I^D5^o 



's ' *;'■■'' ^- , " 
-•: , ■ *- t < ■' j . •■^ 



Cohnnbia ®tttbersiit|) 

ttttldtCityotMrUjfotk 







2iwU mFmoHal funb 





1,t 


* 




9 


^' 


V*' 


.\' 


'-a '• 


Pi 



-"s 



^>^;<^ 



^^^^H 


lY •* 






,1 .»,■■■ "; i_ 





ABDOMINAL SURGERY 



^--^ 



\ 



V 




ABDOMINAL 
SURGERY 



BY 



J. GREIG SMITH, M.A., F.R.S.E. 

Surgeon to the Bristol Royal Infirmary 

Lecturer on Surgery, Bristol Medical School 

Late Examiner in Surgery, University of Aberdeen 

Fellow of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, London 

Honorary Felloiv of the American Society of Obstetricians and 

GyncBcologists, &c. 



XTbirC) BDition 



PHILADELPHIA 
P. BLAKISTON, SON & Co. 

IOI2 W'ALNl'T STREET 



All rights reserved. 



PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION. 



In this Edition I have endeavoured to improve the work in 
detail, by the Hghts of advancing general knowledge and 
increased personal experience. Statistics have been brought 
as closely as possible up to date ; several novel proceedings 
and modifications have been described, and a few new en- 
gravings have been introduced. The general plan of the work 
remains unchanged. 

I desire again gratefully to acknowledge the very flattering 
reception which has been given to the work. 



Clifton, Bristol, 
October, 1889. 



Digitized by tine Internet Arcinive 

in 2010 witii funding from 

Open Knowledge Commons 



http://www.archive.org/details/abdominalsurgeryOOsmit 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 



The very rapid sale of the first edition took me unawares, and 
the work has been in consequence for six months out of print. 
Delay in the production of the second edition will be excused 
on the plea that time as well as labour were necessary to bring 
the work fully up to date, and to make certain desirable 
additions and improvements. 

The advances made in the practical surgery of the abdomen 
in the few months which have elapsed since the work was written 
are truly astounding. For every operation some improvement 
has had to be chronicled, and several new operations have been 
added. The whole subject of the Reparative Surgery of the 
abdomen, being now placed on a basis which is comparatively 
permanent, has been elevated to the dignity of an independent 
section. This section is practically a new one. In deference to 
the opinion of certain reviewers, and, it must be confessed, in 
harmony with a personal feeling, a new section on Supra-pubic 
Cystotomy has been introduced. Among the minor additions 
may be mentioned Keith's mode of treating the pedicle in 
ovariotomy ; Cervical Amputation of the uterus for cancer ; the 
operations of Richardson and of Bull for removal of foreign 
bodies impacted in the lower oesophagus ; Bernays's operation 



VlU PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 

for removal of growths in the stomach ; and the modifications 
of Laparo-colotomy introduced by Allingham and by Ball. 

About forty new wood-engravings have been included. The 
instruments have been mostly re-drawn to scale from photo- 
graphs made on the blocks. Engravings copied from other 
works have their source uniformly acknowledged : engravings 
with no name attached are from drawings made by myself. 

It only remains that I should gratefully acknowledge the 
abundant kindness of reviewers and friends. Amongst the 
latter I desire specially to mention Mr. L. M. Griffiths, who 
has generously and patiently done as much in the way of 
proof-reading for this edition as he did for the previous 
one. Dr. Thomas Keith has very kindly revised the descrip- 
tion of his mode of treating the pedicle in ovariotomy. To 
my pupils, Messrs. G. D. Edwards, J. H. Fardon, W. S. 
Wright, and F. Lace, I am indebted for assistance in various 
ways. 



Clifton, Bristol, 

March, 1888. 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 



The time seems to have come when it is proper to gather together 
and describe in systematic manner the surgical operations usuall}- 
spoken of as abdominal. Of some abdominal operations it may 
truly be said that no complete descriptions have as yet appeared ; 
others are described only in isolated monographs in scattered 
periodicals ; while a few appear only as casual additions to large 
works dealing with one special disease or operation. This, I 
believe, is the first attempt to deal with the practical surgery of 
the abdomen in one treatise. 

From the descriptive point of view, the features of abdominal 
surgery, both in grouping and in detail, lend themselves readily 
to comprehensive treatment. Most of the operations are per- 
formed for diseases which come, in the first instance, within 
the domain of the physician, and the complete and scientific 
accounts of these diseases — their natural history, in fact — must 
be looked for in works on general pathology and medicine. In 
their treatment by operation, the surgeon is associated with the 
physician for a definite practical purpose ; which purpose involves, 
on the part of the surgeon, not only a general acquaintance with 
operative details, but a special knowledge of tlie gross anatomy 
of the disease, and a technical familiarity with the methods of 
diagnosis. 



X PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 

From a practical point of view, it is expedient that the 
surgeon, who makes an abdominal section for a certain pre- 
conceived purpose, should be ready off-hand to deal with an 
unexpected contingency. The recondite nature of many ab- 
dominal diseases frequently necessitates conclusions to operative 
procedures very different from what were contemplated. Con- 
fidence and capacity on the part of the surgeon who ventures 
on abdominal work can scarcely exist apart from a complete 
knowledge of all abdominal operations. 

On these principles this work has been written : to gather 
together for systematic description all abdominal operations, 
and to do so after a method which will satisfy the requirements 
of the practical surgeon. In the selection of subjects, I have 
followed popular habit rather than strict anatomy. Thus, 
Hernia and Epicystotomy are not included, though they may 
be considered as abdominal operations. In the choice, arrange- 
ment, and balance of material, I have steadily kept before me 
the main purpose of the work — treatment by operation. The 
anatomy — normal, of the organ on which the operation is to be 
performed ; and diseased, of the tumour or condition for which 
operation is contemplated — is chiefly naked-eye anatomy ; that 
is to say, what concerns practical manipulation. Microscopic 
or general pathology, except in so far as it has a direct bearing 
on diagnosis or treatment, has been excluded. Symptoms are 
quoted with a definite view to diagnosis, rather than as a part of 
semeiology. Statistics are provided only in detail sufficient to 
give fair grounds for estimating the chances of recovery and the 
values of operations. Finally, with each operation, is given a 
short history of its origin and advance. ■ Believing, as I firmly 
do, that a knowledge, at first hand, of the work of surgeons in 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. xi 

the past is one of the most valuable means of education and 
improvement in the present, I regret that the space at my 
command prevents me from giving more than a skeleton outline 
of the historical material which I have collected. 

Literary references are, as far as possible, kept out of the 
text, and placed in a separate list at the end of the book. 
I am conscious that the Bibliography is very far from being 
complete : as it represents roughly the amount of literature, 
either in original or in abstract, which I have read in the 
preparation of this work, I trust that it will be found repre- 
sentative. Many references in the text are not inclnded in 
the Bibliography. 

I have to express my gratitude for obligations. My indebted- 
ness to my colleagues on the staff of the Bristol Roj^al Infirmary 
I have partly expressed in the dedication. To many of our 
leaders in abdominal surgery — it is unnecessary to name them 
— I am grateful for permission, always most heartily accorded, 
to observe their work and learn from their teaching. To my 
friend Mr. L. M. Griffiths I am indebted for much assistance 
in the correction of proofs and in the preparation of the index. 
To Mr. J. W. Mills my thanks are due for the translation 
of monographs written in a language with which I am not 
familiar. 



Ci-iFTON, Bristol, 
May, 1887. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Section I. — Diagnosis of Abdominal Tumours 
Topographical Anatomy of the Abdomen 

Diagnostic Methods 

Physical Examination of Individual Organs 
Conditions Simulating Abdominal Tumours 
Diagnostic Arrangement of Abdominal Tumours 
General Examination of Patient 
Exploratory Incisions ..... 



Section II. — Abdominal Operations considkded Gener 

ALLY ... 

Nomenclature. Historical ..... 

The Operative Surgery of the Abdomen . 
After-treatment of Cases of Abdominal Operation . 



Section III. — Operations on the Ovaries, the Fai 
LOPiAN Tubes, and the Broad Ligaments 
Ovariotomy .... 

Ovarian Cystoma 
Dermoid Cysts of the Ovary 
Solid Growths of the Ovary 
Operations for Cysts in the Broad Ligament and Parovarium 
IJemoval of the Uterine Appendages 

Section IV. — Operations on the Non-Gravid Uterus 
Hysterectomy for Malignant Disease .... 
Hysterectomy for Intractable Inversion .... 
Hysterectomy for Myoma 



Page 
I 

5 

12 

23 

28 
46 

47 



49 
49 

52 



100 
102 
no 
155 
159 
171 

205 
210 
232 
235 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. Xlil 

Section V. — Operations on the Gravid Uterus, and Page 

FOR Ectopic Gestation 268 

Cassarean Section 273 

Porro's Operation 285 

Laparo-elytrotomy 291 

Comparative Survey of the Three Operations. . . . 297 

Abdominal Section for Rupture of the Uterus. . . . 306 

Operations for Ectopic Gestation 312 

Operation for Missed Labour . • 337 

Section VI. — Operations on the Stomach , . . 340 

Gastrostomy 345 

Gastrotomy 368 

Gastrorraphy 380 

Operative Dilatation of the Orifices of the Stomach . . 384 

Pylorectomy 389 

Gastro-enterostomy 397 

Duodenostomy 403 

Jejunostomy .......... 404 

Section VII. — Operations on the Intestines . . . 406 

Laparotomy for Intestinal Obstruction 414 

Enterotomy 444 

Colotomy 447 

Resection of Intestine 470 

Operations for Artificial Anus 490 

Section VIII. — Operations on the Kidneys . . . 498 

Nephrorraphy ... 505 

Nephro-lithotomy 515 

Puncture of the Kidney 533 

Nephrotomy 541 

Nephrectomy .......... 551 

Section IX. — Operations on the Liver and Gall- 
bladder 572 

Operations on the Liver ........ 577 

Hepatotomy . . 583 

Operations on the Gall-bladder 592 

Cholecystotomy ......... 604 

Entero-cholecystotomy ........ 609 

Cholecystectomy , .611 



XIV 



TABLE OF CONTENTS, 



Section X. — Operations on the Spleen 
Splenectomy 



Section XI. — Operations on the Pancreas 
Operation for Pancreatic Cysts 



Page 

. . 614 

. 616 

. 625 

. 630 

Section XII. — Unclassified Operations .... 633 

Turaours in the Omentum 633 

Tumom's in the Mesentery 636 

Extra-peritoneal Cysts 638 

Section XIII. — Supra-pubic Cystotomy .... 642 

Section XIV. — Operations for Abdominal Injuries and 

Inflammations 695 

Gunshot wounds . . . 696 

Stab-wounds 715 

Rupture of the Intestine . . . . . . . . 719 

Rupture of the Urinary Bladder 727 

Rupture of the Gall-bladder 734 

Rupture of the Solid Viscera 735 

Perforating Appendicitis 73S 

Perforating Ulcer of the Stomach 747 

Perforating Typhoid Ulcer 751 

Purulent Collections in the Pelvis 756 

Tubercular Peritonitis 761 

Bibliography 766 

Index 79^ 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



No. 
I 
2 

3 
4 
5 
6 

7 

8 

9 

lO 

II 

12 

13 

14 
15 
i6 

17 

i8 

19 
20 
21 
22 

23 
24 

25 

26 

27 
28 

29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 



tes . 
ian Tumour 



The regions of the Abdomen and their contents (Tillaux) 

Diagram showing area of dulness in Asc 

Diagram showing area of dulness in Ovar 

Author's Reel-holder .... 

Plan of Operating-room 

Tait's catch-forceps .... 

Wells's large pressure-forceps, bent . 

,, ,, ,, rectangular 

Thornton's T-shaped pressure forceps 
Wells's large pressure-forceps, straight 
Author's scissors-clamp 
Sponge-holding forceps 
Keith's glass drainage tube 
Tait's exhausting syringe . 
Koeberle's glass drainage-tube 
Author's suture-instrument 
Wells's ascites-tube . 
Nelaton's cyst-forceps' 
Wells's clamp-forceps 
Tait's cyst trocar 
Wells's small cyst trocar, Fitch 
Wells's large cyst trocar 
Keith's cautery-clamp 
Cautery iron 



Tait's Staffordshire knot 
Triple interlocking ligature ; thr 



s dome 



ted 



"eads inser 

,, ,, ,, threads interlocked 

,, ,, ,, threads tied 

Diagram of Structures in Broad Ligament (Dorau) 

Vertical antero-posterior section of uterus (Courty) 

Relations of ureters, uterine arteries, bladder, &c 

Clover's crutch 

Uterus pulled downwards by volsella 

Author's clamp for kolpo-hysterectomy 

Tait's screw for myoma 

Koeberle's serre-noeud 

Tait's modification of Koeberle'=' serr 

Tait's temporary rope compressor 

Pozzi's elastic tourniquet . 



e-nceud 



Page 
4 
39 
39 
66 
70 
75 
75 
76 

77 
77 
78 
78 
81 
82 
82 

85 
117 
127 
127 
128 
128 
129 
138 
139 
139 
140 
141 
141 
141 
160 
206 
208 
217 
222 
224 

243 
248 
248 
249 
249 



XVI 

No. 

41 
42 

43 

44 
45 
46 

47 
48 

49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
5S 
59 
60 
61 
62 

63 

64 

65 
66 

67 
68 
69 
70 

71 

72 

73 
74 
75 
76 

77 
78 
79 

80 
81 
82 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Keith's clamp for hysterectomy .... 

Needle for carrying elastic ligature through pedicle 
Closure of abdominal wound in hysterectomy . 
Needle for transfixing pedicle .... 
Uterus near termination of first stage of labour 
Placing of uterine sutures in Cassarean Section 
Site of fistula in Gastrostomy .... 
Diagram to show Fixation of Stomach in Gastrostomy 

Eyeless needle 

Lembert's suture .... 

Diagram of Intestinal Anastomosis 

Delepine's diagram of Abdominal Cavity 

Section of dog's intestine (Halsted) 

Sectional drawing of parts concerned in Colotomy (Braune 

Lund's insufflator .... 

Lund's hooks for Colotomy 

Lund's forceps for removing faeces after Colotomy 

Makins's clamp for intestinal resection 

Dupuytren's intestinal suture . 

Appolito's intestinal suture 

Lembert's intestinal suture 

Czerny's intestinal suture . 

Gussenbauer's intestinal suture 

Bishop's intestinal suture . 

Halsted's plain quilt-suture 

Diagram to show method of intestinal suture 

Diagrams showing varieties of artificial anus 

Structures in hilum of kidney (Weisse) 

Anatomy of Kidneys 

Pelvis and calyces of kidney (Heitzmann) 

Section showing relations of kidney to peritoneum (Lange) 

Pelvis of kidney and ureter exposed from behind (Lange) 

Liver, Duodenum, and Pancreas (Weisse) 

Hodder's guarded aspirating needle .... 

Tait's cholelithotomy forceps 

Vessels in the hilum of the Spleen (Weisse) 

Median Pelvic Section of young man, bladder contracted 

(Langer) 

Median Pelvic Section of young man, bladder distended 

(Langer) 

Median Section of male pelvis, bladder and rectum distended 

(Garson) 

Retractor for supra-pubic cystotomy 



262 
263 
263 
264 
271 
282 
359 
364 
364 
364 
374 
402 
408 
412 
455 
458 
459 
460 
476 
480 
481 
482 
482 
482 
482 
483 

485 
491 
500 
502 
503 
504 
526 

575 
605 
606 
606 
615 

668 

669 

670 
678 



Icbbaminal Surgtrir. 



Section I. 



DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 



The diagnosis of tumours in the abdominal cavity demands an 
accurate comprehension of the topography of the contained 
viscera, a practical acquaintance with the methods of physical 
examination, and some knowledge of the nature of the tumours 
which are liable to be found in connection with the individual 
organs. 

Topographical Anatomy of the Abdomen. 

For purposes of surgical diagnosis we may consider the whole 
of the abdominal and pelvic cavities as one. The surgical limits 
of the abdomen are practically those of the peritoneum ; any- 
thing totally or partially covered b}' peritoneum we may here 
reckon as abdominal. 

2 



2 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

The abdominal cavity is, roughly speaking, a cylinder, flatly 
cordate in transverse section, pointed or arched at its extremities. 
The inward bulging of the vertebral column tends to bisect the 
cylinder in its upper portion; in its lower portion this bony 
ridge is bifurcated and carried outwards laterally, as the 
pelvic brim. At the top is the diaphragmatic arch; at the 
bottom is the pelvic cup, supported by the muscles in the 
pelvic floor. 

The walls of this cavity are chiefly bony behind and muscular 
in front. At both extremities it is encased in bony walls, com- 
pletely behind and partially in front ; at the upper end by the 
lower ribs descending laterally and ascending in front, leaving 
a V-shaped gap, which is occupied by muscle ; at the lower end 
by the iliac bones, which complete the enclosure behind and 
laterally, but leave a muscular space between them in front. 
Behind, the sacrum below and the vertebral column above, 
measured by inches ; in front, the pubes below and the end of 
the sternum above, each not longer than one inch, complete the 
bony portion of the C3'linder. 

Thus the outer muscular coverings of the abdomen represent 
a sort of lozenge-shaped area, the four corners of which lie at 
the xiphoid cartilage, the pubes, the right loin and the left loin, 
in this area all abdominal tumours, if bulky enough, bulge out- 
wards ; and through this area the diagnosis and the treatment 
of abdominal tumours are mainly carried out. Through the 
upper muscular boundary of the diaphragm the abdomen can- 
not be approached ; but through its lower boundary of the 
pelvic floor we may derive important aids in diagnosis, and 
carry out more than one mode of treatment. 

It will be seen that in diagnosing conditions of abdominal 
viscera, we begin by trying to eliminate the parietes ; to ignore, 
or at least to overcome, as far as possible, the obstacles which 
they present to examination. Where the abdominal wall is 
thinnest and most lax, in front, examination is easiest ; in the 
loins, where the layers are thick and tense, examination is 
difficult ; behind and under the bony walls, except by special 
methods in a few cases of certain diseases, physical examination 



TOPOGRAPHY. o 

is impossible. The anatomical construction of the abdominal 
walls does not here concern us : this will be considered when 
speaking of treatment. 

For convenience of localising the abdominal organs the 
surface has been divided by four lines, two horizontal and two 
vertical, into nine arbitrary regions. (Fig. i.) The vertical 
lines (c.c', d.d') extend from the cartilage of the eighth rib 
to the middle of Poupart's ligament. The upper transverse 
line (a. a') is at the level of the ninth costal cartilage ; the 
lower (b.b') at the level of the highest point of the crest of the 
ilium. The upper and lower limits are at the diaphragm and 
pelvis. The middle regions are named, from above downwards, 
the Epigastric, the Umbilical, and the Hypogastric. The 
lateral regions, from above downwards, are named respectively 
right or left Hypochondriac, Lumbar, and Iliac. 

The contents of these regions are, according to Tillaux : 

Epigastric (I.) — From before backwards we find in the 
Epigastrium, the left lobe of the liver, a part of the anterior 
surface of the stomach with its cardiac and pyloric orfices, the 
gastro-hepatic omentum, and the foramen of Winslow. In the 
anterior edge of the foramen we find : the hepatic artery in 
front ; the hepatic and cystic ducts, and the origin of the ductus 
choledochus, in the middle; the portal vein behind the branches 
of the great sympathetic, and the end of the right vagus. 
Behind the stomach we have the second and third portions of 
the duodenum, the pancreas, the cceliac axis and its branches, 
the superior mesenteric artery surrounded by lymphatic glands, 
and the solar plexus ; and behind all, the aorta and vena cava, 
resting on the vertebral column. 

Right Hypochondriac (II.) — Chiefly occupied by the right 
lobe of the liver. Behind it lie the gall-bladder, a small portion 
of the transverse colon, the upper end of the right kidney and 
its supra-renal body. 

Left Hypochondriac (HI.) — Mainly occupied by the large 
cardiac portion of the stomach, and the spleen with the gastro- 
splenic omentum ; contains also the upper end of the left 
kidney, the left supra-renal, a portion of the descending colon, 

2 * 




Fig. I. (after TillauxJ. 

Showing the Regions of the Abdomen and their Contents. 



I. Epigastric. II. Right Hypochondriac. III. Left Hypocliondriac. IV. Umbilical. 
V. Right Lumbar. VI. Left Lumbar. VII. Hypogastric. VIII. Right Iliac. IX. Left Iliac. 

I. Diaphragm. 2. Liver. 3. Pylorus. 4. Gall-bladder. 5. Duodenum. 6. Right Kidney. 
7. Small Bowel. 8. Ascending Colon. 9. Iliac Crest. 10. Cacum. n. Appendix Vermiformis. 
12, 18. Obturator Vessels, R. & L. 13, 17. Obturator Membrane. 14 16. Corpora Cavernosa. 
15. Urethra. 19. Bladder. 20, 22. Rectum, Sigmoid Flexure (should be ^ shaped). 21. Left 
Ilium. 23, 24. Iliac Vessels. 25. Descending Colon. 26. Vena Cava inf. 27. Aorta. 28. Lelt 
Kidney. 29. Transverse Colon. 30. Greater Curvature of Stomach. 31. Spleen. 32. Cardiac 
Orifice oi Stomach. 33. Pancreas. 



DIAGNOSTIC METHODS. » 

and the tail of the pancreas. Sometimes the left lobe of the 
liver extends into this region. 

Umbilical (IV.) — The great omentum, the transverse colon, 
the bulk of the small intestine, the mesenter}/, the aorta, and 
the inferior vena cava. 

Lumbar regions, right and left (V. and VI.) — Some convolu- 
tions of the small intestine ; the colons, ascending on the right, 
descending on the left ; the kidne5'S and ureters, and masses of 
cellulo-adipose tissue. 

Hypogastric (VII.) — The great omentum, the small intestine, 
the bladder when distended, and the uterus when enlarged. 

Iliac, right and left (VIII. and IX.)— On the right, the 
caecum ; on the left, the sigmoid flexure, covered by convolutions 
of the small intestine. 

Tumours first appear in the situation of the organs from 
which they grow, and their main attachments are the same. 
Even if they encroach upon other regions, as they very frequently 
do, abdominal tumours usually have their chief bulk in the 
normal situation of the organs from which they spring. These 
facts are of supreme importance in diagnosis. 



Diagnostic Methods. 

Certain methods of examination of the abdomen in a patient 
suspected of abdominal disease are followed. They are : 
Inspection ; Palpation through parietes, vagina, and rectum ; 
Percussion ; Auscultation ; Exploratory Puncture. 

Inspection. — If the patient is in bed, we note the position 
naturally assumed. We note any lack of freedom in movement, 
as in raising the head, in turning, or in drawing up the limbs. 
Any inflammation in the abdomen is inconsistent with free 
movement. If the patient lies very still, with the knees drawn 
up, we may suspect peritonitis. If, while there is much pain, 
the patient moves restlessly about, perhaps rolling on his face 



6 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

or assuming the genu-pectoral position, we may suspect colic 
or some form of acute intestinal strangulation. 

The abdominal walls are inspected while the patient lies 
comfortably in the supine position. We note the size of the 
abdomen generally, and whether its bulk and symmetr}^ are in 
proportion with those of the chest. We mark any irregularities 
on its surface, particularly observing the localities in which they 
are placed. Uniform swelling is observed to be flat, globular, 
diffuse, or circumscribed. The appearance of a bulky abdomen 
with a lean chest contrasts with a depressed and shrunken 
abdomen in cases where the chest appears of normal develop- 
ment. We further note ever}' peculiarity in the parietes : their 
fatness or leanness ; whether they are white and glossy, or red 
and dull; whether the skin is distended with cedema, or shrivelled 
and puckered ; whether the veins are dilated or not ; and, in 
fact, everything which can be interpreted as being in the 
slightest degree abnormal. 

The movements of the abdomen are watched — first during 
eas}^ respiration, and then during deep respiration. The ab- 
dominal walls may move readily and freely, or they may remain 
fixed while the chest moves. An}^ conspicuous point, as the 
umbilicus, may sometimes be seen to glide up and down over a 
growth, or the growth itself may visibly move upwards and 
downwards with each act of expiration and inspiration. 

Palpation. — For palpation of the abdomen the patient is 
placed supine in bed, with the knees drawn up and the head 
slightly elevated, to give relaxation of the abdominal muscles. 
Too much flexion of the spine, while giving greater relaxation of 
the abdominal walls, defeats the object of palpation by deepen- 
ing the antero-posterior measurement and crowding the contents 
forwards. A thin abdomen, or one relaxed by repeated preg- 
nancies, is more easily examined than a fat abdomen or one of a 
woman who has never borne children, A stout muscular man 
presents the abdomen most difficult to examine by palpation. 

While palpation is being performed the attention of the 
patient is diverted by questions about the symptoms and so 



DIAGNOSTIC METHODS. 7 

forth, which will ensure a natural condition of the abdominal 
walls. Any special instructions, as, to breathe deeply or to 
count, have a tendency to call attention to the process of 
examination rather than to divert attention therefrom. 

The palm of the hand, which must not be cold, and which 
is said to be made more sensitive by being dipped in hot water, 
is laid flatly on the abdomen and pressed steadily and firml}', 
but not roughly, downwards. When it is depressed as far as 
possible, if no tumour prevents it, the hand is rotated outwards, 
and its outer margin and fingers may be pushed deeper, so as, 
without much discomfort, to reach the spine and perhaps the 
brim of the pelvis. The pressure being steadily maintained, 
the hand, and the abdominal wall with it, is moved hither and 
thither over the abdominal contents. The hand is not to be 
moved over the parietes, but the parietes and hand together are 
to be moved over the abdominal organs. Without raising it, 
the hand is slid on to another area, and the process repeated till 
the whole abdomen has been explored. 

By this means we shall make out any small or deeply-placed 
tumour, such as cancer of the pylorus or pancreas ; floating 
kidney; abdominal aneurism; mesenteric, omental or peritoneal 
growths ; and small tumours of the ovary that may have escaped 
from the true pelvis. In this way also we shall be able to detect 
any undue degree of spasm or tension of the abdominal muscles, 
pointing to underlying irritation or inflammation. We enquire 
into, and observe the expression of, the sensations of the patient 
while being examined. In some cases, usually of colic, pressure 
affords" relief. In others, pain, in all degrees from the slightest 
to the most severe, may be caused by pressure. In every case 
it is important to discriminate between the h3'per?esthesia of 
the nervous or hysterical patient and the genuine tenderness 
begotten of inflammation. In inflammation the pain is usually 
limited to the inflamed area ; in simple hyperaesthesia the pain 
radiates in various directions over the skin of the chest, thighs, 
or back. 

If a tumour is visible, we seek by palpation to elucidate as 
many of its characters as possible. Is it circumscribed or 



8 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

diflfuse ? Is it solid or fluid ? Is it fixed or movable ? In the 
case of a circumscribed tumour that is not very large, the hand 
can be partly insinuated between it and the resisting bony 
boundaries. The feel of a solid growth is characteristic : be- 
tween a semi-solid or boggy growth and one distinctlj' fluid 
there are many grades difficult of recognition. We seek to 
detect the condition by trying to elicit the sign of fluctuation. 
While the fingers or the palm of one hand lie firmly pressed on 
one side of the growth, the fingers of the other tap it on the 
opposite side ; if the swelling is fluid, we feel a thrill or series of 
vibratory thrills. The fluctuation thrill may not be detected in 
fluid tumours if their cyst walls are thick and tense, or if the 
fluid is thick or contained in many cysts. To detect mobility, 
the hand is laid flatly on successive aspects of the tumour, and 
endeavours to move it in various directions ; or the tumour 
may be grasped bodily between the hands, and movement 
given to it. 

By palpation also we seek to make out any irregularities on 
the surface of the growth, or any localised differences of consist- 
ence in its mass. The fingers will note any sensation of grating 
or fremitus on its surface indicating peritonitis, or they may feel 
that the parietal peritoneum glides readily over the tumour. 

New facts may be discovered by turning the patient, first on 
one side and then on the other. These relate chiefl}^ to mo- 
bility, the extent and direction of it, or its non-existence ; but 
these characters are, perhaps, better ascertained by the pal- 
pating hand than by change of position. 

Palpation by vagina in all abdominal tumours not high up, 
and not small, is of great diagnostic value. By this plan we 
may be able, not only to elicit important facts as to the physical 
character of the tumour, but also to make out its connection or 
non-connection with the uterus. Not infrequently the tumour 
may be poised between the finger in the vagina and the hand on 
the abdominal wall, and the situation and attachments of its 
pedicle or base made out. Very often a tumour which, through 
the abdominal walls, gives the characters of a single cyst, is 
found through the vagina to have its lower portion composed of 



\ 



DIAGNOSTIC METHODS. ^ 

several cysts, and, frequently, of solid material as well. The 
use of the uterine sound is an aid to vaginal palpation. By 
means of it we can ascertain with accuracy the length of the 
uterine cavity, the extent and range of mobility of the fundus^ 
and the situation of the whole organ generally with reference to- 
the growth. In not a few cases the uterus lies immediately 
behind the pubes, and its fundus can be readily palpated 
through the abdominal wall ; while the whole organ may be 
moved between the fingers, outside on fundus and inside on 
cervix. Often, again, it is pressed downwards and retroverted,. 
and its outlines can be made out in Douglas's pouch. The 
middle finger in the rectum, with the forefinger in the vagina,, 
the perineum between them being pushed upwards, will give 
more information usually than the simple finger in the vagina ; 
but this plan is not always agreeable to the patient. 

Palpation by the rectum may be carried out in the manner just 
mentioned, or by the finger in the rectum alone, or by the whole 
hand introduced while the patient is anaesthetised. Very rarely 
indeed can the last method, in itself an operation of some 
severity, be considered advisable. Only in certain cases of 
extreme difficult}^, in which it is of vital importance that opera- 
tion, even exploratory, should not be undertaken till diagnosis is 
certain, is it admissible. The results, it is very generally 
admitted, of manual exploration through the rectum are often 
disappointing. Few surgeons, even among those of the largest 
experience, have had recourse to this method of diagnosis. 

Percussion. — Percussion of the abdomen is performed while 
the patient is in the same position as for palpation — that is, in 
the supine posture with knees drawn up. But change of posi- 
tion, first to one side and then to the other, though but slightly 
adding to the value of palpation, introduces important aids to 
diagnosis by percussion. The practice is best carried out by 
tapping the fingers of the left hand, placed on the abdomen^ 
with the fingers of the right hand. If a wide area is to be 
percussed, it is a good plan to percuss b}' successive taps on one 
finger after another while they are spread out as much as 



10 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

possible over the abdomen. If the wrist and fingers are kept 
stiff, and pressure is made with the arm, more uniform force is 
exerted, and more exact comparison is possible than if only one 
finger is used, and moved from one spot to another. Some 
prefer always to use a pleximeter. 

It is of great importance to bear in mind the different values 
of deep and of superficial percussion. A " minimised note," 
produced by gentle taps, will reveal increased dulness in small 
or thin solid bodies, which would not be detected by strong 
percussion. A thickened omentum, or pelvic cellulitis extend- 
ing up into the abdominal parietes, or a small growth lying 
over the intestines, would be revealed in this way. Deep per- 
cussion, again, may reveal dulness from a growth covered by 
intestines, which would give a resonant note to superficial 
percussion. In those parts where the abdominal walls are 
thick, as in the loins, slight percussion is useless, as it reveals 
only the dulness caused by the thick muscles. 

In examining the whole abdomen, particular attention is to 
be paid to the umbilical, the epigastric, and the lumbar regions. 
Free fluid in the peritoneal cavity, always gravitating to the 
lowest part, is first detected by percussion in the lumbar 
regions. Circumscribed and movable growths have a tendency 
to rise above the intestines to the surface. It must be remem- 
bered that a dull note in the flanks may be caused by fluid 
faeces in the intestines ; and further, that this dulness may be 
changed to resonance by turning the patient on one side, and 
so causing the fluid-laden intestines to gravitate downwards. 
Again, a colon distended with gas may cause resonance in the 
loin even when ascites is present. When only a small amount 
of fluid lies in the abdominal cavity, the mesentery is long 
■enough to permit the gas-containing intestines to float to the 
surface, thus giving a resonant note. 

In the case of a tumour being visibly and palpably present, 
percussion is chiefly valuable as eliciting the position of reso- 
nant intestine. Sometimes the tumour is all gas-containing 
intestine — meteorism or phantom tumour. Occasionally tracts 
of resonance passing over a growth indicate the presence of 



DIAGNOSTIC METHODS. 11 

adherent bowel. But in the great majority of cases percussion 
is of value chiefly as demonstrating the "tympanic corona" (as 
Tait well names it), which surrounds a growth overl3dng intes- 
tine, in contrast with the circular, semi-circuiar, or crescentic 
area of resonance which is found in cases of peritoneal dropsy. 
In diagnosing ascitic fluid from C3'sts, in detecting slight 
enlargements of liver and spleen, and in demonstrating the 
presence of gas in a swelling, percussion is of great value : in 
all other respects, as a diagnostic method, it is much inferior to 
palpation skilfully practised. 

Auscultation. — As a method of phj^sical diagnosis applied to 
the abdomen, auscultation has not as yet been very fruitful of 
results. Vascular bruits in aneurisms, and in fibroid or sarco- 
matous tumours, friction-sounds in peritonitis, and the sounds 
of the fcetal and the placental circulation, are the most im- 
portant revelations of the auscultatory method. There are 
signs that the use of the stethoscope in differentiating intestinal 
sounds may be of clinical value. Such sounds, produced by 
the mingling of fluid and gas during intestinal movement, and 
described as metallic, gurgling or splashing, may be heard 
during health, and, no doubt, in modified manner during disease. 
But clinical data as to the character of these sounds are not yet 
definite enough to be of practical use. In certain cases of dila- 
tation of the stomach, in cholera and diarrhoea, augmentation 
or perversion of these sounds can be detected. In intestinal 
obstruction, any such addition to our powers of diagnosis would 
be heartily welcomed ; but as yet no very definite clinical facts 
have been established by auscultation. 

Exploratory Puncture. — Removal of a small portion of the 
contents of an abdominal tumour by a hollow needle attached 
to an exhausting syringe, is a method of diagnosis of somewhat 
imcertain value. In many cases it is useless; in others it makes 
a diagnosis which does not modify the treatment ; in a few 
cases it is of real and decided benefit. There can be no doubt 
that the method has been employed with undue frequency. 



12 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

having been adopted to solve difficulties which ought by other 
means to have been overcome. Furthermore, it is sometimes 
attended with danger, and has even caused death. Perhaps 
the best criterion of the value of exploratory puncture is the 
fact that it is very rarely used by our most skilled and expe- 
rienced operators. 

If it is decided to employ the exploring needle, particular 
care must be taken to see that the instrument is purified by 
repeated washings with antiseptic lotions. The skin at the site 
of puncture must also be purified ; for a group of epidermic 
scales, or even a small piece of skin, may be carried along by 
the point of the needle and cause sepsis. Not a few cysts have 
undergone septic suppuration as a result of the introduction of 
the exploring trocar ; therefore every possible precaution ought 
to be taken to avoid such a catastrophe. 



Physical Examination of the Individual Organs. 

THE LIVER. 

Palpation. — In health, all of the liver that can be felt is its 
lower margin where it lies below the ribs, and a portion of the 
anterior surface of the left lobe in the epigastrium. In men, it 
may be impossible to palpate the liver at all, or it may simply 
be detected as a line of increased resistance. In women, and 
particularly in those who have lax parietes from child-bearing,, 
the hepatic margin can usually be distinctly felt and traced. 
While the fingers examine the condition of the portion of liver 
within reach, we take cognizance of the freedom with which 
the organ moves during the acts of respiration. We note also 
any complaints of pain or tenderness during palpation. When 
the liver is enlarged it descends within easy reach, and its 
surface is carefully examined for abnormalities. Hardness, or 
bogginess, or fluctuation ; irregularities of surface — their size 
and consistence ; and the general form of the enlargement, are 
the points to be mainl}' attended to. Hepatic fremitus from 



EXAMINATION OF ORGANS. 13 

peri-hepatitis and hj^datid fremitus may be felt by the hand. A 
distended gall-bladder may sometimes be felt in health ; and 
Guttmann* says that by squeezing it he has caused its contents 
to escape through the excretory ducts. In pathological enlarge- 
ment the gall-bladder is readily felt extending below the liver 
margin. 

Percussion. — On account of the overlapping of the lung, the 
upper limits of the liver cannot be accuratel}^ determined by 
percussion. Between the highest part of liver and the thoracic 
wall there is such a depth of lung that a clear resonant note is 
given ; and for a little distance lower, only relative dulness or 
flatness is obtained. Absolute hepatic dulness is elicited where 
the liver is in close contact with the thoracic wall, or, at least, 
not separated from it by air-containing lung. As relative dul- 
ness is very variable over the hepatic region, we use the sign of 
absolute dulness to define its limits. Percussion is performed 
during the respiratory pause, and along the four lines — sternal, 
para-sternal, mammillary, and axillary. For defining its upper 
limits: in the mid-sternal line dulness is obtained at the base 
of the xiphoid process; in the para-sternal line, just above the 
sixth rib ; in the mammillary line, at the lower border of the 
sixth rib ; and in the axillary line it is found at the level of the 
eighth rib. Behind, hepatic dulness is found as high as the 
tenth rib. The lower limits of hepatic dulness are as follows : 
in the mid-sternal line, half-way between the base of the xiphoid 
process and the umbilicus ; in the para-sternal and mammillary 
lines, it coincides with the free margin of the ribs ; in the axil- 
lary line, between the tenth and eleventh ribs ; behind this, 
hepatic dulness is lost in that caused by the thick muscles of 
the back. In women, the liver dulness may extend from half 
an inch to an inch lower. In percussing the lower portions of 
the liver, a minimised note is necessary to produce absolute 
dulness, on account of its being thinner and lying over ■ air- 
containing viscera. 

As the patient lies supine, the liver rotates a little on its 
transverse axis, and the anterior margin slips up under the ribs, 
* Handbook of Physical Diagnosis, New Syd. Soc., 1879, 



14 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

elevating the lower limit of anterior dulness. The erect posture 
corrects this. The liver may be dragged up by contraction of 
lungs or pleura, or pushed up by growths distending the ab- 
dominal cavity. In certain diseases it becomes enlarged, often 
to enormous size, and in such case the increase is downwards, 
occupying part or the whole of the anterior abdomen. In such 
enlargements percussion will always demonstrate continuity in 
the dulness found over the hepatic area. A healthy gall-bladder 
cannot be detected by percussion : in disease, a dull note is 
given over the area of its increase. 

Auscultation is of little value as a mode of examining the 
liver. A friction-sound may be heard in peri-hepatitis. 

Explovatovy puncture has been frequently employed in diag- 
nosing diseases of the liver. It is chiefly valuable in detecting 
the nature of fluid in cystic or suppurative enlargements : 
it also helps, in doubtful cases, in diagnosing whether the 
enlargement is solid or fluid. Rarely a small piece of tissue 
removed by the needle, and examined by the microscope, has 
revealed the nature of a new growth. The procedure is not 
free from danarer, remote as well as immediate. 



THE KIDNEYS. 

Palpation. — A kidney that lies in its proper position, and is 
not enlarged, is, as a rule, beyond the reach of palpation. In 
thin subjects, with lax abdominal walls, the normal kidney may 
sometimes be felt. Between the fingers of one hand pressed 
deeply in the costo-iliac space behind, and the opposed fingers 
of the other hand in front, the lower third or so of the kidney 
may be palpated ; or with one hand, the thumb being in front 
and the fingers behind, the loin may be firmly grasped and the 
kidney felt through the muscles. Size can be estimated more 
accurately by the grasp of one hand than between two hands : 
for detecting slight enlargements, palpation between thumb and 
fingers of one hand is perhaps the better method. If the 
patient lie over a pillow on the side opposite that being ex- 
amined, the costo-iliac space is enlarged, and more of the 



EXAMINATION OF ORGANS. 15- 

kidney is exposed to palpation ; but the advantage so gained 
is partly counterbalanced by the increased tension of the loin 
muscles. All of the healthy kidney that can be felt is the 
lower third or thereabouts of its posterior border, and a little 
portion of its lower anterior surface ; the rest is merely a 
sensation of something grasped with a consistency like that of 
kidney. 

If the kidney is readily felt, we may conclude that it is 
enlarged. A kidney increasing in size cannot extend far up- 
wards, and not at all backwards, on account of the lumbar 
muscles : it grows downwards and forwards — that is, more and 
more within the reach of the palpating fingers. In diagnosing 
displacements and undue mobility of the kidney, palpation is of 
great value. Tenderness on pressure, in renal as in other in- 
flammations, is a sign of importance elicited by palpation. 
Fluctuation or solidity, with various degrees of hardness or 
softness, are all signs of diagnostic value. The grating of 
stones in a kidney has been felt through the abdominal walls. 
In cases of great enlargement, the colon may be felt passing 
over the surface of the tumour. 

Percussion. — The kidney, being in close relation with solid 
bodies, — liver on one side, spleen on the other, lumbar muscles 
and vertebrae behind, while it is embedded in a thick capsule of 
fat, — cannot be mapped out by percussion. The absence of 
kidney from one side may, in lean subjects, give a note on 
percussion less dull than on the other side where it is present. 
If there is renal enlargement, a resonant area in the loin 
is encroached upon and replaced towards the front by an 
area of dulness. At the inner margin of the kidney, extra 
resonance may be obtained from the colon distended by 
gas. In considerable enlargement, a resonant area from a 
distended colon may longitudinally traverse the surface of the 
kidney. 

Exploratory puncture is used in the diagnosis of renal tumours* 
It will tell whether an enlargement is solid or fluid ; and if 
fluid, it will tell the nature of it — whether suppurative, cystic,, 
hydronephrotic, or hydatid. As puncture by trocar can, in fluid 



16 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

enlargements of the kidney, more often than of other abdominal 
organs, be continued beyond the purpose of diagnosis into a 
plan of treatment, its employment is most legitimate in kidney 
diseases. 

THE SPLEEN. 

Palpation. — The healthy spleen is usually be5^ond the range 
-of touch. In favourable circumstances, however, as in thin 
subjects with lax muscles, and during deep inspiration in the 
erect posture, the fingers insinuated below the margins of the 
ribs may feel the organ. By this plan slight enlargements are 
best detected. As the spleen enlarges, it appears at the costal 
margin below the site of the apex beat, and continues to in- 
crease downwards and forwards. It lies, when enlarged, imme- 
diately under the parietes over the intestines, and can readily 
be palpated. The characteristic sensation imparted by splenic 
substance, and its rounded inner margin indented with one deep 
notch and one or more others less deep, render the diagnosis of 
spleen by palpation comparatively easy. Its rounded posterior 
margin, if it do not lie behind the border of the quadratus 
lumborum, may sometimes he differentiated. The spleen, 
even when greatly enlarged, is usually movable in lateral 
direction. 

Percussion. — The spleen, as it lies over air-containing organs, 
must be percussed gently. Differences in the area of dulness 
may be elicited as the patient lies on the back or the side, as he 
stands up, and as he forcibly expires or inspires; In the erect 
posture, the spleen descends ; as the patient lies on the right 
side, it gravitates away from the surface ; in expiration the lung 
ascends from it, and increases its area of dulness ; in inspiration 
the reverse takes place, a forced inspiration sometimes causing 
the splenic dulness completely to disappear. The upper third 
of the spleen cannot be recognised by percussion. Generally 
speaking, the splenic dulness in its most marked condition with 
the patient erect, and in the pause after expiration, is repre- 
sented by an oval patch lying midway between the scapular 
and axillary lines, and bounded above by the upper border of 



EXAMINATION OF ORGANS. 17 

the ninth rib, and below b)' the lower border of the eleventh 
rib. The healthy spleen may be pushed downwards by any 
pathological increase in the size of the left pleural cavity : it 
ma)' be pushed upwards by ascites, tympanites, or any growth 
filling the abdominal cavity. It is usually indistinguishable by 
percussion from any non- resonant tumour or collection of fluid 
which displaces it. 

Auscultation. — A vascular bruit is sometimes to be heard over 
an enlarged spleen. If there is inflammation of its capsule, 
friction-sounds may be audible during respiration. 

THE PANCREAS. 

Except in very thin patients, the pancreas cannot be felt. 
The head of the pancreas can sometimes be recognised as a 
small hard elevation, a little above and to the right of the 
tmibilicus : the body and tail cannot be palpated. The genu- 
pectoral posture and bimanual pressure from both sides inwards 
are said to facilitate palpation of the pancreas. The gland is 
always fixed in disease as well as in health. The diagnosis of 
growths of the pancreas, solid and cystic, is always difficult 
and sometimes impossible, and many examples of errors could 
be quoted. I have had part charge of a case in the Bristol 
Infirmary where an aneurism in the substance of the pancreas 
was, for more than a month, supposed to be tumour of the 
gall-bladder. 

Other methods of examination are absolutely useless. In 
growths of the pancreas lying close to the abdominal wall, 
exploratory puncture may be employed with doubtful advan- 
. tage. 

THE STOMACH. 

Inspection. — In health, some idea as to the emptiness or ful- 
ness of the stomachic cavity may be got by inspection. In 
disease, there is a marked contrast between the depression of 
the epigastrium in a patient with oesophageal obstruction and 
the tumefaction of the upper abdomen seen in cases of stomachic 
distension from obstruction of the pylorus. Sometimes, in a 

3 



18 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

dilated stomach, peristaltic movements may be visible through 
the parietes. Not infrequently a new growth in the walls of 
the viscus is visible as an elevation in the epigastrium. 

Palpation. — By touch we can detect dilatation of the stomach 
with fluid or gas, and the existence of growth in its walls. 
Local pain — an important sign in diseases of the stomach — 
may be elicited by pressure. A pyloric growth in its early 
stages is movable ; later on it becomes fixed. Sometimes, on 
account of dilatation of the stomach, a p3doric tumour is dis- 
placed downwards from the normal position of the pylorus in 
the epigastrium. Tumours in the walls of the stomach descend 
by gravitation. Tumours in the left half of the stomach, which 
however are of rare occurrence, cannot, as a rule, be detected 
by palpation. Vermicular contraction of the stomachic Avails 
may occasionally be felt by the examining finger. 

Percussion. — Only that portion of the surface of the stomach 
which is in contact with the abdominal walls can be satisfac- 
torily percussed ; the sounds over the rest of the stomach are 
rendered uncertain in import by the overlapping of the liver and 
the lung. The margin of the left lobe of the liver on the right, 
and the lower border of the left lung on the left, mark the 
upper boundaries of pure stomachic resonance : the lower limit, 
the great curvature, is represented by a curved line lying mid- 
way between the end of the sternum and the umbilicus, and 
joining the costal margin at the free end of the tenth rib. The 
upper limits, being marked by transitions from hepatic dulness 
on the right and pulmonary resonance on the left to the tym- 
panitic note given forth by an air-containing stomach, are easily 
mapped out. The lower limits are not so readily fiixed, on 
account of the proximity of the colon, which frequently gives 
forth a percussion note identical in quality and intensit}-. 
Sometimes, however, there is a sharp distinction in the variety 
(jf note, permitting the hne of the greater curvature to be 
marked out with exactitude. 

The percussion note over the stomach is usually loud and 
tympanitic, but low in pitch. But the note varies greatly 
according to the nature and amount of contents. The stomach 



EXAMINATION OF ORGANS. 19 

may be quite full of fluid, when the note is dull or very touch 
muffled, and this dulness may extend over an area greater than 
is occupied by the normal undilated stomach. Air and fluid 
may be present together, when each will give out its charac- 
teristic note according to its amount and the position of the 
patient. A common condition. is seen when air and fluid are 
both present in moderate amount ; and the stomach surface is 
then represented to percussion as a rounded patch of tympanitic 
resonance above, bounded below by a crescentic area of dulness. 
The metallic note described by Leichtenstern, which may be 
elicited in cases of over-distension by gas, is not of great clinical 
value. More precise results are sought to be attained by such 
methods as that of Frerichs, w^ho generated carbonic acid in the 
cavity, and that of Schrieber, who inflated a rubber balloon intro- 
duced collapsed into the stomach, with other methods which might 
be mentioned ; but none of them have come into general favour. 

Anything which depresses the diaphragm will depress the 
stomach ; and anything which distends the abdomen will push 
the stomach upwards. Its area of resonance is diminished by 
enlargement of the liver or spleen, and increased by contraction 
of the liver, as well, of course, as by gaseous dilatation from 
pathological causes proper to itself. 

In every case important modifications of the percussion note 
may be got from changing the position of the patient. Reso- 
nance follows the movements of the gas, always to the surface ; 
dulness follows the fluid, which gravitates to the lowest position 
and drags the stomach with it. 

Auscultation. — Certain splashing, gurgling, or metallic sounds 
are caused by the agitation of the fluid and gaseous contents of 
the stomach. These sounds may be caused by the natural 
movements of the stomach walls, or by rapid voluntary move- 
ments of the diaphragm, or by manipulation from without. 
Frequently they are very loud, and can be heard at a consider- 
able distance : in such instances we may suspect some sort of 
pathological distension. During the processes of swallowing 
and digestion, gastric murmurs, of a nature not easily described, 
may be heard with the stethoscope. 

3 * 



20 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 



THE INTESTINES. 

Inspection. — General fulness or emptiness of the intestines 
causes visible protuberance or retraction of the abdominal walls. 
Excessive distension of the intestines by gas produces a charac- 
teristic form of enlargement. With general protuberance in the 
umbilical region, there is a peculiar fulness in the epigastric and 
lumbar regions, which belongs to no other form of abdominal 
enlargement. In such cases, if the parietes are thin, peristaltic 
movements may be seen in individual coils of intestine. Collec- 
tions of faeces in the colon may appear as localised elevations at 
any part of its course, or even as a general enlargement of the 
whole abdomen. 

Palpation. — It is not often that touch is of assistance in 
diagnosing the condition of intestine. We can feel, and often 
diagnose by touch, an accumulation of faeces; and it is sometimes 
possible by palpation alone to tell whether the contents of a 
distended bowel are chiefly gaseous or chiefly fluid. Occasionally 
peristaltic movements, in such cases of distension, are perceptible 
to touch. One important sign elicited by palpation is pain, 
chiefly of value in the diagnosis of certain inflammatory condi- 
tions in the neighbourhood of the caecum. 

Percussion. — In health, the percussion-note all over the 
intestine is tympanitic. The quality of the note varies accord- 
ing to the proportions of fluid or gas contained. Where the 
intestine, still full of gas, is of small calibre from compression, 
the tympanitic note is raised in pitch; where its walls are greatly 
distended by gas, the note becomes deeper in pitch, and gradually, 
according to the amount of distension, becomes less and less 
tympanitic. In conditions of extreme gaseous distension, the 
character of the note is metallic. It is not generally known that 
percussion over the iliac bones, if the patient is not fat, will give 
a tolerably accurate idea as to the nature of the contents of the 
underlying bowel. 

In certain cases the presence of fluid in the bowel may give 
a dull note in the flanks, which, when the patient turns over, 
slowly becomes resonant. In intestinal obstruction that has 



EXAMINATION OF ORGANS. 21 

lasted over a few days, this dull lumbar note from the gravitation 
of fluid-laden bowels is of by no means infrequent occurrence, 
I have more than once found, in intestinal obstruction, that 
dulness in the flanks, diagnosed as ascites, has turned out after 
operation to depend upon large quantities of fluid in the bowels. 

Auscultation, — As already stated, the clinical value of auscul- 
tation applied to the intestine is not 5'et fully established. 
Beyond certain gurgling or splashing sounds produced by the 
mingling of fluid and gas in perturbed intestinal contractions, 
and which are found in a variety of conditions, chiefly medical, 
there is little in the way of definite abnormality which can be 
detected by the stethoscope. In several cases of intestinal 
obstruction it has appeared to others, as well as to myself, that 
those gurgling sounds were loudest in the neighbourhood of 
what was afterwards found to be the situation of the obstruction. 
It is possible to follow with the stethoscope the sounds produced 
in the colon by a fluid injected through the rectum ; and this fact 
may be employed to diagnose the existence and position of any 
obstruction in this part of the bowel. 

In perforation of the bowel, there are sometimes heard sounds 
of an amphoric or blowing character, caused by the gas rushing 
out of the intestinal opening into the general peritoneal cavity. 
These sounds are said to be most audible during the act of 
inspiration. 

THE OMENTUM. 

In health, the omentum is beyond the range of any of the 
diagnostic methods. In disease, inflammatory thickening can be 
detected by percussion ; and tumours growing in its substance 
can be recognised by the methods proper to these. 

THE UTERUS AND ITS APPENDAGES. 

These are examined by methods special to themselves, which 
are fully described in works devoted to the consideration of their 
diseases. Our purpose in this work will be fulfilled by a short 
description of the method of palpation as applied to these 
organs. 



22 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

The best position is generally the supine. The patient lies 
close to the edge of the bed or couch, and the thighs are drawn 
up towards the chin and separated. One hand — the surgeon 
ought to be able to use either hand for the purpose— is laid 
upon the abdomen over the pubes, and gently but firmly presses 
the pelvic organs downwards. Two fingers of the other hand 
(or one finger if there is a hymen, or the vagina is narrow or 
tender) are carried up to the posterior vaginal cul-de-sac, and 
the posterior surface and lateral connections of the uterus 
examined as far as possible. We now seek to get the uterus 
between the fingers in the vagina and the hand on the abdomen. 
If it is retroverted, we try to turn its fundus forwards by push- 
ing the middle finger upwards (supposing two fingers are used) 
in the cul-de-sac behind, while the forefinger, by a contrary 
movement, tries to pull the cervix downwards in front. If it is 
anteverted, the forefinger pushes upwards the vagina in front of 
the cervix, while the mic^dle finger behind presses the cervix 
downwards and forwards. The result of these movements, if 
adroitly performed, is that the uterus in its length is fixed 
between the fingers in the vagina and the hand outside. Having 
in this way got an accurate idea of the size and consistence 
of the uterus itself, we direct attention to the broad ligaments, 
Fallopian tubes, and ovaries. We simply try to make the fingers 
of each hand meet over these organs, palpating their condition 
between them. In moderately thin patients, with abdominal 
walls that are not very tense, it is nearly always possible, in 
health, to palpate the fundus uteri, and frequently the ovaries 
and broad ligaments. In diseases producing enlargement, 
these, and the Fallopian tubes as well, can be made out with 
considerable precision. In diseases not connected with increase 
of bulk, the production of pain on pressing in certain localities 
is a most valuable aid in diagnosis. 

Nothing is said of the uterine sound. In bimanual examina- 
tion, which is by far the most perfect method of exploring the 
uterine organs, its use is not called for. And in uterine diseases 
generally it is used with much less frequency than it was a few 
years ago. In cases of tumour, uterine or doubtfully uterine, it 



CONDITIONS SIMULATING TUMOURS. 23 

will tell us the direction which the uterine canal takes, and, with 
some uncertainty, the length of the cavity; otherwise, it gives 
little information which cannot more accurately be got by other 
means. 

In some cases the examination is rendered more complete by 
turning the patient on her side in Sims's position, and examining 
after the manner described. In this position the uterine organs 
usually rise upwards, away from the examining fingers; but this 
disadvantage is sometimes counterbalanced by the greater laxity 
of the tissues in and around the vagina. 



Conditions Simulating Abdominal Tumours. 

In every case of abdominal enlargement, we must be assured 
of the absence of certain abnormal conditions which simulate 
new growths. The most important of these are : distended 
bladder, faecal accumulation, phantom tumours, obesity in the 
abdominal walls and omentum, tympanites, and oedema of the 
abdominal wall. 

Distended Bladder. — As no surgeon who undertakes the surgical 
treatment of an abdominal tumour is likely to be misled by this 
condition, it need be little more than mentioned. A history of 
retention or diminished discharge of urine, median dulness from 
the pubes upwards as far as, or even beyond, the umbilicus, with 
a rounded fluctuating tumour in this region and resonance in 
the flanks, are the ordinary symptoms. In any case of doubt, 
catheterisation will settle the question. It must not be for- 
gotten, however, that a distended bladder may accompany an 
abdominal tumour. This may happen from direct pressure on 
the urethra by the tumour, or by stretching of the urethra by a 
growing tumour which is adherent to the bladder wall. Reten- 
tion of urine is often the most prominent symptom of retroversion 
of the gravid uterus. 

Facal Accumulation. — A collection of faeces in the large bowel 
may be mistaken for a new growth. The collection may be 
found in the abdomen wherever the large bowel may be found ; 



24 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

and that is, practically, anywhere. It is now v/ell known, 
especially through the investigations of Treves, that the trans- 
verse colon may become bent and elongated so as quite to reach 
the pubes, and faecal accumulations may be found in any part 
of it. 

A tumour of hard or doughy consistence, occasionally capa- 
ble of being moulded, movable, and lying on the surface of the 
intestines close to the abdominal wall, may be faecal. In size it 
may vary from that of a small orange to almost any dimension. 
When fluid or semi-iluid, its peculiar want of tension, and the 
absence of definite fluctuation, will probably strike us. Tym- 
panitic distension of the bowel lying near will be found if there 
is obstruction as well as accumulation. A regular action of the 
bowels must not be taken as contra-indicating the presence of a 
faecal mass; diarrhoea even is not uncommon. In cases of long- 
standing accumulation, diarrhoea, probably due to the formation 
of " stercoraceous ulcers," is the rule rather than the exception. 

In all cases the existence of the condition will be proved by 
the administration of purgatives and enemas. If symptoms of 
intestinal obstruction are present, the chances of mistake are 
diminished. 

Phantom Tumour. Pscudo-cycsis. — Phantom tumour is a localised 
and symmetrical enlargement of .the abdomen, containing gas ; 
pseudo-cyesis is the same associated with symptoms of preg- 
nancy. Though similar, the two conditions are not identical. 
Pseudo-cvesis, or " spurious pregnancy," is most frequently 
found in women who have married late in life, and who are 
anxious for children."- Phantom tumour may occur in unmarried 
women, and in women who have borne children and are con- 
scious that their condition is in no way connected with 
pregnancy. Both conditions have been associated with hysteria. 
Rarely is phantom tumour found in males. 

A case of ordinary phantom tumour may present no physical 
signs beyond this tympanitic enlargement. A rounded, S3'm- 

* An excellent example of the species is depicted with admirable humour 
and effectiveness by Smollett in the person of Mrs. Trunnion, in reregrine 
Pickle. 



CONDITIONS SIMULATING TUMOURS. 25 

metrical, movable tumour, of size varying between that of a 
large orange and a child's head, occupying the middle of the 
abdomen, not fluctuating, and resonant on percussion, is prob- 
ably a phantom tumour. Examination by the vagina gives 
negative information. A decisive diagnosis is afforded when 
the patient is anaesthetised ; the tumour then disappears spon- 
taneously, though it may return as consciousness returns, or 
even before this. 

Pseudo-cyesis is a more complex affair. Though it is 
undoubtedly most common in elderly women anxious for chil- 
dren, and in whom symptoms of ovarian or uterine disease are 
present, it occurs also in young women in whom no such 
peculiarities exist. The remarkable case of an ass, recorded by 
Dr. Haughton of Dublin, would seem to show that the condition 
exists in the lower animals. The mimicry of pregnancy is 
sometimes very exact. Amenorrhoea, swelling of the breasts 
with pigmentation of the nipples, and morning sickness, may all 
be present with the abdominal enlargement. At the presumed 
full term a false labour may take place. 

In such cases, Tait thinks that a power of air-swallowing, 
as seen in crib-biting horses, may account for the condition. 
He calls attention to the frequent presence of loud intestinal 
gurglings in these women, and thinks their condition is caused 
partly by this spurious flatulence, and partly by peculiar mus- 
cular rigidities which they are prone to indulge in. No doubt 
the infirmity, if voluntarily produced, is an outcome of " tliat 
insatiable love of attracting attention so deeply rooted in the 
female mind," and is, as might be expected, most frequently 
found "in women to whom nature has denied the external 
attractions of beauty, or in whom there is not the compensation 
of a refined and cultured intellect."* Many speculations as to 
the origin of phantom tumour have been indulged in ; probably 
Tail's account represents the full amount of our scientific 
knowledge of the curious ailment. 

Obesity of Abdominal Walls and Omentum. — More than once the 
abdominal cavity has been entered to remove a tumour which 
* Tait, Dis. of Ovaries, 1883, p. 206. 



26 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

turned out to be fat. The simulation of abdominal growths by 
fat in the parietes or the omentum, or both, is sometimes so 
close that considerable care may be required in their discrimi- 
nation. If obesity is general, we are more likely to be on our 
guard ; but if, as sometimes happens, especially near the climac- 
teric, there is a large deposit of fat in the abdomen, while the 
limbs do not increase in bulk, or even get thinner, the condition 
is more misleading. 

In such cases the possibility of grasping and raising from 
the abdominal muscles masses of fatty tissue, the absence of 
any localised area of dulness, and the negative results of vaginal 
examination, will be our chief guides in diagnosis. A fat 
omentum is clinically, perhaps, an abdominal tumour ; but 
pathologically, there is no growth of similar thickness and 
consistency which is spread so evenly over the bowels. 

Qldeina of Abdominal Wall. — Great oedema of the abdominal 
Avail has been mistaken for abdominal tumour ; but the error 
must be of rare occurrence. A concomitant thickness and 
hardness of the subcutaneous tissues, preventing pitting on 
pressure, would seem to be necessary to render the mistake 
even possible. The absence of all the physical signs of abdo- 
minal tumour except increase in size, with the presence of 
such signs of disease in the system as would account for the 
oedema, should help the diagnosis. It should be remembered, 
however, that oedema sometimes accompanies abdominal 
tumour. 

Tympanites. — At least seven cases are on record where an 
abdomen has been laid open to find only gas. In phantom 
tumour this would be impossible, for the swelling disappears 
with the anaesthesia. The mistake, in the light of our present 
knowledge, seems almost inexcusable. On the other hand, it is 
just possible to overlook the presence of a tumour because it is 
resonant all over its surface. I have removed a large putrid 
suppurating cyst, over the whole surface of which resonance 
could be demonstrated on the operating table to a number 
of students and medical men. Half its contents were 
gaseous. 



CLASSIFICATION OF TUMOURS. 27 

Having eliminated these spurious complaints, and having 
decided that the abdomen contains a real tumour — a foreign 
development constituting disease — our next duty is to make out 
what this tumour is. In working out the diagnosis, it is well to 
follow certain lines with the mind that reasons, as well as with 
the senses that explore. These lines need not be laid down by 
science ; they may be purely practical, if only they are useful. 
Our purpose being simply diagnosis, we are justified in adopting 
any procedure which will most quickly and certainly bring out 
the ph3'sical features of the disease. Thus, while we group 
together all tumours of the ovarj^ for purposes of classification 
and description, for diagnosis we rather compare solid tumours 
of the ovary with pedunculated m3-omata of the uterus. A 
large ovarian cyst may have more physical signs in common 
with a cyst of the kidney than with any pathologicall}'- allied 
growth, uterine or ovarian. 

The rarity of a disease may be a cause of meagre scientific 
acquaintance with it ; but for diagnostic purposes, all diseases 
have equal importance. In abdominal surgery, in particular, it 
is just those rare diseases that we chiefly wish to exclude. 
Probably, most of the errors in abdominal surgery are made in 
this way. The ordinar}'^ broad signs of ovarian disease may in 
a score of cases have guided our diagnosis correctly, when a 
twenty-first case turns up with an exact repetition of all these 
signs, and we find ourselves in error. We have probably over- 
looked one or two little signs of the rare disease, because we 
thought little of it. We dare not essay to perform operations 
on the abdomen till we are familiar with the diagnosis of all 
abdominal tumours; and we cannot pretend to diagnose posi- 
tively any one disease without being able negatively to exclude 
every other. 

From the purely diagnostic point of view I have arranged 
the following plan. It is one which I have unconsciously 
adopted in abdominal examinations, and I present it simply as 
being likely to be useful. It is, of course, a mere skeleton, 
indicating in a few words the most prominent and characteristic 
signs which suggest, but do not prove, the existence of the 



28 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

disease. Full diagnostic details will be found under the 
headings of the various diseases described. 

The classification is based on the most prominent physical 
signs. The first question asked is, Is the tumour solid or fluid ? 
The next question is, Is it in the middle line, or on one side ? 
i.e., Is it symmetrical or non-symmetrical, with regard to the 
general abdominal surface? If it is non- symmetrical, On 
which side does it lie ? If it is symmetrical. Does it lie in the 
upper or lower abdomen, or in the middle ? By answering these 
simple questions at each step in our examination, we narrow 
the limits of possible disease twofold, fourfold, and eightfold, at 
the first, second, and third steps respectively. 

Schematic Arrangement of Abdominal Tumours 
for Purposes of Diagnosis. 

SOLID TUMOURS. 

Symmetrical. 

Upper Abdomen. — Cancer of Pancreas. Cancer of 
Pylorus. Fibroid Thickening of Pylorus. Morbid 
Growths in Stomach. 
Lower Abdomen. — Solid Growths of Ovary — Sar- 
coma, Fibroma, Carcinoma. Uterine Myoma. Sar- 
coma of Uterus. Molar Pregnancy. Extra-uterine 
Pregnancy (also fluid). 

NoN- SYMMETRICAL. 

Either side of Abdomen. — Solid Growths of Kidney — 
Sarcoma, Adenoma, Carcinoma. Displaced Kidne}^ 
Tumours of Colon. 

Right Side. — Solid Growths of Liver — Sarcoma, Carci- 
noma. Solid Tumours of Gall bladder. Cancer of 
Caecum. 

Left Side. — Enlargements of Spleen — Leucocytha^mic, 
Amyloid, Cancerous, Syphilitic. Wandering Spleen. 

Indifferently Situated. 

Solid Growths of Peritoneum — Cancer, Enchondroma. 
Cancer of Omentum. Cancer and Sarcoma of 
Parietes. 



SCHEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF TUMOURS. 29 

FLUID TUMOURS. 

Symmetrical. 

upper and Middle Abdomen. — Cysts of Pancreas. Peri- 
toneal and Mesenteric Cysts. Encysted Dropsy of 
Peritoneum. 
Lower Abdomen. — Ascites. Ovarian Cystoma. Parovarian 
Cysts. Papillomatous Cysts of Broad Ligament. 
Fibro-cysts of Uterus. Pregnancy. Hydramnios. 
Haematometra. Haematokolpos. Hydrometra. Extra- 
uterine Pregnancy. Cysts of Urachus. 

NON-SYMMETRICAL. 

Either Side. — Renal Cysts. Renal Hydatids. Hydro- 
nephrosis. Pyo - nephrosis. Nephric and Peri- 
nephric Abscess. Hydro- Haemato- Pyo -salpinx. 
Extra-uterine Pregnancy. Ovarian Abscess. 

Right Side. — Abscess of Liver. Hydatids of Liver. 
Dropsy and Empyema of Gall-bladder. 

L'eft Side. — Abscess of Spleen. Hydatids of Spleen. 



Solid Tumours. 

It is impossible to define the meaning of the clinical term 
" solidity " applied to tumours. Negatively, it has been taken 
as meaning "absence of fluctuation;" but this is inexact, for 
many fluid tumours do not fluctuate. And more than one class 
of tumour which is pathologically solid may give an obscure 
sense of fluctuation. It would be near the truth to say that 
most solid tumours are hard, that they communicate to the 
hand a peculiar sense of resistance, that none fluctuate freely, 
and that very few fluctuate even obscurely. But, undoubtedly, 
the best ultimate criterion of solidity and fluidity in tumours is 
the educated sense of touch. A skilled and experienced diag- 
nostician will say almost at once, by laying his hand on a growtli, 
whether it is solid or fluid ; and such judgment, in my opinion, 
is more likely to be correct than the most painstaking enquiry 
into all the clinical features of the enlargement. 



Solid Symmetrical Tumours. 

By a symmetrical tumour is meant one which occupies equal 
parts of each side of the abdomen. The symmetry of the 
abdomen is not disturbed; the enlargement is bilaterall}- equal, 
or nearly so. 

SOLID SYMMETRICAL TUMOURS IN THE UPPER ABDOMEN. 

Cancer of the Pancreas. — A hard, rounded or irregular tumour 
fixed deeply in the region of the pancreas, usually covered by 
bowel, and perhaps giving a sense of pulsation to palpitation, 
with a vascular bruit on auscultation, is probably pancreatic 
cancer. If the growth is small, nothing may be detected beyond 
a deep, obscure sense of resistance and hardness. It is not 
often that the growth acquires dimensions large enough to be 
visible through the abdominal wall. 

Cancer of the Pylorus. — This may be felt as a small hard 
movable tumour situated in the epigastrium, usually a little to 
the right of the median line. It becomes fixed in its later 
stages. It always lies deeply, and is covered by bowel. Pres- 
sure causes pain. 

Fibroid Thickening of the Pylorus. — Although thickening of the 
pylorus rarely reaches to the dimensions of a tumour, it some- 
times becomes bulky enough to be obscurely felt as a localised 
induration. From the early stages of cancer of the pylorus, it 
cannot be diagnosed. The amount of pain elicited — small in 
thickening, considerable in cancer — may be of value. 

Morbid Groivths in the Stomach. — These are roughly median, 
but usually with the main enlargement on the left. They are 
usually one or other of the varieties of cancer, three-fourths of 
the cases being scirrhus. A growth in the stomach is at first 
freely movable, near the surface if in the anterior wall or 
greater curvature, rounded or irregular in outline, and may 
attain to a considerable size. On the posterior surface or lesser 
curvature (which is not a common situation), the growth may be 
only obscurely palpable when the stomach is empty. It tends to 
drag the stomach downwards, and from this cause, as well as 



SCHEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF TUMOURS. 31 

from the dilatation of the viscus which usually accompanies it> 
may descend as low as the umbilicus. It is painful on palpa- 
tion. I have seen two cases of cancer of the posterior wall, in 
each of which there was a visible protuberance in the epigas- 
trium. Cancers of the stomach are late in becoming fixed ; 
some slight degree of mobility is present to the last. 



SOLID SYMMETRICAL TUMOURS IN THE LOWER ABDOMEN. 

Solid Growths of the Ovary (sarcoma, fibroma, myoma, carci- 
noma) present clinical features which are, except where the 
tumours are of large size, essentially identical. When they first 
signify their presence, the}' are usually about the size of the fist, 
and have escaped from the pelvic into the abdominal cavity. 
Unless they are of considerable size, they are not strictly sym- 
metrical, lying towards the side of the ovary from which they 
spring ; but as they occup)^ more of the middle than of the 
sides of the abdomen, they may be considered as symmetrical. 
When large, the}' become strictly median. 

Such tumours are round, hard, smooth on the surface and 
freely movable. They are not usually very painful on being 
handled. Vaginal examination reveals a normal uterus, some- 
times dragged upwards, movable, and following upwards artificial 
elevation of the growth. By deep exploration with the fingers, 
it may be possible to make out tension and relaxation of the 
ovarian ligaments as the tumour is pulled upwards or pushed 
downwards. Palpation reveals the sensation that the uterus 
is not closely, but remotely attached to the tumour. This 
condition may be verified by passage of the uterine sound. 

Uterine Myoma. — This enlargement varies in its appearance 
according as it is sessile or pedunculated, single or multiple, 
hard or soft (" oedematous "), fixed in the pelvis or free in the 
abdominal cavity. A single round pedunculated myoma may 
be very similar in clinical features to a solid ovarian tumour. It 
is more exactly median, and the uterus follows its movements 
more closely. The sessile myoma has more of its bulk low down 
than the pedunculated, and the uterus seems to be part of it, 



32 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

following its movements to the fullest extent. Multiple myomata 
exhibit several rounded bosses irregularly placed in the lower 
abdomen, and are usually associated with considerable enlarge- 
ment of the uterine tissues, with elongation of the uterine cavity. 
The distinctive signs of the individual varieties of myomata 
need not here be referred to. There is practically no limit, 
consistently with life, to the size to which these tumours may 
grow. Auscultation over myomatous growths may reveal a 
vascular bruit. 

Sarcoma of the Utenis. — It is very seldom that sarcoma of the 
uterus, in itself a rare disease, attains to such a size as to become 
an abdominal tumour. Its growth is usually purely intra-uterine 
and the uterine walls are spread over it. From a large fibroid 
polypus, it cannot be diagnosed with certainty : softness and 
rapidity of growth suggest sarcoma. 

Molar Pregnancy. — This is recognised as being an intra-uterine 
enlargement by the ordinary methods of physical examination. 
The hydatidiform mole is said to reveal to palpation " a pecu- 
liar doughy boggy feeling, in the highest degree characteristic' 
The abdominal tumour, which may increase more rapidly than 
a normal gestation, and grow to a greater size, is usually some- 
what flattened. The principal signs in such cases are merely 
confirmatory of the more important general symptoms which 
accompany this form of abnormal gestation. 

Extra-uterine Pregnancy. — When the foetus is dead, and the 
surrounding fluids are absorbed, an extra- uterine pregnancy 
may appear as a hard irregularly-rounded mass fixed in the 
lower abdomen and pelvis. Its connections with the uterus, 
which is always enlarged, are close and firm. Here also history 
is all-important in forming a diagnosis. It may be impossible, 
so far as physical signs are concerned, to diagnose a uterine 
myoma from an extra-uterine pregnancy. 

Solid Non-symmetrical Tumours. 

By a non-symmetrical tumour is meant one which, visibly 
or palpably, lies chiefly in and has its main connections on 



SCHEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF TUMOURS. 33 

one side of the abdomen. The symmetry of the abdomen, 
if there is evident enlargement, is disturbed. If there is no 
enlargement, an abnormal swelling is felt in one side of the 
cavity. 

SOLID NON-SYMMETRICAL TUMOURS FOUND ON EITHER SIDE 
OF THE ABDOMEN. 

Solid Growths of the Kidney. — These are : sarcoma, several 
varieties; adenoma; and carcinoma. Clinically, certain suppu- 
rative lesions of the kidney may be solid. From mere increase 
of resistance in the loin without visible enlargement, to a bulk 
so great that it may pass the middle line and even fill the whole 
abdominal cavity, there is every gradation of size in renal 
tumours. Generally speaking, a hard smooth body, fixed or but 
slightly movable, in either loin, dull on percussion from the 
lumbar region forwards, and completely filling the costo-iliac 
space, will indicate a solid renal growth. Pressure on a renal 
tumour from the front gives a peculiar sense of hard, unyielding 
resistance. In tumours of considerable size, the passage of the 
colon — ascending or descending, as the case may be — over its 
surface may be detected by percussion or palpation. 

Displaced Kidney, movable and fixed. — A movable and a floating 
kidney, pathologically distinct, give identical physical signs. 
A body of the size, shape, and consistence of the kidney is felt 
somewhere in the abdomen between its normal situation and 
the middle line : it glides from under the palpating fingers, and 
may be replaced in the loin, when its presence may be detected 
by bimanual palpation. It is always covered by bowel. A 
peculiar sensation of nausea and faintness is produced by pres- 
sure. Movable kidney is most common on the right side. 

A kidney fixed in an abnormal situation is usually found 
near the brim of the pelvis, close to the sacro-iliac joint. It is 
usually larger and more lobulated than natural, but otherwise 
presents to the examining finger the physical characters of renal 
substance. Fixed malposition of the kidney is most frequently 
met with on the left side. Manual exploration by the rectum 
may, in certain cases, be necessary for diagnosis. 

4 



34 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

Tumours of the Colon. — Solid growths of the colon are — poly- 
pus, adenoma or adeno-sarcoma, and cancer. A polypoid 
growth is usually found in the descending colon ; it is rarely 
so large as an orange, and is freely movable for some inches in 
all directions. It lies usually at or near the surface of the 
abdomen. In the sigmoid flexure it is perceptible on rectal 
palpation. Cancer may be found in any part of the large 
bowel. It is felt rather as an obscure thickening than as a 
distinct rounded tumour, and is slightly or not at all movable. 
For diagnosis, other signs, especiallj^ those found in the excreta, 
are essential. 



NON-SYMMETRICAL SOLID GROV/THS ON THE RIGHT SIDE 
OF THE ABDOMEN. 

Solid Groivths of_ the Liver. — Various kinds of cancer and 
sarcoma are found affecting the liver, as new growths ; it may be 
enlarged from fatty or lardaceous disease, or other influences 
which do not here concern us. The leading physical signs in 
malignant disease are, a solid resisting enlargement in the hepatic 
region — most frequently in the right lobe, rarely in the left lobe 
— causing more of its surface than is natural to protrude from 
under the ribs, and increasing the area of dulness. From the 
upper limits of hepatic dulness over the ribs to the lower 
limits of the enlargement in the abdomen, dulness on percussion 
is continuous. If the enlargement is not very great, and if the 
growth is not adherent, the liver moves upwards and downwards 
during respiration. The characteristic knobs on the surface of 
the liver, in cancer, are almost pathognomonic. The edge of 
the liver may be palpated. There is practically no limit, other 
than the capacity of the abdomen, to the growth of malignant 
tumours of the liver. 

Solid Tumour of the Gall-bladder. — Except as part of general 
malignant disease of the liver, new growths in the gall-bladder 
are rare. A gall-bladder full of gall-stones, and with walls 
thickened from inflammation, is clinically a solid tumour. A 
tumour of the gall-bladder appears in its normal situation at the 



SCHEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF TUMOURS. 35 

edge of the liver, and grows diagonally downwards and inwards 
towards the umbilicus. It is smooth and rounded on the surface, 
globular, ovoid, or pear-shaped in outline, and is movable in 
lateral directions, and to some extent backwards. Dulness over 
it is rarely absolute ; an area of resonance, from the presence 
of colon, is occasionally found separating it from the liver 
margin. 

Cancer of the CcEcum. — A hard irregular tumour, not of large 
size, in the right iliac fossa, and movable through a limited area, 
may be a malignant growth in the caecum. Other signs, relating 
chiefly to obstruction to the passage of the intestinal contents, 
are necessary to the diagnosis. Inflammation in the caecum, or 
near it (typhlitis or peri-typhlitis), may be associated with the 
development of an enlargement which simulates new growth : 
in this case the enlargement is not movable. A malignant 
tumour in this part of the bowel is not usually strictly limited 
to the caecum, but involves either ileum or ascending colon. 



NON-SYMMETRICAL SOLID GROWTHS ON THE LEFT SIDE OF 
THE ABDOMEN. 

Solid Enlargements of the Spleen. — With the diagnosis of the 
acute enlargements of the spleen found in various purely medical 
diseases we are not here concerned. The varieties of splenic 
enlargement likely to be met with in exploration of the abdomen 
for tumours arise from Leucocythaemia, Amyloid degeneration, 
Cancer, and Syphilis. In all of these, physical examination 
reveals little more than enlargement of the organ. Splenic 
tumours appear under the left false ribs, and grow downwards 
and inwards towards the middle line. They lie close to the 
parietes, and give an absolutely dull note on percussion over 
the surface ; there is usually an area of resonance in the loin 
behind. The characteristic notched or festooned inner border 
is usually to be felt. Unless the tumour is of considerable 
size — and splenic tumours may attain to great dimensions — 
it enjo3^s some degree of mobility. Palpation in most cases 
is painless. 

4 * 



36 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

Wandering Spleen. — This rare condition is found exclusively in 
women. A displaced spleen has been found at the umbilicus, 
in the true pelvis, and at various other situations in the left 
abdomen. In one case, at least, it has been found free in the 
cavit}^, the pedicle having been twisted through. Absence of 
dulness at the normal site of the spleen, and the presence of 
a body having the physical characters of this organ, movable 
round' a centre placed under the left false ribs, is probably 
wandering spleen. A dislocated spleen is, however, liable to 
contract adhesions in its abnormal position, and then mobility 
is absent. 



SOLID TUMOURS INDIFFERENTLY SITUATED IN THE 
ABDOMINAL CAVITY. 

Tumours of the omentum, the peritoneum, the small intes- 
tines, and the parietes, may appear at any part of the abdominal 
area. Their situation is indifferently lateral or median, high up 
or low down. 

Solid Growths of the Peritoneum. — Excluding tubercular disease, 
the new developments met with, in connection with the peri- 
toneum, are practically all cancerous. Enchondroma has been 
found as a new growth, originating from the peritoneum. In the 
great majority of cases, peritoneal cancer is secondary either to 
outlying disease or to local disease in the intestines. As usually 
met with, cancer of the peritoneum is sessile, very hard and 
irregular on the surface, and accompanied by a variable amount 
of ascitic fluid. If originating from the bowel, and seen early, it 
may be movable ; but it very soon becomes fixed, by implication 
of neighbouring organs. In most cases bowel either overlies it 
or passes through it, and thus gives a percussion note of reso- 
nance or modified dulness. In cases of advanced disease, a large 
amount of ascitic fluid may be present, masking the signs and 
obscuring the diagnosis. 

Solid growths of the small intestine not involving the 
peritoneum are mere pathological curiosities, and may be 
practically ignored. 



SCHEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF TUMOURS. 37 

Solid Growths of the Omentum. — Various forms ot malignant 
disease may attack the omentum ; colloid cancer is the most 
important. It is known by its superficial position, overlying the 
bowels ; by its very irregular surface, hard at most parts, but 
boggy or even semi-fluctuating where colloid material abounds ; 
and by the wide superficies which it occupies, as compared with 
its general bulk. Ascites, revealed by the ordinary signs, may 
be present behind the growth. In the earliest stages of omental 
cancer, palpation and deep percussion may elicit signs that it 
overlies, and is supported by, intestines. 

Solid Groivths of the Abdominal Parietes. — These are usually 
malignant, most frequently cancerous, but sometimes sarco- 
matous. They cause bulgmgs ot the parietes, more prominent 
than their size would seem to warrant ; are rounded, and not 
very irregular on the surface ; they follow closely the move- 
ments of the abdominal walls, and, if of moderate size, appear 
to float on the surface of the intestines. There .is absolute 
dulness all over the palpable surface. 



Fluid Tumours. 

The only definite attribute that can be attached to the 
clinical term "fluidity," apphed to new growths, is "presence 
of fluctuation." Many tumours, however, that have fluid con- 
tents, and that are diagnosed as having such, do not exhibit the 
sign of fluctuation. Between the definite physical signs of 
fluidity and solidity there are gradations which we seek to 
describe by such terms as "soft," "boggy," "semi-fluctuating," 
But the actual condition, solid or fluid, is in many instances a 
thing to be decided simply and solely by the educated sense of 
touch. So many circumstances combine to obscure or abolish 
the sign of fluctuation, even when it ought to be present, that 
special pains should be taken to perfect our means of diagnosis 
without this sign. Thick abdominal walls, tension or thickness 
in the cyst-wall, great density of the fluid, or multiplicity of the 
loculi in which the fluid is contained, are some of the hindrances 



38 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

to fluctuation. We conclude, therefore, that while the positive 
sign — fluctuation — is proof of fluidity, its absence is not proof 
to the contrary ; and that, though no verbal description of it is 
possible, the educated sense of touch must frequentl}^ be our 
sole guide. 

FLUID SYMMETRICAL TUMOURS IN THE UPPER AND MIDDLE 
ABDOMEN. 

Cysts of the Pancreas. — Though not always accurately sym- 
metrical, cysts of the pancreas lie mainly in the middle line. 
A rounded thin-walled cyst, distinctly fluctuating, deeply and 
firmly fixed, not moving with respiration, and situated above 
the umbilicus, may be a pancreatic cyst. Exploratory punc- 
ture reveals a fluid, viscid or opalescent, alkaline in reaction, 
and containing a considerable amount of albumen, which is 
coagulated by heat and nitric acid. 

Peritoneal and Mesenteric Cysts. Encysted Dropsy of the Peri- 
toneum. — Like pancreatic cysts, these, though chiefly occupying 
the middle line, are rarely exactly median. It is impossible to 
diagnose them with precision. They clearly contain fluid, 
though fluctuation is usually obscure ; it is rarely possible to 
make out a distinctly outlined cyst-wall, as intestine is frequently 
intimately attached to its surface, and the percussion notes are 
liable to vary at different times of examination. Some degree 
of mobility is usually present. Such collections are usually 
situated either at the level of, or below, the umbihcus; occasion- 
ally, however, they are found elsewhere. 



FLUID SYMMETRICAL ENLARGEMENTS IN THE LOWER ABDOMEN. 

Ascites. Peritoneal Dropsy. — A fluctuating fluid collection in 
the abdominal cavity that changes position with the movements 
of the patient, always gravitating to the lowest part of the 
cavity and causing dulness on percussion there, but leaving 
resonant the highest part, or situations from which bowel cannot 
be displaced, is probably ascites. In the supine position, there 



SCHEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF TUMOURS. 



39 



is dulness in the flanks ; and if the amount of fluid is not very- 
great, there is resonance in front, over a circular or crescentic 
area the concavity of which is towards the chest. (Fig. 2.) If 
the parietes are not greatly distended, the abdomen is flattened; 
if its walls are lax, there may be bulging in the flanks. In cases 
of great distention, the umbilicus protrudes. Vaginal exami- 
nation gives negative results. 

Ovarian Cystoma. — A rounded or irregular tumour in the 
middle line, or slightly to one side, always showing its presence 
in front to palpation or percussion, never changing its shape, 
and movable only in mass or not at all, may be an ovarian cyst. 
In the supine posture there is a circular area of dulness, sur- 
rounded by a "tympanic corona" ; if no ascites is present, there 
is resonance in the flanks. (Fig. 3.) There is no protrusion of 





Fig 2. 



Fig 3. 



Diagrams showing development of areas of dulness in ascites (Fig. 2), and in ovarian 
tumour (Fig. 3^. Darker shading indicates an earlier stage of disease. 



the umbilicus. Vaginal examination reveals close or remote 
connection with the uterus, with displacement, and sometimes 
enlargement, of that organ. 

Parovarian Cysts. — This variety of growth has the character 
of the preceding, as to dulness in front and resonance in the 



40 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

flanks. The cyst is thin-walled, and fluctuation is very evident. 
By the vagina it may frequently be palpated, when its thin wall 
and connection with the uterus through the broad ligament will 
confirm the diagnosis. 

Papillomatous Cysts of the Broad Ligament. — These are not 
usually diagnosed from ovarian cystomata. They are firmly 
fixed low down in the pelvis, and are frequently closely incor- 
porated with the uterus. One or more large cysts, not often 
symmetrical, and with sulci between them, occupy the abdo- 
men : by vaginal examination, several cysts of smaller size may 
be detected in the pelvis. Small growths of this nature are 
one-sided. 

Fihvo-cystic Disease of the Uterus. — It is probable that ovarian 
or broad ligament cysts have been not infrequently described as 
cystic disease of the uterus. True cystic disease is undoubtedly 
very rare. In very few cases can it be diagnosed from ovarian 
cystoma. It has most of the signs of the latter, and is always 
sessile on the uterus, moving consentaneously with that organ. 
Many ovarian tumours are very intimately attached to the 
uterus. 

Pregnancy. — K pregnant uterus stands out from the pelvis 
more prominently than an ovarian or other tumour of the same 
size : more of the fundus is palpable than in other tumours. 
The uterine walls are of a peculiar density, fluctuation is 
obscure, and the foetus may be felt by palpation or ballottement. 
By the vagina, there is detected a characteristic softening of the 
cervix — not merely the superficial softening of swollen mucous 
membrane, but a softening all through its tissue, extending up 
to the globular capsule of muscular fibre which contains the 
foetus. The lower portions of the uterus move in harmony 
with the fundus. The other well-known signs of pregnancy 
will, of course, be looked for. 

Hydramnios. Dropsy of the Amnion. — In pregnancy compli- 
cated with albuminuria the amniotic fluid may be in excess, 
giving rise to a condition that may be not unlike ovarian or 
parovarian cyst. The uterine walls are very thin, and fluc- 
tuation may readily be elicited, while the foetus may be beyond 



SCHEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF TUMOURS. 41 

the reach of palpation. Special weight is to be given to the 
condition of the cervix — softened, as in ordinary pregnancy, — 
and to the other evidences of gestation. 

Hamatometra. — A round globular collection of fluid in the 
lower abdomen and pelvis of a young woman who has not 
menstruated, but who has passed the period of puberty, may be 
a collection of blood inside the uterus. The cervix uteri is not 
softened nor swollen, and there are no signs of pregnancy. The 
amount of cervical tissue felt will depend on whether the atresia 
is at the external or the internal os. Sometimes there is complete 
atresia of the vagina, which in itself suggests the diagnosis. 

HtBmatokolpos. Retained Menses. — The various conditions in 
the vagina or hymen which prevent the outflow of the menstrual 
fluid at puberty may cause the appearance of a cystic tumour 
in the lower abdomen. The ordinary sign of a fluid encysted 
enlargement, with the abnormality easily discovered by vaginal 
examination, in addition to amenorrhoea, will make the diagnosis 
easy. Haematokolpos bulges more into the pelvis than haemato- 
metra ; it may even cause distension of the perineum, and visibly 
protrude through the vulva. The uterus sessile on the top of 
the cyst may sometimes be palpated through the abdomen. 

Hydrometra. — When occlusion of the cervical canal at its 
external or internal opening takes place after the menopause, 
there is a collection of fluid in the uterus that is not blood, 
but a clear or blood-stained watery or viscid fluid. The uterine 
walls are much attenuated, and fluctuation is well marked. As 
a clinical curiosity, an hour-glass dilatation of the uterus, from 
occlusion of the external as well as the internal os, may be 
mentioned. Such collections of watery fluid inside the uterus 
do not usually attain to large size, and they are of very slow 
growth. If, as very rarely happens, the contents suppurate, we 
get the condition cdMed pyometva. 

Extra-idevine Pregnancy. — While the fcetus is still alive, and 
the fluids are in normal amount, an extra-uterine gestation may 
appear in the lower abdomen as a thin-walled obscurely fluc- 
tuating cyst, with firm and deep connections in the pelvis. By 
the vagina, an enlarged and probably anteverted uterus, inti- 



42 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

mately connected with the growth, will be detected. General 
matting and induration in Douglas's pouch, and, very likely, 
part of the contour of a foetus, may be felt. The signs of preg- 
nancy, modified and misleading, will be present. 

Cysts of the Urachns. — Small cysts of the urachus containing 
a few drachms of fluid are sometimes found at abdominal 
operations. Large cysts are rare. They are exactly median, 
rise a little higher than ovarian tumours of the same size, have 
no connection with the uterus, and, if not large, may leave a 
resonant area between their lower margins and the pubes. 
They fluctuate freely in all directions. Sometimes there is a 
history of urinary trouble. 



FLUID NON-SYMMETRICAL TUMOURS FOUND ON EITHER STDE OF 
THE ABDOMEN. 

Fhiid Enlargements connected with the Kidney. — These are : 

Renal cysts, 
Hydatids, 
Hydro-nephrosis, 
Pyo-nephrosis. 

The special diagnosis of these conditions must be carried 
out by methods other than the purely physical. Certain phy- 
sical signs which they have in common may here be enumerated. 
A cystic enlargement of the kidney lies in close contact with 
the parietes in the lumbar region, causing absolute dulness 
there and, according to its size, over the anterior surface ; and 
is either fixed or but slightly movable, having its main attach- 
ment deep in the loin. Growing from the side towards the 
middle line, as well as upwards and downwards, it may occupy 
the whole abdominal cavity. But it nearly always leaves reso- 
nance in the opposite flank, and can rarely be detected by 
vaginal palpation. The passage of colon over it may be re- 
vealed by percussion and palpation. 

Nephric and Peri-nephric Abscess. — A collection of fluid in the 
region of the kidney, associated with signs of suppuration, may 



SCHEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF TUMOURS. 43 

be abscess in the organ itself or in the outlying tissues. It is 
not always possible to differentiate the two conditions ; in fact, 
they are often associated. In cases of any standing there is 
discolouration of the overlying skin, with inflammatory thick- 
ening in the deep parts, and tenderness on pressure. The lum- 
bar muscles are fixed, tense and brawny. Positive signs of fluid 
are frequently absent : in most cases the early condition of renal 
suppuration is that of a solid, and not of a fluid, enlargement. 

Fluid Collections in the Fallopian Tubes. — These are : 
Hydro-salpinx, 
Haemato-salpinx. 
Pyo-salpinx. 

It is not often that cystic enlargements of the Fallopian 
tubes become abdominal tumours. They are usually confined 
to the pelvis, and discovered by vaginal and rectal palpation, 
or by the ordinary bimanual method. An ovoid or irregular 
fluid collection of small size lying in the retro-uterine space, 
and usually on one side of it, may be a cystic dilatation of the 
Fallopian tube. It is evidently closely connected with one side 
of the uterus at the fundus. If painless, it is possibly hydro- 
salpinx ; but this cannot be differentiated from small cysts of 
the ovary. If painful on palpation — and pain is often a very 
prominent symptom — it is probably pyo- or haemato-salpinx ; 
but may be ovarian abscess, or localised pelvic suppuration, 
either primary or resulting from pelvic haematocele. The diag- 
nosis of lesions of the Fallopian tubes is attended with con- 
siderable difficulty. 

Extra-uterine Pregnancy, and especially Fallopian pregnancy 
(which all these cases probably are), is, in its early stages, 
unilateral, and is obscurely cystic. When rupture takes place, 
the enlargement is chiefly median. 

Ovarian Abscess. — A suppurating ovary is usually dislocated 
downwards. It is rarely larger than a hen's egg, very tender on 
pressure, tense and obscurely fluctuating. It usually Hes in the 
recto-uterine pouch, on one side or the other, and cannot, on 
account of adhesions, be moved from this situation. 



44 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 



FLUID NON-SYMMETRICAL TUMOURS ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE 

ABDOMEN. 

Abscess of the Liver. — Only in its later stages can the presence 
of fluid in a hepatic abscess be detected by palpation. There 
is general enlargement of the area of hepatic dulness ; the liver 
margin can be palpated under the ribs, and pressure there 
causes pain ; there are the usual signs, not always well marked, 
however, of suppuration ; and in advanced cases, where the 
growth of the abscess is mainly downwards, there may be a 
palpable and visible protrusion of the parietes. Exploratory 
puncture reveals the presence of pus. 

Hydatid Disease of the Liver. — A hydatid cyst usually appears 
as a smooth, painless globular enlargement in the right hypo- 
chondriac or epigastric regions, obscurely fluctuating, elastic 
and resisting. The characteristic hydatid fremitus is not always 
detected. If the cyst lies deep in the hepatic tissue, or on its 
posterior aspect, it produces no signs other than hepatic en- 
largement. Exploratory puncture reveals the existence of clear 
hydatid fluid, perhaps with portions of the entozoa. Hydatid 
cysts sometimes suppurate, and then are indistinguishable from 
abscess. 

Distension of the Gall-hladder'.^-K pyriform or ovoid cystic 
swelling in the right hypochondrium, fixed under the liver, 
but movable elsewhere, painless or but slightly painful, will 
probably be distended gall-bladder. The exact nature of its 
contents — watery, or purulent, or bilious — will be revealed by 
the consideration of accessory symptoms. 



FLUID NON-SYMMETRICAL ENLARGMENTS ON THE LEFT SIDE OF 

THE ABDOMEN. 

Splenic Abscess. — Abscess of the spleen is of rare occurrence; 
and, unless it is of large size, and shows a tendency to burst 
through the parietes, it is not often diagnosed. Fluctuation is 
always obscure, often unrecognisable. Though the symptoms 
are usually acute and attended with pain, they are sometimes 



SCHEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF TUMOURS. 45 

very chronic, and little more may appear in evidence of splenic 
abscess than a boggy semi-elastic tumour in the left hypo- 
chondrium. I have seen a case, in the practice of a colleague, 
where a large abscess of the spleen was opened and a piece of 
sloughed splenic tissue removed, nearly as large as an orange, 
which showed slight and unimportant signs of its presence. 

Hydatids of the Spleen. — This condition is also rare. A pain- 
less tumour in the region of the spleen, smooth on the surface, 
but sometimes lobulated, obscurely fluctuating or only bogg)^, 
painless, and perhaps exhibiting the hydatid trembling, is 
probably hydatid cyst of the spleen. Exploratory puncture 
renders the diagnosis certain. 



Artificial Distension of the Stomach and Intestines 
as an aid to Diagnosis. 

Distension of the stomach and the intestines by gas and by 
fluids has recently been advocated and employed in the diag- 
nosis of abdominal diseases and injuries. Senn of Milwaukee 
has recently employed rectal and stomachic inflation of hydrogen 
gas for the purpose of diagnosing perforation of the viscera, 
and others have followed his example. This will be again 
referred to. In 1883 Ziemmsen used inflation of the rectum with 
carbonic acid gas as an aid to diagnosis, and spoke highly of 
the plan, but it did not come into extensive use. More recently 
Minkowski* has made an elaborate study of the practice in 
aiding the diagnosis of abdominal tumours, having employed it 
in no fewer than no cases. He distended the stomach with 
carbonic acid gas generated by the administration of bicarbonate 
of soda and tartaric acid ; water was employed for distending the 
rectum. A comparison of the position and relations of the tumour 
before and after distension reveals certain facts which may be of 
importance. Tumours of the liver, gall-bladder, and spleen are 
displaced or more distinctly outlined after gaseous distension of 
the stomach. The diagnosis of tumours of the large intestine, 
mesentery, kidney, and pancreas is said to be assisted by fluid 
* Berl. Klin. Woch. No. 31, 1868. 



46 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

injections into the large intestine. The inferences as to changes 
in position or variations in dulness are to be made from known 
anatomical relations, and need not here be enlarged upon. 

As a routine method of aiding in the diagnosis of abdominal 
tumours, artificial distension of the hollow viscera has not found 
much favour in this country. In the great majority of cases it 
is superfluous ; in such cases, its employment is barbarous in the 
same' sense that it is barbarous to seek to elicit crepitus in a 
case of fracture where other symptoms suffice for diagnosis. In 
many cases it is inadmissible : the condition of the patient 
forbids the deliberate infliction of pain, or even discomfort, for a 
possible but doubtful help in diagnosis. Where the patient's 
condition admits of it ; where diagnosis is incomplete, and is 
likely to be made more complete by the proceeding, we may, if 
it is important that the diagnosis be made, employ it. 



General Examination of the Patient. 

What has been said refers merely to the diagnosis of the 
growth or disease for which operation is contemplated. But 
before such operation is decided upon, we must also make an 
investigation of every vital organ — diagnose the condition of 
the patient, in fact. The importance of this cannot be too 
strongly insisted upon. Many of the catastrophes of abdominal 
surgery are to be attributed to overlooking some lesion of an 
important organ, such as an exhaustive and skilful investigation 
of the whole of the system might have detected. The grand 
fact of the diagnosis of the tumour, and everything connected 
with it, is too apt to overshadow the diagnosis of other things. 
We take a pride, and justly, in the rapidity and accuracy with 
which we can diagnose the nature and connections of an 
abdominal tumour; and this cultured and impressive skill is 
liable to make us impatient of the tedious medical examination 
of the whole system. The condition of the heart, lungs, kid- 
neys, no one would dare to overlook who was not recklessly 
foolish ; but any abnormal symptom, howevef apparently trivial, 



SCHEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF TUMOURS. 47 

ought to be followed up to its origin. For instance, in two 
cases of abdominal tumour, I had seen bleeding from the 
rectum, as an effect of pressure, which disappeared when the 
growth was removed. A third case had similar bleeding, but 
for certain reasons was not at once submitted to operation. 
Later on, the continuance of the bleeding demanded a special 
examination, and revealed cancer of the rectum. Had I oper- 
ated upon this patient when she was first seen, I should have 
done so in ignorance of this condition. Dr. Henry C. Coe*-' 
records a case which he lost from having overlooked a stricture 
of the colon; and many other similar cases could be quoted. 
Therefore, we ought never lightly to pass over a symptom that 
might be caused by the disease : we ought to be certain before 
operating that the symptom is so caused. 



Exploratory Incision. 

There is no doubt that a good deal of rashness and a certain 
amount of incompetence is sought to be concealed by the prac- 
tice of "exploratory incisions." No incision ought to be merely 
exploratory : at the utmost, it ought to be ultimately diagnostic 
in a case of extreme doubt and difficulty. The exploratory 
incision of the skilled surgeon is Avidely different from that of 
the tyro. Where the former will make a correct diagnosis in 
ninety-nine out of a hundred cases, the latter will fail over his 
tenth case ; but he may not conclude that the justification of 
exploratory operation is assured merely because he is in doubt in 
this case. Perhaps surgeons of large experience are somewhat to 
blame for so freely speaking of this tentative proceeding as being 
frequently justifiable and necessary. What is justifiable in their 
experienced hands, may not be so in the hands of less experienced 
men. Before submitting our patient to what, after all, is a serious 
operation and a trying illness, we ought again and again to 
return to the examination of the disease, read and re-read the 
exhaustive history, and decide only after having done this. At 
* N. Y. Med. Journ,, May 9th, 1SS5. 



48 DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

different examinations the mind focuses its attention on different 
points, and travels in different directions ; and each examination 
may give us new information. The help of a skilled friend is 
always valuable, but too much weight must not be given to it. 
Responsibility begets trustworthiness : the man who operates is 
the man who must diagnose, and additional acumen is given to 
his powers by the heavy responsibility that waits upon their 
fruition. 

Having made this " exploratory incision," we must not be 
too rash in converting it into an operative one. We ought to 
be sure, before inflicting the slightest injury upon the growth, 
that we can remove it. To have been forced to submit the 
patient to exploration by incision, is grievous enough ; but to 
have added thereto additional risks from sheer meddlesome- 
ness, is unpardonable. Difficulties and dangers, legitimate and 
unavoidable, are numerous enough, in all conscience, in abdom- 
inal surgery : let us not to these add risks that are illegitimate 
and avoidable. 



Section II 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS CONSIDERED 
GENERALLY. 



Nomenclature. Historical. 

The operation of abdominal section has for a very long 
time been known by the term Gastrotomy, from '/rto-T*)/)— belly, 
and To/ni'j — incision. As the proceeding was at first carried out 
only for the purpose of removing a foetus from the womb, the 
name came to have a limited application to Caesarean section. 
Thus, in the dictionar}^ by Blancard of Middleburg, in Zealand, 
published near the end of the seventeenth century, and trans- 
lated into English in 1702, " Gastrotomia " is defined as " the 
cutting open of the abdomen and womb, as in sectio Caesarea." 
Gastrorraphy about this time was chiefly used as meaning 
simple suture of wounds in the abdomen ; but it was also 

5 



50 NOMENCLATURE. 

applied to the introduction of sutures in the bowel. In these 
instances the word ya<r7r]p was used in its original and legitimate 
sense, corresponding to the vulgar rather than the anatomical 
word " stomach ; " but when the stomach proper came within 
the sphere of practical surgery, Gastrotomy was often used for 
the operation of removal of foreign bodies from that viscus. 
Sedillot introduced the word Gastrostomy {aro/na — mouth) to 
indicate the formation of stomachic fistula ; and Gastrorraphy 
has quite recently been used by Billroth and others to signify 
closure of an opening in the stomach by suture. In the begin- 
ning of this century the term Laparotomy {Xmrapa — flank) came 
into use for operations such as herniotomy, or the operation for 
artificial anus made in the loin. Soon it came to have a wider 
significance, and now it is applied to any and every operation 
in which section of the abdominal walls is performed. As, in 
the words Gastrostomy, Gastrotom}^, Gastrorraphy, ^/affn'jp is 
probably now permanently appropriated to the anatomical 
stomach. Laparotomy is probabl}^ the best word to use generally 
for the operation of abdominal section. " Ventrotomy " has 
recently been proposed as a convenient term for abdominal 
section. Unfortunately, there is abundant precedent for the 
introduction of barbarous words into our terminology; but the 
practice scarcely deserves encouragement. Petit"^-' would limit 
the word Gastrotomy to indicate in a general way the operations 
practised on the abdominal wall ; Laparotomy, for the oper- 
ations performed for intestinal obstruction ; and Stomachic 
Incision (Taille stomacale), for removal of foreign bodies from 
the stomach. But abdominal terminology in England has 
already- got beyond the possibility of using these limitations. 
The special operation is sought to be indicated by affixing 
certain terminal words to the Greek name of the organ indi- 
cated. Thus, "-tomy" (to/o) — incision) is added to indicate 
mere incision, as in nephrotomy, hepatotomy, cholecystotomy. 
The termination " -ectomy " (eV, out of; to/u}) is added to indi- 
cate cutting out or removing the organ ; as in nephrectomy, 
splenectomy, colectom}^ pylorectomy, &c. The suffix "-stomy" 
* Diet. Encycl. dcs Sc. Med., tome VII., 1881, art. " Gastrotomie." 



NOMENCLATURE. 51 

{oTofjia — mouth) indicates the formation of an opening in a 
hollow viscus that is intended to be permanent ; as in gastro- 
stomy, gastro-enterostomy. In colotomy, an opening is made 
that is usually permanent, and the word colostomy would then 
be more exact ; enterotomy would sometimes, but not always, 
be better indicated by the word enterostomy. The termination 
"-rraphy" or "-rhaphy" {^a(f)i) — suture) is used as meaning any 
suturing of an organ for wound, as gastrorraphy ; or to fix it, if 
movable, as nephrorraphy. The latter term might also be very 
properly used to indicate the suturing of a wound or laceration 
of the kidney. 

The history of each operation will be given in its proper place. 
Here it need only be noted that the progress of abdominal 
surgery has not been simply forward in a straight line, but in 
waves of advancement and retrogression. There can be no 
doubt that the technique of abdominal surgery was more perfect 
nearly two centuries ago than it was fifty j^ears ago. Minute 
and excellent directions for making and for suturing wounds in 
the abdominal walls were given in several works on surgery 
published during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In 
more than one of the works of this period instructions as to the 
inclusion of the peritoneum in suturing the abdomen are given 
with scientific precision. Heister, who wrote about the middle 
of the eighteenth century, so far anticipated modern art as to 
advocate drainage of the lower abdomen by a cannula, and 
washing it out by " vulnerary decoctions." In Cagsarean sec- 
tion, Roussetus advised this, as well as drainage of the uterus 
by a cannula inserted into its cavity. The directions given for 
closing an abdominal wound by Dionis, in his Course of Surgical 
Operations (1733), might almost be quoted bodily as the practice 
of the Samaritan Free Hospital to-day. 

All this good work was ignored, and more which followed it ; 
and, in times comparatively modern, much good practice that 
had been tried and proved by past masters in the art was 
neglected and overlooked. The clamp in ovariotomy was a dis- 
tinct step backward; but the amount of advance which followed 
its abolition, being synchronous with the introduction of anti- 

5 * 



52 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

septics, cannot accurately be estimated. I think there can be 
no doubt that the most important single contribution to 
abdominal surgery is the gospel of surgical cleanliness preached 
by Lister; but along with this we must reckon the greater 
perfection of finish in every operation, rendering the work 
of the best operators something approaching the ideal in 
surgical art. 

The Operative Surgery of the Abdomen. 

The practical surgery of the abdomen presents many 
features special to itself. The manipulations have to be 
performed in an area exquisitely sensitive to traumatic in- 
fluences, and in the midst of organs whose integrity is 
peculiarly necessary to life. The peritoneal fluids are very 
prone to take on septic contamination, and the inflammation 
thereby induced is doubly dangerous, from the great amount of 
surface over which it may extend, and from the involvement 
of the structures of the sympathetic system, which are so 
abundantly distributed under the peritoneal membranes. 

Before an abdominal operation can be performed section 
of the parietes — a proceeding, in itself demanding some surgical 
skill and knowledge — has to be concluded ; and, when the 
operation proper is finished, the accurate closure of this wound, 
in a manner fully to meet the immediate and remote demands 
made upon its union, requires more care than does an ordinary 
surgical wound. The manipulations in the cavity have to be 
performed frequently at some distance from the surface, some- 
times out of sight, and are often of a difficult and delicate 
nature. Through the whole proceeding, careful avoidance of 
injury to vulnerable organs by rough handling or exposure, and 
minute and continuous attention to secure absolute cleanliness 
in hands, instruments, and sponges, are especially important. 
Lastly, certain well-established rules as to the environment of 
the patient, and the management of the case, must be attended 
to. These and such questions, being common to all abdominal 
operations, will now be considered in detail. 



THE SICK-ROOM. 53 

ENVIRONMENT OF PATIENT. 

The Sick-room. — There is no disputing the fact that the 
best results in abdominal surgery are got in specially prepared 
rooms or wards. It is true also that the mortality in large general 
hospitals is greater than in small specially designed hospitals. 
But it is further a fact that the most experienced operators are 
attached to the small special hospitals ; and it is therefore 
impossible to say how far the good results are to be attributed 
to the surroundings of the patient, and how far to the skill of 
the surgeon. That an a priori probability of the greatest success 
would be got in specially designed hospitals, fully under the 
control of a highly skilled surgeon, there is no question ; and 
this would hold true of any surgical operation in the hands of a 
man who specially devoted himself to it. But, at the present 
time at least, it is perhaps nearl}?- as true of abdominal as of 
other operations, that extra care in avoiding all matters con- 
ducive to septicism will, with surroundings such as most 
surgeons can command, justify their being carried out either 
in general hospitals or in private dwellings. Very few surgeons 
can begin an operation of any sort with the consciousness that 
the patient is being submitted to the best conceivable conditions 
for recovery : much that is justifiable is not perfect. 

This, of course, is no argument against every effort being 
made to secure for the patient the best possible surroundings. 
An ideal room — situated in an open and elevated locality 
ventilated with warmed (and perhaps filtered) air, wall and 
floor impermeable to moisture and readily and easily washed, 
and with many other excellences which could be detailed — is 
rarely in this country at the disposal of surgeons. Such rooms, 
abundant enough in America and on the Continent, are usually 
erected at the private expense of the operators. In only a few 
hospitals in England are there specially prepared private wards 
for abdominal surger}^ 

If the operation has to be performed in a private dwelling, a 
large, bright room with a southern aspect, and which can be 
kept comfortably warmed and well ventilated, ought to be 



54 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

selected. A room that has not been constantly occupied as a 
bedroom is likely to be more fresh and sweet than one that has 
been so occupied. Carpets, curtains, and everything that may 
harbour dust and filth, ought to be removed. A well-kept 
bedroom, in a home of gentlefolks, will require nothing changed 
or removed. 

If the windov/s are kept open for twenty-four hours or so, 
while a large fire is kept burning in the grate, the room will be 
freshened and purified, and thus made, not only a more pleasant, 
but a more safe habitation for the patient. 

Admission of Visitors. — The question of the presence of 
visitors at the operation has been much discussed. Some 
surgeons admit no visitors beyond their immediate assistants ; 
others admit a limited number, who declare that they have not 
recently been in contact with septic products ; not many admit 
visitors without restriction of any sort. If the room is small, 
one would certainly rather not have the air made foul by 
crowding ; and in every case, one would not care to have in the 
room individuals who have recently come from contact with 
cases of pyaemia or erysipelas. But if one has full confidence 
in the antiseptic spray, and the room is large, I see little 
necessity in being particular as to the admission of onlookers, 
wherever they may have come from, and whatever be their 
number. In the Bristol Infirmary, I operate in the general 
theatre, placing no restrictions whatever on visitors ; and it 
happens, by a somewhat clumsy arrangement, that the adminis- 
trator of anaesthetics is also the pathologist. The results, over 
more than eighty cases (I purposely exclude private operations), 
are equal to those got in any special hospital. 

Purification of Atmosphere. — Some surgeons seek to improve 
the purity of the atmosphere in which the operation is to be 
performed by making a steam antiseptic spray play in the room 
for a few hours. There is no strong objection to this : if it does 
nothing else, it lays the dust. But if the room has been properly 
cleansed and ventilated, and the surrounding air is of the 
moderate purity and freshness that may be found almost any- 
where in England, the spray in the room is perhaps uncalled 



NURSING. 00 

for. If an}' objection could be raised to the proceeding, I think 
it ought to be on the ground of saturating the atmosphere with 
moisture. Respiration is not so easy in an atmosphere laden 
with moisture, as in one that is dry ; and if a patient has to 
undergo a prolonged and dangerous operation, we should desire 
to have the recovery from shock promoted by every possible 
surrounding benefit — one of which is certainly not a wet, 
depressing atmosphere to breathe. 

As to the beds and bedding, no special directions need be 
given. A narrow bed, preferably with spring or woven-wire 
bottom, on which is laid a good horsehair mattress, will satisfy 
all requirements. I prefer to have two beds ; the patient being 
lifted, in the sheet on which she lies, from one bed to the other 
every night or morning, or both night and morning, and the 
unused mattress being taken out of the room to be dried and 
aired. This, however, is a luxury, and not a necessity. 

For clothing, I think the best plan is to entirely discard the 
night-dress, and use instead a jacket, made of fine flannel, 
which reaches as far as the loins. If the patient desires it, linen 
drawers may be worn. Free access to every part of the abdo- 
men, with warmth and lightness, are the chief requisites in the 
clothing of such patients. 

The Nuyse. — For nursing abdominal cases, no special skill is 
necessary in the attendant beyond ability to pass the catheter 
with gentleness and dexterity, and v/ithout moving or exposing 
the patient. Clumsiness in this art worries the patient to an un- 
necessary degree : and this worry the surgeon may know nothing 
of, as the patient believes it to be a necessary part of the treat; 
ment, and does not complain ; while the nurse is not likely to 
speak of her own awkwardness. It is extraordinary how rarely 
we find even the most skilled nurse able to catheterise a patient 
secundum artem. It will, therefore, be well to see the nurse pass 
the catheter at least once on each new patient. If she fails in 
dexterity, a hint as to any peculiarity of conformation, and the 
way to overcome it, will give her confidence in future acts of 
catheterisation. Beyond this, the nurse must have a perfect 
familiarity with the use of the rectum tube, which may be left to 



56 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

her discretion ; and a practical knowledge in the administration 
of enemas. A perfect nurse is a perfect woman, rarely to be 
had ; but good temper, implicit and uncomplaining obedience, 
gentleness, cleanliness, and some degree of physical strength 
and endurance, are absolutely essential. 

In simple cases, one nurse will be sufficient, as after the first 
few days she may have full rest. In bad cases, it is wise to 
have a day and a night nurse. Not only will they give better 
nursing, but they will give some variety to the patient, and be 
more bright and cheerful in the sick-room than if they were 
tired and over-worked. 

PRELIMINARIES TO OPERATION. 

Preparation of Patient. — In most cases, all that is wanted by 
way of preparation is the administration of a purge the day 
before operation — supplemented, where deemed expedient, by a 
simple enema. The last two or three meals should be of suclr 
a nature that no residue will be left in the bowel at the time of 
operation. If peritonitis or enteritis supervene, it will be one 
point in favour of good progress that there are no irritating 
matters in the bowel. Starvation for two or three days before 
operation, as has been recommended, is unnecessary and 
detrimental. The advantage of having to operate with collapsed 
bowel inside the abdomen is more than counterbalanced by the 
weakening of the patient which such a procedure induces. 

I think that the advantages of catheterism before operation 
are somewhat exaggerated. I am convinced that it is unneces- 
sary, and I never have it done. The patient may pass water 
before operation : if there is some abnormal condition in the 
bladder which prevents her being able to empty it, I would 
as soon find this out after operation as before. We can see 
and feel, and accurately locate, an enlarged bladder if it is dis- 
tended ; lying flat and empty over a growth, we may unwittingly 
injure it. If the bladder contains so much urine as to be in the 
way of the operator, it may be emptied by an assistant : this, 
however, will rarely be necessary. 

If the patient is of the lower classes, it will be well that she 



PREPARATION OF PATIENT. 57 

should have a warm bath, and have her skin well cleansed with 
soap and water. Apart from the increase of comfort, — a result 
not to be lightly estimated, — the advantages, in aiding free 
cutaneous action by removing layers of effete epidermic scales 
and accumulated dirt, must be considerable, especially in cases 
where the renal functions are not quite normal. At the site of 
the wound, particular care is to be taken with the cleansing 
process. The parts are soaked for twenty-four hours previously, 
by several layers of lint containing 1-20 carbolic lotion; and 
the umbilicus and pubes are scrubbed with a nail-brush. The 
pubic hair need not be shaved : septic matters lodge rather in 
the hair follicles than upon the hair itself. 

Operating Table. — Any ordinary operating table will suffice. 
It should be narrow, and it should not be low. A simple deal 
board, about two feet broad, placed between trestles or tables, 
or any other solid support, makes an excellent operating table. 
The height of it should be regulated according to the height of 
the surgeon. Nothing is more tiring than to bend over the 
work during a long operation ; and such weariness would 
undoubtedly tell upon manual dexterit3^ A table, three feet to 
three feet four inches in height, will elevate the patient so that 
the surgeon can stand up to his work. The patient's arms are 
confined by a piece of bandage or broad webbing carried round 
the operating table, and fixed, by a clove-hitch or other con- 
venient means, around the wrist. The legs are confined by 
tj'ing the bandage over the knees and under the table. For 
confining the arms I am in the habit of using the well-known 
wristlets invented by Mr. Prichard for lithotomy ; the hooks 
being fixed into holes made in a broad piece of webbing which 
is passed under the operating table. Apparatus specially made 
for the purpose may be purchased. 

Coverings. — In every case the patient should be so wrapped 
up that as little as possible of the body heat will be lost. Two 
warmed blankets are placed on the operating table, and folded 
separately, so that one can be turned over the front of the lower 
limbs, and the other over the chest and upper abdomen. If it 
seems advisable to take extra care to keep the patient warm, a 



58 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

layer of cotton wool over the chest and under the flannel jacket, 
and rolls of wool around the limbs under the blankets, may be 
added. 

When the patient is properly protected against cold, the 
whole body, from chin to feet, is covered with a sheet of mac- 
intosh in which an opening has been made, of size and shape 
convenient for exposing the area in which the operation is to be 
done. An oval opening, about seven inches long by four broad, 
will be found suitable for the majority of operations ; the sheet 
itself, so as completely to cover the patient and to hang over 
the sides of the table, must be about six feet square. The 
opening is made about two feet from the top. 

On the under surface of this macintosh sheet, around the 
margin of the opening, is spread adhesive material, such as is 
used on ordinary adhesive plasters ; the edges of the opening 
are thereby made to adhere closely to the skin, leaving exposed 
only as much of the abdominal wall as is necessary for operating. 
The impervious sheet prevents loss of heat by evaporation, and 
keeps the patient and her coverings clean. 

In every abdominal operation I should use this sheet of 
macintosh. Its virtues may be more conspicuous in the removal 
of large cystic growths, where it keeps the patient dry and 
serves to guide the fluid into the receptacle provided, than in 
small or solid growths, where such uses may not be called for. 
But bowels may be extruded in any abdominal operation ; and 
blankets, towels, or sheets may become displaced and get in the 
way. The impervious rubber sheeting, when washed, provides 
a field for operation which is always clean, and it keeps every- 
thing else out of the way. 

A sponge-cloth, wrung out of warm antiseptic lotion, laid 
over the macintosh below the field of operation, will be found 
very useful for wiping soiled fingers upon, and, if requisite, for 
throwing over extruded intestines. 

Warmth. — It is not wise to operate in a room under 60° Fah.; 
but the necessity of warming the room up to 70° Fah. need not be 
insisted upon. Evaporation is the chief cause of cooling of the 
peritoneum ; and this is prevented by packing into the exposed 



ASSISTANCE. 59 

cavity soft warmed sponges, and by protecting extruded viscera 
with large flat sponges, or several layers of thick soft cloth. 
General warmth of the body is maintained by the method 
indicated. 

Light. — The use of artificial light during daylight for the 
purpose of searching for bleeding points in the deep parts has 
been recommended. For this purpose an electric lamp is, for 
obvious reasons, undoubtedly the best. I have no experience 
of the electric lamp, and have never found the necessity for its 
use ; though, in a badly-lighted room on a dark day, I can 
readily conceive that it might prove of great assistance. A 
hand mirror is often useful for throwing reflected light into the 
cavity. 

Assistance. — Besides the anaesthetist, one assistant is all that 
is wanted for most abdominal operations. Such an assistant 
ought to be familiar with the methods of the operating surgeon ; 
able, with swiftness, precision, and dexterity, to second and 
facilitate his proceedings at every step. He must have no 
opinions of his own as to operative details, but try to follow 
implicitly the mental direction of his chief. His duties are 
simply those of the operator ; he acts as his third or fourth 
hand. A skilled assistant is thus on the high road to becoming 
a skilled operator ; and he frequently reaches this goal. If an 
unskilled assistant has to be used, I think a medical student is 
of more use than a tried surgeon who has no experience in 
abdominal surgery. The student will do what he is told, and 
no more. As a matter of fact, in most cases of abdominal 
surgery, an assistant of any sort is a luxury rather than a 
necessity. As personal experience increases, the two hands 
become capable of doing more and more ; and, with the excep- 
tion of some minor manipulations, which might easily be 
performed by a nurse, the surgeon can do most things without 
assistance of any sort. But the unexpected often happens in 
abdominal surgery, and the presence of a skilled assistant in 
any of the numerous accidental emergencies will so frequently 
be of conspicuous advantage, that it will be wise never to 
operate without his presence. 



60 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 



ANTISEPTICS. 

The most perfect surgery is aseptic, rather than antiseptic. 
All antiseptics are more or less irritating, and thereby to some 
extent, however small, harmful to the peritoneum ; if there 
is no septic material in the air, fluids, fingers, sponges, or 
instruments that come into contact with the wound or peri- 
toneum, antiseptics are also useless. That perfect purity of 
every material which touches the inside of the abdomen is 
absolutely essential, all are agreed ; the only questions in dis- 
pute are, as to whether the air also ought to be purified — that 
is, whether the steam spray should or should not be used ; and 
whether antiseptic lotions should be used for cleansing. 

When the spray is condemned as harmful by such men as 
Keith and Tait on the one hand, and upheld as beneficial by 
such men as Thornton and Wells on the other, we may safely 
conclude that, under an}- circumstances which may be common 
to all their patients, it is unimportant. Spray, or no spray, is 
probably a choice of evils, and of not very great evils. On the 
one side, the evil is irritation of the peritoneum, from the 
germicide ; cooling of the peritoneal surfaces, from wetting and 
evaporation ; and poisoning, from absorption of the antiseptic 
agent used. On the other side, the evil is a danger to be 
avoided — namely, septic peritonitis, from contamination by the 
surrounding air. 

Now, there is no doubt v/batever that the greatest risk of 
peritonitis arises from impurity of hands, sponges, and instru- 
ments, and not from air. The spray has little influence over 
these : but repeated cleansing with soap and water will render 
them practically pure. An antiseptician who scrupulously 
attends to cleansing of hands and instruments is in a better 
position than one who places all his trust in the spray. And, 
as a matter of fact, those who object to the spray do, all of 
them, most thoroughly and efficiently purify fingers, sponges, 
and instruments. It has become evident that many surgeons, 
with implicit belief in Listerism, trust too much to carbolic acid 
or its allies, and pay too little attention to the cleansing of 



ANTISEPTICS. 61 

sponges and fingers, by simply removing the filth, rather than 
disinfecting it. Herein non-antisepticians — or, as they might 
more justly be called, asepticians — teach a lesson which it 
would be well for all to follow. 

The dangers of the spray in ordinary operations are un- 
doubtedly very small. It is easy enough to protect the peri- 
toneum by sponges, and to prevent cooling of the abdominal 
surface by a macintosh cloth. Carboluria in these cases is very 
rare ; and even if it comes on, it is practically always slight and 
evanescent. In the case of prolonged and difficult operations, 
where the peritoneum must be exposed for the separation of 
adhesions, the dangers of the spray are undoubtedly real, if 
they are not great. Here, personal experience is everything. 
Thornton has strongly expressed his belief in its freedom from 
danger ; and other operators, American and continental, agree 
with him. Personally, speaking from an experience of cases 
which, from various causes, have been of more than average 
difficulty, I have seen the spray do no harm. 

The practical outcome of the teaching of modern surgery is 
probably this. All bodies that come into contact with the 
wound or peritoneum are to be made thoroughl}^ clean and 
aseptic. The operation must be performed in air that is not 
only free from contamination, but very approximately pure. 
If the air is not in this wholesome condition, then it must be 
purified by the use of an antiseptic spray, either in the room 
before operation, or over the abdomen during the operation. 
In all cases of doubt as to the condition of the air — and such 
cases must be common — it is wise to use the spray. And some 
weight must be given to the personal experience and habits of 
the surgeon. A man who is thoroughly conversant with the use 
of the spray, who knows exactly how strong it may be made, 
and how best its evil effects may be minimised, will be loth to 
dispense with the security it affords, even where surroundings 
appear to be most favourable. Another, who uses it as a sort 
of experiment (and there are still many such), or who has 
already come to have confidence in his own methods without 
spray, will probably decide against it. If it is possible to create 



62 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

a bias one way or the other, I think it ought to be towards the 
spray. If the points in dispute are narrowed down to carboHc 
poisoning on the one hand, and septic poisoning on the other, 
I should not hesitate as to which I should seek to ward off from 
my patient. 

The Steam Spray. — If the antiseptic spray is used, certain 
practical details must be attended to. We must employ the 
least amount of spray compatible with efficienc}^ One nozzle 
is sufficient, if it throws a large finely divided cloud. A cloud 
that is dense and coarse is particularly to be avoided. It will 
be found that different apparatus throw out very different qualities 
of spray. Some instruments at ordinary pressure, with carbolic 
lotion of the strength of 1-20 in the bottle, will cast a spray of 
1-50; while others, under the same conditions, will cast a 
spra)' of 1-30 strength. Every spray-producer should be tested 
by putting measured quantities of water and of lotion into the 
boiler and the bottle, and estimating the amount used up after 
a given time. The position of the spray also is important. 
I believe that carboluria may be caused by inhalation of spray 
(the writer always has this symptom after a prolonged operation 
in a carbolised atmosphere) ; and to avoid this, the apparatus 
must be placed so that the cloud does not envelope the patient's 
head. This will be secured by placing the instrument opposite 
the patient's left shoulder, at a distance of about six feet or 
more from the wound. 

SURGICAL ARMAMENTARIUM. 

Sponges: their Selection, Preparation, and Purification. — The 
very finest Turkey sponges should be used. It is difficult, 
even in large collections, to find the sort of sponge that is 
suitable for abdominal surgery. They must be very soft, of the 
finest texture, elastic and compressible, and of various shapes 
and sizes. Several very large thin and flat sponges are neces- 
sary to cover extruded bowels or omentum on which a number 
of compression forceps may have been placed. A number of 
somewhat flat sponges, of about the area of the open hand, are 
requisite for packing inside the abdomen, to prevent extrusion 



SPONGES. 63 

of bowels, and to absorb blood and fluid during the separation 
of adhesions. Lastly, small round sponges are necessar}- for 
general purposes — for sponging the wound, for packing into 
spaces where large ones will not go, and for mopping out the 
peritoneal cavity. 

The preparation and purification of sponges requires the 
most careful and close attention. This duty cannot safely be 
relegated to assistants ; the surgeon must do it with his own 
hands. The sponges are first cleansed from the sand which 
occupies their meshes by repeated washings in water. At the 
end of about a week, the water having been changed at least 
twice daily, all the large fragments will have been washed out. 
They are left for three or four days longer in water acidulated 
with hydrochloric acid, in amount sufficient to make the fluid 
taste distinctly of the chemical. This bleaches the sponges a 
little, but scarcely alters their texture. They are then (according 
to one method), after washing in pure water to remove the acid, 
placed in a solution of ordinary washing soda (about a pound of 
soda to the dozen sponges is the proportion that Tait advises), 
and left there for not more than twenty-four hours. They are 
washed and squeezed several times in this fluid, which they 
render slightly cloudy. They are now very soft. Finally, after 
being taken through clean water to remove the soda, the}' are 
soaked for a few hours in 1-20 carbolic lotion, squeezed as dry 
as possible, and artificially dried by heat. When they are 
perfectly dry, they are laid aside in a dry place, well covered up, 
till they are wanted. 

After an operation the sponges may be purified in a some- 
what similar manner. Having been washed in water to remove 
as much of the filth as possible, they are placed in the soda 
solution, which effectually dissolves out the blood and fibrine, 
and repeatedly washed and squeezed in it. The soda solution 
is changed several times. When ever}- particle of filth has been 
removed, they are cleansed in water, dipped in carbolic solution, 
squeezed and dried, and kept in a dry place till further use. 

Another very excellent mode of cleansing sponges is recom- 
mended by Borham, After giving it a full trial, I have adopted 



64 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

it entirely in preference to other methods. The sponges are first 
soaked in a one-per-cent. sohition of permanganate of potash ; 
the permanganate is then washed out by repeated squeezings in 
fresh water. This part of the proceeding may be neglected ; I 
doubt if it is of much value. The sponges, ten or twelve in 
number, are then placed in a gallon of water, in which half a 
pound of sodium hyposulphite has been dissolved ; the amount 
of solution being increased according to the number of sponges. 
Then about four ounces of oxalic acid are added, and a chemical 
action takes place which rapidly bleaches the sponges and dis- 
solves out any fibrine contained in their meshes.* 

The sulphur dioxide is a powerful disinfectant as well as a 
bleaching agent, and being generated in the meshes of the 
sponges, reaches every part of them. The sodium oxalate acts 
as a softening agent and dissolves out the fibrine. It takes a 
good many washings in water to get rid of the free sulphur ; but 

* Mr. W. A. Shenstone, Chemical Master at Clifton College, has very 
kindly supplied me with the following explanation of the reaction : — 

The use of sodium hyposulphite (properly sodium theiosulphate) no doubt 
depends upon the formation of a solution of sulphur dioxide, SO.,, according to 
the equation — 

Na^ S,0, + H2 C„0^ = Na^CjO, + SO,, + S 4- H„0. 

The rather tardy appearance of the precipitate of sulphur being possibly 
due to formation, in the first instance, of hyposulphurous acid, H^ S„ O3, 
which, however, if formed speedily undergoes decomposition according to the 

equation — 

H2S2O3 = H.,0 + SO, + S. 
If the precipitate of sulphur that accompanies the sulphur dioxide be objected 
to, sodium sulphite (Na^SOj TH^O), may conveniently be substituted for the 
sodium hyposulphite. 

Small quantities of sulphuric acid are formed in the bleaching process, 
and a solution of sulphur dioxide absorbs oxygen from the air with pro- 
duction of sulphuric acid ; therefore, as the presence of this compound in 
the water that remains adherent to the sponges when they are placed 
aside to dry tends to rot them, they must be very thoroughly washed with 
pure water after treatment with the bleaching liquid. From the above 
equation it will be seen that the hyposulphite and the acid may conveniently 
be used in molecular proportions. Both oxalic acid and sodium hyposulphite 
crystallise with water of crystallisation however (NajS^Og 5H.^O and 
HoCjO^ 2H2O), and, therefore, they should be used in the following pro- 
portions, viz. : 248 parts of crystallised sodium hyposulphite to 126 parts of 
oxalic acid. In practice two parts of the salt to one of the acid will be a 
sufficiently close approximation to these theoretical numbers. 



LIGATURES AND SUTURES. 65 

this is rather an advantage than otherwise, for if we follow the 
rule never to consider the sponges cleansed till the water 
squeezed out of them is quite clear, this freedom from sulphur 
is a good working test of the purity of the sponges. Sulphur 
itself is a mild antiseptic (from slow oxidation and formation 
of sulphur dioxide) ; and the sponges may at once be dried 
and laid aside after washing. I usually dip them in carbolic 
acid, however, before doing so. If the precipitate of sulphur is 
objected to, sodium sulphite may, as Mr. Shenstone suggests, be 
used instead of sodium hyposulphite. 

The sponges, for reasons explained in the foot-note, must not 
remain in the solution longer than ten minutes. 

Ligatures and Sutures.— For ligatures the best material is silk 
of the variety known as Chinese twist ; for sutures, either silk- 
worm gut or plaited silk such as are used in rod-fishing. 

As material for ligature there is no strong objection to cat- 
gut ; I have used it and nothing else in more than twenty 
ovariotomies, and found it perfectly reliable. Its drawbacks 
are, the trouble necessary for its perfect preparation, and its 
tendenc}^ to deteriorate by keeping ; such drawbacks being, in 
my opinion, of sufficient weight to justify its being displaced by 
the more handy and equally trustworthy silk twist. 

Chinese twist is made in different sizes; the sizes ^, 2, 4, and 
6 are quite sufficient for all practical purposes in abdominal 
surgery. The thickest is strong enough to bear as much strain 
as a very powerful man can put upon it, and is used for tying 
thick pedicles ; the thinnest is adapted for the finest work, such 
as suture of wounds in bladder or intestine. The medium sizes 
are used for tying thin pedicles and ordinary adhesions. For 
holding these four varieties of silk, I have had a stand made 
which is very portable and always ready for use. It consists of 
a solid rubber case, on to which is screwed a cap which keeps it 
practically air-tight. (Fig. 4.) Into this case fits a leaden disc, 
which is heavy enough to remain stationery while the silk is 
being drawn out ; and on this disc, supported by upright rods of 
metal, are placed the four reels. A glass plate, perforated in 
four places for the threads, is screwed on to the top of a central 

6 



66 



OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 



bar. Before using it, the leaden disc with the reels and thread 
is placed in boiling water for ten minutes, and then returned to 
its case, into which sufficient i — 20 carbolic lotion has been 
placed to cover the glass plate. To prevent their being acted 
upon by boiling water the reels are made of metal, and to 
prevent rusting all the metal is nickel-plated. After being 
used the lotion is poured out a'nd the cap screwed on. 
The silk, treated and protected in this wa}^ may be used 
daily, without further boiling, for several weeks : none is 
wasted ; it is just as trustworthy at the end of six weeks 
as at the end of six days ; it is always ready for use, and 
the apparatus is so simple that it can scarcely get out of order. 
For suturing the parietal wound, I have come to the con- 
clusion, after giving it an ex- 
tensive trial, that no material 
is superior to silk-worm gut as 
introduced by Bantock. In 
every variety of surgical oper- 
ation I have tried it, and 
ever3'where it exhibits the 
same virtue in causing no 
irritation. I have purposely 
left it in the tissues for weeks, 
and even months, and I have 
never seen its presence fol- 
lowed b}- the formation of' 
pus. In the sense of being 
unirritating it is superior to 
any suture material with 
which I am acquainted. Its 
drawbacks are, that it is 
somewhat stiff, not very easy 
to manipulate till one is 

familiar with it, and rather friable, being liable to break if the 
second cast in the knot is pulled too tightly. The stiffness may 
be partl}^ removed by soaking in warm wather for ten minutes 
before operation, and the danger of its breaking may be 




Fig. 4. 
The Author's Reel-holder. 



Half size 



INSTRUMENTS. 67 

lessened by making the first cast a double one and tying the 
second one very lightly. Another objection, which at the same 
time speaks in its favour, is that, when the suture is being 
removed, it lies so firmly embedded in the tissues that a some- 
what sharp tug is required to drag it out of its bed. This, 
however, may be because the suture needle w^hich I use is 
smaller than ordinary. The strongest objection, in my opinion, 
to silk-worm gut arises in cases where there is much straining 
and vomiting ; then it may cut through the tissues. In one such 
case where the incision extended through the umbilicus, the gut 
cut clean through the thin tissues and permitted protrusion 
of bowels. Care in selecting only such threads as are round 
and thick may obviate this ; but I should always advise the 
placing of a few thick silk sutures at points where the parietes 
are thin, in cases where abdominal strain is likely to be 
produced. 

The gut is that ordinarily used by fishermen, and need not 
be described. I have found the best gut in the shops of good 
fishing-tackle makers ; in the ordinar}' trade bundles, perhaps a 
dozen threads, specially smooth, round, and thick, are found 
suitable for surgical purposes. 

After silk- worm gut, as suture material, I should place the 
plaited silk recently patented for use as fishing lines. 

Its chief advantage over twisted silk is that it does not kink 
in the eye of the needle or in the suture openings, while it 
is more closely knit and does not offer so large a surface for 
absorption of inflammator}^ products. It is also very strong. 
The trade reels of plaited silk used in the suture instrument to 
be presently described makes a handy and efficient suture 
apparatus. 

Instruments. — The instruments to be used in an abdominal 
operation must be thoroughly clean ; they must be conveniently 
placed within reach of the operator's hand ; and they must be of 
a known number. 

Cleanliness, in the fullest sense of the word, is an absolutely 
essential quality of every instrument. To ensure this, all steel 
instruments (not cutting) should in the first place be nickel- 

6 * 



68 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

plated. Then filth is less likely to be overlooked, and not liable 
to be mistaken for rust or tarnish. After every operation they 
should be thoroughly cleansed and dried ; and before every 
operation they must again be purified. Some surgeons, before 
operation, hold every instrument for a little while in the flame of 
a spirit lamp ; others subject them to boiling. Practically it will 
be found that scrubbing with a brush, and the use of an anti- 
septic lotion, will efficiently purify every instrument. Smooth 
surfaces may be wiped several times with a sponge-cloth soaked 
in lotion ; irregular surfaces and joints must be scrubbed. The 
notched blades and the joints of catch-forceps require most 
attention. A good plan is to dip the blades of each forceps into 
a dish containing soft soap, and then scrub it with the brush 
dipped in hot water till lather ceases to form. Nothing softens 
filth better than soft (potash) soap ; and when every particle of 
soap has been scrubbed out of the notches and recesses of 
instruments, we may be certain that no filth is left behind. 
After they are scrubbed the instruments are thrown into hot 
water and left there for a few moments. Then they are placed 
in fluid, water or lotion, as the case may be, to be ready for use. 
Carbolic lotion of the strength of 1-40 is the best antiseptic 
fluid for placing instruments in ; corrosive sublimate is in- 
admissible, because of its action upon steel. 

Flat trays, an inch or more in depth and of various sizes, are 
used for placing the instruments in. Porcelain trays such as are 
used by photographers are best,' because they are easily cleansed, 
are impervious to acids, and, being white, show up instruments 
laid in them. As they are, however, somewhat cumbersome 
and fragile, they are not very convenient for being carried about 
to private operations. For use in private hard rubber trays are 
best. They may be procured in "nests" of all sizes; and four 
or five such, of dimensions suitable to the nature of the in- 
struments to be used, may be put in the operation bag, the 
total space occupied being no more than the largest tray. Each 
tray has its variety of instrument. In one are the cutting 
instruments ; in another, the small catch-forceps ; in another, 
large forceps ; in another, trocars or clamps, or drainage tubes ; 



THE OPERATING ROOM. 69 

and so on according to the instruments to be employed. Every 
instrument is removed from its tray by the surgeon himself as he 
wants it, and after being used is at once replaced in the fluid. 

The instruments should be counted before each operation, so 
that there may be no possibility of leaving instruments inside. 
In the case of bulky instruments this mistake is not likely to 
happen. It is a good plan to always work with simple multiples 
of each instrument; for example, in the case of pressure forceps, 
which are most likely to be lost : twelve pairs of smallest size in 
one tray ; six pairs of medium-size in another tray ; and six 
pairs of large size in a third tray. The habit of having two or 
three instruments of one sort laid out, in case one is found 
faulty, is not a good one ; each instrument should be tested and 
ascertained to be perfect before operation. The surgeon who 
has two or three scalpels and two or three pairs of scissors laid 
out for operation is not likely to be so well served as he who has 
only one of each. 

Plan of Operating Room. — The placing of patient, assistants, 
nurses, instruments, and operators so that the operation may be 
carried out with the greatest efficiency and the least amount of 
friction is of some importance. The annexed diagram (Fig. 5), 
modified from the one in Doran's valuable work,* shows at a 
glance the arrangement which I consider best. For reasons I 
have already explained the steam spray is so placed that the 
patient is not forced to inhale its vapour. The direction of the 
cloud is obliquely across the field of operation, and envelopes 
the hands of the assistant and of the operator as well as the 
instruments and the field of the operation. In the arrangement 
shown in Doran's work, I think it is a disadvantage that the 
instruments are placed outside the spray-cloud ; and a danger to 
have the spray directed towards the patient's mouth. The 
operator stands on the right of the patient and the assistant on 
the left. The instruments are arranged in trays placed side by 
side on a table, which is situated within easy reach of the 
operator's right hand. The feet of the patient are towards the 
window; and the table is so placed that the best lights fall upon 
* Cynacological Operations, p. 200. London, 1887. 



70 



OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 



the field of operation. The nurse stands behind the assistant, 
and takes from him soiled sponges and supplies him with clean 
ones. The fewer hands that sponges pass through the better : 
one nurse can easily clean the sponges and supply the assistant 
with clean ones. If a basin containing lotion is placed under 
the left hand of the assistant, and the nurse places the sponges, 
which she has cleaned in a large pan full of hot water, in this 




Wfeix- 







pLOROroRKISTj 



"'li^ili^; 




'^\\<$$$ 


\\>>\ 



[receptacle FOR FmiDl x^'N^'v^ '^ 







TABLE.WITH..^ 

'instruments 

SI trcATUHES 



Fig. 5. 

Diagram sJwu'iug position of Patient, Surgeon, Assistants, &-c., in 
Abdominal Operations. 

basin as they are cleaned, the assistant can help himself at once 
to any sponge he wants, and as he helps himself he squeezes the 
sponge dry — a duty which the nurse often fulfils very imper- 
fectly. It is not pleasant to hear the assistant call out for a 
"large flat sponge" or a "small round sponge" as the surgeon 
wants it ; it should be lying ready to his hand, and he should be 
able silently to help himself the moment the surgeon wants it, 
or he foresees its usefulness. 

For ovariotomy a receptacle is placed partly under, partly 



THE OPERATION. 71 

by the side of, the table for holding ovarian fluid. A long 
narrow trough, which is out of the way of the surgeon's legs and 
includes half the length of the table, is most convenient. 

If a second assistant is wanted, he ma}' stand on the left side 
of and behind the operator, 

ANESTHETIC. 

Ether, properl}' administered by means of a Clover's in- 
haler, is generally believed to be the best anaesthetic. For 
old patients, or for patients who are bronchitic, chloroform 
is perhaps safer. Chloroform and ether mixed is favoured by 
some surgeons of repute. Bichloride of meth3dene, which is 
used at the Samaritan Free Hospital, has not been generally 
adopted. In all cases, I believe that safety and efficiency 
depend more on the capacity of the administrator than on the 
nature of the anaesthetic. 

THE OPERATION ITSELF. 

The Incision through the Parietes. — A sharp scalpel, a few catch 
forceps, and a pair of scissors, are all the instruments required 
for this purpose. The surgeon may suit his own fanc}' as to the 
scalpel he uses ; the only essential is that it be sharp. The 
most delicate workmanship is secured if the cutting edge of the 
knife is situated at a distance from the finger-tips, which is 
rendered habitual by frequent practice in other directions. This 
is undoubtedly the position of the point of a pen in writing. 
The point of the scalpel should be at the same distance from the 
grasping finger-tips as the point of a writing-pen or drawing- 
pencil, as these are held by the individual operator. The 
advantages, in the way of sensitiveness and estimation of move- 
ments, are self-evident. In most cases this would mean a blade 
shorter than that in ordinary use. The handle of the scalpel 
should not be too small, nor too light. Clean, straight cuts 
from end to end of the wound, and not nibbling dissection, with 
forceps and director, are to be made. The scalpel penetrates 
exactly the same distance from one end to the other, and 
divides the same structure at each stroke. 



72 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

It is an advantage to have the scissors elbowed a httle ; and 
a further advantage consists in having the lower blade probe- 
pointed, to facilitate its being pushed along under the fasciae or 
muscles that may require division. The proceeding differs some- 
what, according to the situation elected for incision. In the 
linea alba below the umbilicus, where the great majority of 
incisions to enter the cavity are made, no muscle is divided. 
In other situations, as for gastrostomy, nephrectomy, or co- 
loton>3% several laj'ers of muscle require division. P'or dividing 
muscle, I believe the scissors to be a superior instrument to the 
scalpel. Few English surgeons make a practice of using scis- 
sors, and some little practice is necessary to enable one to 
appreciate its virtues. Scissors-cuts are clean and straight ; 
they do not bleed much, because compression is a factor in the 
division ; and if one is moderately familiar with the use of 
scissors, the dissection is more rapid than with the scalpel. 

The scissors usually recommended for ovariotomy, and in 
use at the Samaritan Hospital, is a large instrument with flat 
blades, bent on the flat near the hinge, and very blunt-pointed. 
It is an admirable instrument for such modes of cutting as 
ovariotomy offers, being well adapted for dividing adhesions, 
cutting through the pedicle, and enlarging the parietal wound. 
But for more delicate work, such as division of layers of muscle, 
dissecting closely adherent organs from their attachments, or re- 
section of intestine, I do not consider it so handy as a smaller 
instrument, elbowed a little and with smaller and more rounded 
points. But much depends upon habit and practice. The shape 
and size of an instrument are of small importance as compared 
with the surgeon's familiarity with it. 

If a vessel spouts, a catch-forceps is at once placed on it, and 
left there till the peritoneum has been opened, or as long as de- 
sirable. A few minutes' compression b}' forceps produces perfect 
haemostasis; ligature or torsion is quite unnecessary. When the 
subperitoneal fat is reached, a little area is cleared out of it, and 
the peritoneum caught up by catch forceps and pulled forward. 
A second pair of forceps is placed on the raised fold of peri- 
toneum, and the membrane divided between them. The fore 



INTRA-ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 73 

finger is inserted at this opening; and the peritoneum divided 
upon it, upward and downward, by scissors, to the extent of the 
wound on the parietes. 

In the division of layers of muscle, it is just as foolish to 
look for anatomical divisions, as in the operation of herniotom}', 
to look for the individual coverings of the sac. It is more 
workmanlike to estimate by touch the general thickness of the 
abdominal wall, and to divide the muscles with a few large cuts 
by scissors, than to plod through the individual layers with 
director and scalpel. When the subperitoneal fat is reached, it 
is time to be minutely careful. The director is a clums}^ and 
useless instrument in abdominal surgery ; in the hands of the 
most skilful operators, it is conspicuous by its absence. 

The length of the incision is a matter of some importance. 
Elaborate statistics have been compiled to show that a long 
incision is attended with an increased mortalit}' ; but this is not 
caused by the incision itself, but by the serious nature of the 
work inside the abdomen which necessitates the long incision. 
The smallest incision compatible with the provision of sufficient 
room, without bruising the edges of the wound, is to be adopted. 
All lengths, from something under two inches in cases of oopho- 
rectomy or simple ovarian cysts, to the whole length of the 
abdomen from sternum to pubes, as for some cases of myo- 
motomy, are in use. 

When the tumour is adherent to the parietal peritoneum, 
some care must be observed in effecting an entrance. It is quite 
possible to mistake the adherent peritoneum for the cyst-wall, 
and begin to strip it from the parietes. We may expect to find 
peritoneum adherent to tumour if there is more than ordinary 
bleeding in making the parietal incision, if the intermuscular 
fasciae are pink in colour, or if the subperitoneal fat, instead of 
being pale yellow or white, is rosy-red or injected. But here 
also experience is the best guide: familiarity with the aspects of 
the tissues will always prevent mistakes of this sort. 

Intra- Abdominal Manipulations. — During the various procedures 
necessary for the removal of an abdominal growth, every effort 
must be made to protect, and keep out of the way, the intestines. 



74 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

Sponges of suitable size and shape are packed in wherever 
bowels appear, and the growth is isolated from the rest of the 
abdominal contents as far as the available space will permit. 
By means of sponge-packing we seek, in fact, to make the 
manipulations necessary for removal as nearly extra-abdominal 
as possible. Wherever we can, we work against or upon sponges, 
and not against boAvel or upon peritoneum. 

Sponges not only protect delicate organs ; they absorb and 
gather up any blood and fluid that may escape. And every 
spongeful of fluid so removed is a saving of time and trouble 
against the time when it becomes necessary to perform the final 
toilet of the peritoneum. Whenever a sponge appears to be 
saturated, it ought to be replaced by one that has been squeezed 
dr3\ Of course, it must be taken out of fluid that is warm : 
carbolic lotion, of the strength of two and a half per cent., is 
as suitable a fluid for sponges as any. 

Most of the difficulties in removing abdominal tumours arise 
from the separation and management of adhesions. When they 
are visible, or within easy reach of the fingers, their separation 
may be comparatively easy ; when they lie deep, or out of 
sight, their division may be attended with difficulty or danger. 
Special difficulties arise when delicate organs are glued to thin 
or inflamed walls of cystic growths, or where bowels are em- 
bedded in sulci of the tumour, or where an}^ of the large 
abdominal vessels or the ureters are in close contiguity. Ad- 
hesions to the omentum are, as a rule, most easily dealt with ; 
adhesions to the bowels in the pelvis, or to the under surface ot 
the liver or diaphragm, are among the most difficult of all. 
Tumours in the broad ligaments may require a prolonged and 
tedious dissection to separate them from uterus and bladder. 
Each case has its own variety of adhesion, which must be dealt 
with by methods peculiar to itself. 

Forceps, sponges, fingers, scissors, and ligatures are in 
constant use during the surgical management of adhesions. 
Slight adhesions are best separated by means of a sponge ; the 
adherent organ is sponged off" the tumour, so to speak. At 
every step, bleeding points are looked for, and forceps placed on 



SEPARATION OF ADHESIONS. 



75 




them Adhesions of some de- 
gree of firmness, if broad, must 
be separated by fingers : if long 
or thin, or of the bulk that might 
be classed as bands, they are 
divided b}^ scissors between 
pairs of catch-forceps. Very 
dense, broad, and sessile adhe- 
sions are divided by scissors ; 
while forceps or ligature, as may 
seem most suitable, checks the 
bleeding as it arises. 

The best form of forceps for 
adhesions is, I think, Tait's 
modification of Koeberle's in- 



FiG. 6. 

Tait's modification of Koeberle's Catch 
Forceps. Two-thirds size. 

strument. (Fig. 6.) But Wells's in- 
strument is almost equally good, and 
surgeons who ma)' have become 
accustomed to its use will desire 
none better. The advantage that 
Tait's forceps possesses is in its 
sharp points, which can scarcely 
be included in the ligature. Both 
instruments are superior to Pean's 
older forceps, in being much 
stronger, smaller, and more easily 
handled. These instruments are so 
well known, being in the hands of ' '' 

almost every operating surgeon, that ^^'(^^^'^ Large Pressure 
,,.,,, . . . Hades bent at obtuse 

detailed description is unnecessary. „ tl' d ' e 




Forceps, 
anele. 



76 



OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 



Besides these straight small forceps, others, bent at various 
angles (Figs. 7 & 8), or T-shaped (Thornton's, Fig. 9) and of 
larger size, will be constantly found of use. Wells's large forceps 
(Fig. 10), on the same plan as his small one, is invaluable for 
many purposes. Straight forceps of medium size are very useful. 
I have invented an instrument which combines cutting with 
crushing, and which I have 
found of benefit in giving a 
bloodless division of thin 
flat adhesions. A knife is 
concealed in the powerful 
blades of a compression 
forceps, and divides the 
adhesion between the lines 
of crushing. (Fig. 11.) A 
very large and powerful 
T-shaped forceps I have 
found very valuable 
Special instruments are 
necessar}' for special oper- 
ations: these will be 
described in their proper 
places. 

At the end of a difficult 
operation, as man}^ as two 
or three dozens of catch 
forceps may be clinging at 
points where bleeding had 
taken place. By many 
surgeons it is considered 
necessary to apply a liga- 
ture to each of these, and the time spent in doing so is of 
necessity very considerable. I have always acted upon the 
principles of general surgery, regarding a small bleeding 
point which has been effectually compressed as secured against 
haemorrhage. Less than a fourth of the vessels compressed by 
forceps require ligature. Most of them will have been crushed; 




Fig. 8. 

Wells's Large Pressure Forceps, blades bent 
at right angle. Half size. 



TOILET OF PERITONEUM. 



77 




Fig. 9. 

Thornton's T-shaped Pressure Forceps, 
Large size. Half size. 

Toilet of the Peritoneum. — Of the 
many good practices which Keith 
has introduced into abdominal sur- 
gery, not the least valuable is that 
of removing from the cavity all 
blood and escaped fluids before 
closing the parietal wound. Most 
of such foreign matter, if fluid, will 
be removed with the sponges placed 
in the cavity during operation. A 
final cleansing by means of a sponge 
held between the blades of a sponge- 
holder (Fig. 12) and carried into 



and on many of them the 
forceps will have been 
hanging for ten minutes 
or a quarter of an hour, 
so that coagulation will 
probably have taken 
place above the crushed 
point. I am convinced 
that we overdo the deli- 
gation of adhesions : I 
believe that perfectly 
trustworthy haemostasis 
may, in the great ma- 
jority of bleeding points 
left after separation of 
adhesions, be effected by 
forcipressure alone. 




Fig. 10. 

WeUs's Large Pressure Forceps. 
One-third size. 



78 



OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 



Douglas's pouch and into each loin, may suffice. But if 
purulent or colloid fluids, or the contents of a dermoid cj-st, 
or, generally, any materials which cannot easily be removed 
by a sponge after moderate use of it, lie in the cavity, then 
Tait's plan of washing out the abdomen ought to be adopted. 
If a tumour has been removed, and the parietes, being relaxed, 




\ - 




Fig. II. 

The Author's Scissors-clamp. 



Fig. 12. 

Sfonge-holding Forceps. One-third size. 



can be pulled forward, the cleansing fluid may be poured in 
from a jug. But, for most cases, irrigation is the best mode of 
cleansing. If a special irrigating apparatus is not at hand, the 
fluid may be conducted from an ordinary basin by arranging 
the tubing of an ordinary trocar as a siphon. 

For conducting the irrigating fluid inside the abdomen, I 



IRRIGATION OF CAVITY. 79 

have had made simple glass tubes of different sizes at the 
nozzle, according to the size of the stream we may wish to 
employ, but all of one size at the other end, so that they may 
fit into the large rubber tubing attached to Tait's trocar. Tait's 
trocar used at the end of the rubber tube has this disadvantage 
in cases where it is desirable to direct the stream upon a certain 
small area, that the fluid flows out through two openings near 
the point, and not through one opening at the point. Some- 
times it is desirable to direct a small stream with considerable 
force upon a very limited area, then a small nozzle may be used 
and the irrigating reservoir elevated : at other times it is desir- 
able gently to fill the cavity with a large body of Avater, then 
the largest nozzle is used with moderate elevation. The size of 
the stream and the force of it can thus easily be regulated. 

To aid in the removal of particles of filth, the bowels are 
moved about by the fingers, and the abdominal walls are gently 
kneaded and squeezed. The amount of foreign matter, such as 
little clots of blood, small shreds of tissue, and pieces of coag- 
ulated fibrine, which may escape from the abdomen during 
irrigation, is sometimes truly surprising. A conspicuous advan- 
tage of irrigation is, that it will always make visible the existence 
of bleeding. A very small quantity of fresh blood makes itself 
apparent in water. 

The residual fluid left after squeezing the parietes is removed 
by sponges. It is often a good practice to place a large sponge 
in Douglas's pouch, with forceps attached, and leave it there 
till the sutures are placed. Fluid is attracted to a sponge from 
all parts of the abdomen, except perhaps from the lumbar hol- 
lows, and sometimes it may be advisable to place sponges there 
also. After irrigation, elaborate sponging is not required ; the 
fluid which remains after squeezing the parietes is quietly soaked 
up by the sponge or sponges left inside while the sutures are 
being inserted. A few ounces of clear fluid left inside do no 
harm whatever ; indeed, it is conceivable that under certain 
circumstances such fluid may do good. In four cases where 
I employed irrigation, after re-opening the abdomen for peri- 
tonitis following operation, I did not attempt to suck out an}- of 



so OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

the fluid, but simpl}' let it flow away through a drainage tube. 
Sometimes as much as a pint would be left inside, and very 
Jittle of this would come away in the next twenty-four hours. 
All the patients recovered. In most cases where irrigation has 
"been called for, a drainage tube will be inserted, and left in for 
at least one day. 

Before the parietal wound is closed, all sponges and instru- 
ments are counted, to make sure that nothing has been left 
inside the cavit}'. Judging from the number of catastrophes 
which have been caused by leaving foreign bodies in the abdo- 
men, the necessity of doing this would seem to be very real. 
Dr. Wilson''' has collected twenty-one such cases, in most of 
which the foreign bod}^ was a whole sponge or part of one, 
and in a minorit}^ forceps. It is a good rule always to begin 
operation with a fixed and definite number of sponges and 
instruments. 

Drainage. — The wounded or irritated peritoneum secretes 
fluid in amount varying according to the extent of the trau- 
n:iatism. Sero-sanguineous oozing from raw surfaces adds to 
the exudations. The peritoneum, in its healthy regions, has a 
great power of absorption, and in most cases these fluids are 
absorbed as rapidly as they are secreted. But sometimes secre- 
tion is too rapid for absorption, and we then get a collection of 
fluid which has a tendency to gravitate into Douglas's pouch. 
This fluid is peculiarl}' liable to undergo decomposition — 
usually, no doubt, from septic influences introduced from the 
outside; but occasionally, I believe, from contamination through 
the coats of the large bowel. In an}'^ case, the accumulation of 
fluid in the pelvis after abdominal operations is a thing to be 
guarded against. If we have any apprehension that the amount 
exuded will be considerable, we ought to drain ; and in any 
case of doubt, it is wise to drain. While bleeding is going on, 
the tube should not be removed ; and if bleeding is appre- 
hended, the tube should be inserted and left till the danger has 
passed. Whenever purulent or decomposing fluid has escaped 
into the abdominal cavity, drainage should be employed. It is 
* Trans, of Ameiican Gyito'C. Soc. vol. ix. 



DRAINAGE TUBES. 



ai 



said that, the older the patient is, the less is absorption by the 
peritoneum, and therefore the greater the necessity for draining. 
The special indications for drainage in special operations will 
be named further on. 

The best drainage tubes for general use are Keith's modifi- 
cation of Koeberle's. (Fig. 13.) They are glass tubes, open at 
both ends, with several perforations near 
the end of the tube which is inserted into 
the cavity, and a protruding lip near the 
outer extremity where it passes through the 
wound. The intra-abdominal pressure being 
greater than that of the outer air, most of 
the fluid will escape through any opening 
provided. A tube perforated through all its 
length may permit some of the fluid, as it 
rises from the pelvis, to escape amongst the 
bowels and, if this fluid is decomposing, 
to infect an amount of peritoneal surface 
greater than necessary. 

It is necessary to be certain that the 
tube is pervious, and that it is in the midst 
of the fluid. It may become blocked by 
Fig. i^. clotting of the discharges; this may be 

rr :,, ^, r, ■ guarded against by using a syringe or suc- 
Ketth's Glass Drainage ° *= j o J & 

Tube. Half size. tion instrument. Pieces of bowel may be 
drawn into the openings, and so prevent the 
entrance of fluid : pulling the tube out a little way, and rotating 
it, will put this right. The fluids may be very thick, becoming 
colloid or even clotted, and then it will be necessary to use an 
exhausting syringe. The little apparatus of Tait (Fig. 14) is 
very efficient for this purpose. It is essentially a rubber bag 
attached to the end of a piece of glass tubing. To the side of 
the tube is attached a glass globe, into which the extracted 
fluid falls ; to the free extremity is attached a piece of rubber 
tubing, small enough to pass down the drainage tube. The 
tube is inserted while the bag is empty ; as the bag expands, 
the fluids are sucked up. 

7 



82 



OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 



In cases where there is bleeding, it is a golden rule to keep 
the abdomen dry. This may be done by the frequent use of 
the exhausting syringe — every few minutes or every few hours, 
according to the case. No doubt the efficacy of this plan 
depends to some extent on the removal of secreted serous 

fluid, which would dissolve up 
the blood-clot. Just as bleeding 
js encouraged after leech - bites 
by the application of hot wet 
cloths, so it is 
encouraged after 
division of ves- 
sels in the ab- 
dominal cavity 
by their being 
bathed in abun- 
dant thin serous 
fluid. Keeping 
the abdomen dry 
permits clotting, 
and thereby pro- 
motes haemosta- 




sis. 



Fig. 15. 



Koeberle's Glass 

Drainage Tube. Half 

size. 



Fig. 14. 
TaiVs Exhausting Syringe. 



For the drain- 
age of simple 
serous fluids, a 
tube on the plan 

of Koeberle's original one is best. 
This is essentially an ordinary 
test tube, with numerous perforations along its whole length. 
Koeberle's tube is slightly conical, and this shape renders 
it liable to slip out of the opening: in the tube shown 
in the engraving (Fig. 15) the neck is the narrowest point, and 
escape from the cavity is thereby prevented. The bulbous 
end brings a larger surface of intestine into contact with it, 
which is perhaps an advantage. Tait has recently recom- 
mended a tube which is cylindrical, exactly Hke a test-tube. 



DRAINAGE. 83 

The rounded extremity of the tubes on Koeberle's plan is less 
likely to cause perforation of the rectum than the annular 
extremity of Keith's tubes. Its numerous perforations are an 
advantage in draining abundant ffuid, and no disadvantage if 
the fluid is not septic. Keith's tube, on the other hand, has the 
enormous advantage of permitting the extraction of pieces of 
clot, or lymph, or other aggregated material. 

Drainage of fluid may be promoted by capillary action. A 
shred of gauze rolled up and laid in the tube, serves this pur- 
pose admirably. The free end of the roll of gauze is placed in 
contact with the absorbent dressing, or sponge, which is laid 
over the end of the tube. This simple expedient, which I have 
always employed inside a drainage tube, has recently, under the 
name of capillary drainage, been extolled as a novel and highly 
valuable method * with the threads free inside the abdominal 
cavity. By capillary action the abdomen can be kept continuously 
dry : the exhausting syringe acts only intermittently, and the 
fluids collect in the intervals. The full advantage of the plan 
may be got by placing the threads inside the drainage tube : it 
unnecessarily adds to peritoneal irritation to let the threads lie 
loose inside the cavity. 

The manner of collecting and removing the discharges from 
the drainage tube is of some importance. The end of the tube 
is completely isolated by a square of rubber cloth, through the 
centre of which a hole has been cut, large enough, with a little 
stretching, to encircle the tube below the collar. The absorbent 
material being placed over the end of the tube, the cloth is 
folded over it, so as to completely envelope the dressing, and 
the whole is retained in position by a loose binder. The dressing 
is changed as often as it gets nearly saturated by simply unfolding 
the rubber, and without disturbing the coverings of the wound. 
Sponges are usually employed to absorb the discharges ; but the 
obvious objections to the use of sponges for this purpose make 
me prefer absorbent wool or gauze. Sal-alembroth wool, prop- 
erly prepared, is an excellent absorbing material, not so cumber- 
some as sponges, and is, besides, a powerful antiseptic. 
* Cf. Pozzi, Ann. de Gynec, 1888, XXIX. 

7 * 



84 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

Closing the Wound in the Parietes. — When the time has come for 
closing the cavity, a dry sponge of convenient size is placed over 
the bowels under the opening. This keeps the bowels out of 
the way and absorbs the blood that is shed by the needle punc- 
tures. A drachm of pure blood can usually be squeezed from 
this sponge after inserting sutures in a wound three or four 
inches long. 

Many plans of suturing the abdominal wound are in vogue. 
Some surgeons use two or three silver tension-sutures through 
muscle and peritoneum, and close the rest of the wound by 
superficial sutures. I had used this plan in a good few cases, 
finding it answer admirably, till I had a bronchitic patient, 
whose constant coughing caused the silver sutures to partly cut 
their way through ; and then I abandoned it. The best mode 
of suturing the wound is, I believe, by interrupted silk or silk- 
worm gut sutures placed, about three to the inch, close to 
the margins of the wound, and every one including perito- 
neum. In these sutures some surgeons are careful to include 
only skin, fascia, and peritoneum ; others include muscle 
as well. I matters little, as regards immediate union, what 
tissues are included in the suture ; but it is important to provide 
against the remote risks of a ventral hernia, by having as broad 
a basis of union as possible. After a few months all uniting 
cicatricial tissue becomes lax and distensile; the more that 
there is of it, the stronger will it be. I, therefore, always push 
the needle straight through everything, at the same distance 
from the surface in muscle and in peritoneum as in skin. 
When the sutures are tied, the line of incision then bulges out- 
wards; when only skin, fascia, and peritoneum are included, the 
sutured wound appears depressed. 

Many surgeons close the wound by means of individual 
sutures, to each end of which a needle is attached. Keith uses 
a peculiarly fine straight needle ; others use an ordinary long 
glover's needle. For some time past I have used a suture 
instrument (Fig. i6) with needles made on Hagedorn's plan, 
but with much shorter cutting points, and I have found it 
exceedingly convenient for the purpose. It is essentially a 



SUTURING THE PARIETAL WOUND. 



85 



handled needle, the handle of which contains a reel on which 
the suture silk is wound ; and it may also contain lotion in 
which the thread is soaked. With this instrument, after a little 
practice, sutures may be inserted with much greater rapidity 
and precision than with the ordinary 
needle. It also saves the trouble of 
threading and otherwise looking after 
numerous needles and sutures. The end 
of the handle is large enough to contain 
the ordinary trade reel of plaited silk, 
and the thread runs through the cavity of 
the handle, which contains lotion, to the 
end of the needle. While the bulbous end, 
containing the reel, lies in the hollow of 
the palm, the tips of the fingers rest at the 
end near the needle, and manipulation is 
easy and comfortable. The needle may 
be inserted in the axis of the handle, or 
at right angles to it ; and various sizes of 
needles may be used for different thick- 
nesses of the abdominal walls. 

The needle is made to transfix skin, 
fascia, muscle, and peritoneum on the 
right side of the wound ; and then peri- 
toneum, muscle, fascia, and skin on the left 
side ; the loop of thread is caught in the 

finger, the free end drawn out, the needle Suture Instyument. Half 
withdrawn, and the sutures cut, each ^''^''• 

about six or eight inches long, and their ends handed over to an 
assistant. About three sutures to an inch is a fair proportion. 
When all the sutures are inserted, the sponge is removed, the 
suture threads are tied, and the ends cut off. If the stitches 
are neatly inserted, the whole length of the wound will be 
perfectly and accurately closed, and no secondary or superficial 
sutures are necessary. 

For placing silk-worm gut sutures, which I now use to the 
exclusion of all others in abdominal operations, I employ the 



Fig. i6. 

The Author's 



86 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

same needle. The needle is passed unthreaded, the gut is 
pushed through the eye of the needle and pulled through the 
tissues as the needle is withdrawn. As the eye of the needle is 
large and gut is a material Very easily threaded, this manceuvre 
can be carried out with great ease. The assistant, holding a 
bundle of sutures in his hand, may thread the needle each time 
it is passed, 

Hagedorn's needle and holder are employed by several well- 
known surgeons. I have used it somewhat extensively in 
general surgery, and like it for many purposes. In suturing very 
thick parietes the long, straight needle supplied in Hagedorn's 
set, and passed by means of his holder, will be found very use- 
ful. But for general use in suturing the abdomen I consider the 
handled needle most convenient. In very short wounds, such 
as one made in uncomplicated ovariotomies, three or four 
stitches may be all that are required, and then it matters very 
little what needles are employed. 

Dressings. — In a few hours after operation the peritoneal 
surfaces will have united, and the parietal wound will then be, 
to all intents and purposes, a superficial one. It matters very 
little what the dressing is, if it is unirritating and absorbent. A 
pad of alembroth wool, or salicylic silk, or carbolised gauze, or 
a few folds of boracic lint, will serve the purpose admirably. 
The dressing need not be disturbed for a week, when the wound 
will be found quite healed, and the stitches may be removed. 
On the dressing, when removed, we expect to find a thin la3'er 
of dried sero-sanguinolent discharge, two inches broad. 

After removal of a large tumour, I think the plan of covering 
the whole abdomen with long broad layers of strapping should 
be adopted. The sudden decrease of abdominal tension that 
follows removal of an abdominal tumour no doubt favours 
gaseous distension of the bowels ; and strapping is undoubtedly 
a better means of preventing this than a tight binder. The 
strips of plaster act as a firm unyielding splint, keeping the 
parts immovable, and permitting the patient whatever liberty of 
movement she may desire. Not only are changes of position 
from the back to the side very agreeable to the patient ; but 



GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS. 87 

lying on the side, with the knees drawn up, favours the passage 
of flatus and the use of the rectum-tube. Hollows under the 
strapping are to be filled up by firm pads of some sort ; folded 
towels do very well. A binder is unnecessary. 

If drainage is used, the dressing and strapping stop short at 
the point where the tube emerges. Special dressings are 
arranged around the end of the tube in the manner already 
described (p. 83). The most scrupulous attention ought to be 
paid to the securing of perfect cleanliness in the means adopted 
for collecting discharges from the abdomen. 

Stitch-abscesses, causing some elevation of temperature, 
are mentioned as possible accidents during the uniting of the 
parietal wound. Those are never seen in wounds treated anti- 
septically, and I think they can be caused only by the use of 
sutures that are not absolutely free from filth. Perhaps too 
much tension in the stitches might cause suppuration in their 
track ; but if everything were aseptic, this would not cause 
much elevation of temperature. 

In the manipulative part of the operation, absolute precision 
and exactitude, as far as hands and materials can secure these, 
are necessary to the most perfect success. Not only must no 
part of the work be hurried over or scamped, but every detail 
must be finished and rounded off with a thoroughness as minute 
and genuine as if that detail were the turning point of success. 
And, practically, it is a fact that imperfect attention to almost 
any detail may result in a catastrophe. 

But the avoidance of bungling, oversight, or neglect is not 
enough. It is possible to overdo, as well as to underdo. The 
clamp is an example of overdoing, and the calamities that 
followed its use are our warning. We may run to excess in 
the means adopted for stemming haemorrhage, by means other 
than the clamp. We see this in the double, triple, or even 
quadruple ligation of the most ordinary pedicles by certain 
operators ; in an elaborate sponging of the peritoneal cavity, 
that is prolonged beyond cleansing into irritation ; in separate 
suturing of peritoneal surfaces ; and in many other ways that 
could be mentioned. 



88 OPERATIVE SURGERY OF ABDOMEN. 

It must not be forgotten that shock is one of the chief 
dangers in all abdominal operations, and that tardiness in 
operating is an important factor in contributing thereto. In 
addition to the risk from extended traumatism, we must reckon 
with that from prolonged anaesthesia. These propositions have 
only to be stated, to be admitted ; but not all who admit them 
act upon them. Rapidity in operating is a prime virtue in 
abdominal surgery; but this rapidity must specially be cul- 
tivated over the more subsidiary details, as in making the 
parietal wound and closing it. In other matters no time must 
be spent in deliberating. The surgeon must be prepared with 
mind, hand, and instrument, to meet every emergency as it 
arises according to the best rules of his art. A man who 
enters the abdominal cavity ought to be able to do anything, 
from ligature of a vessel to resection of the intestine ; and he 
should be prepared to do this in a manner which defies the criti- 
cism of his brethren. We can rarely diagnose perfectly the state 
of matters inside an abdomen before we open it, and we ought 
therefore to be able to treat anything which we find when we enter. 
Dexterity here comes from knowledge as much as from practice. 
To be prepared, at the appearance of any complication, to 
apply the best known surgical technics ; to do what is wanted, 
and no more than is wanted ; to have the manner and method 
of each procedure mentally laid down in clear and definite lines ; 
and generally to perform the operation in steady, straight- 
forward, workmanlike manner through the endless complications 
that may arise, is ho trifling call on the capacities of a human 
being. Much of it may be learnt by intelligent practice, at the 
expense of the patients ; much may be learnt by careful study 
and practice on the dead body ; but most of all will the young 
surgeon derive information from a close and intelligent personal 
attendance at the operations of our great masters. Abdominal 
surgery is no longer a field for legitimate and versatile experi- 
ment ; certain fixed and useful laws and customs have been 
laid down by the dearly bought experience of great men : the 
abdominal surgeon ought to begin fully equipped with such 
knowledge as has been gathered for him. 



After-Treatment of Cases of Abdominal Operation. 

A golden rule in the treatment of cases of laparotomy is — 
to let the patient alone. Everything approaching to meddle- 
someness is to be condemned. The patient must not be upset by 
fussy applications of tentative therapeutics : when an emergency 
arises, it is to be met, promptly and decisively, by a method 
which has been approved trustworthy. 

Comfort may be regarded as a therapeutic measure of some 
importance. Besides the ordinary measures that would be 
adopted with a patient who is seriously ill, certain minor atten- 
tions in abdominal cases may be carried out with benefit. The 
luxury of a change into a second bed, with clean fresh linen, 
will be highly appreciated, and will often be a means of securing 
a good night's rest. Changes of position — moving the patient 
from back to side, raising the head and shoulders a little, bending 
the knees over pillows, or raising the lower limbs on supports — 
all tend to lessen the irksomeness of confinement to bed, and by 
so much to increase the chances of recovery. Sponging the arms, 
legs, and chest, or washing them with soap and warm water, 
will always be grateful. These and similar proceedings are well 
worthy of consideration, as being itemxS in the not inconsiderable 
total of the patient's comfort. 

As to the administration of food and drink to the patient, it 
is impossible to give definite rules. Generally speaking, the 
gravity of the case, and our apprehension of danger, will be our 
guides. A simple case of oophorectomy or ovariotomy, after the 
first twenty-four hours, will require little change from the ordin- 
ary diet of health. In cases of serious operation, where some 
■degree of inflammation of injured viscera is bound to supervene, 
dieting may be of supreme importance. In such cases irritability 
of the whole digestive tract, with vomiting and tympanites, may 
co-exist with an urgent necessity for supporting the patient's 
strength by stimulating nourishment. The judicious manage- 
ment of these cases will tax the surgeon's capacity to the 
utmost. 

In general, milk is a bad food for abdominal cases. It is not 



90 TREATMENT AFTER ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

digested by the stomach, and, as curd, it may pass a long way- 
down the intestine; also, it is a food that causes flatulence. 
Peptonised milk has not these drawbacks, but patients rarely 
like it. Good home-made beef tea, or any of the numerous 
concentrated beef jellies, taken either solid in tea-spoonfuls at 
a time, or much diluted if the patient is thirsty, are usually 
agreeable to the patient, and are of great value. Oatmeal gruel 
and Hquid arrowroot, with similar articles of diet, varied accord- 
ing to the patient's taste, may be given. 

" Little and often " is to be the rule of administration ; but 
not too little nor too often. The stomach, like other organs, 
wants occasional rest ; and to keep it in constant action for 
three or four days on end by hourly or half-hourly exhibitions 
of small quantities of nourishment, will result in functional 
irritation, or even exhaustion of the organ. The peculiarities 
of the case, and the tolerance of the stomach, must direct us. 
In all cases we must not forget that foods when peptonised may 
be retained and absorbed, when they would be rejected in their 
unprepared condition. 

As a rule, in cases of average gravity, it will be found a wise 
plan to give the patient only warm water, or toast-water, by the 
mouth for the first twenty-four or forty-eight hours, and then 
begin the administration of foods such as have been mentioned. 
Cold water, and particularly " ice to suck," for thirst, are to be 
avoided : the}^ do not allay thirst so well as warm water ; and 
my experience coincides with that of others, that they are more 
commonly rejected. If the patient complains of thirst, a pint 
of tepid water slowly administered as enema will rapidly and 
effectually alleviate it. It is unwise to upset the functional 
capacities of the stomach by ingestion of large quantities of 
fluid to allay thirst, when this end may be attained by rectal 
absorption. 

In operations upon females, special attention must be paid 
to the management of the functions of the bladder. It used to be 
considered necessary to draw off the water by catheter at 
frequent and stated intervals for some days after operation. 
This is quite unnecessary. The catheter need not be passed till 



SHOCK AFTER OPERATION. 91 

the patient feels a desire to micturate ; and as soon as she can 
pass water herself, she may be permitted to do so. Some 
patients do not require the use of the catheter at all. In the 
first twenty-four hours, the secretion of urine is usually scanty, 
and the instrument may not have to be used at all in this time. 
In few cases will it have to be passed oftener than thrice in 
the day. 

Cystitis, often of a troublesome nature, is occasionally 
produced by catheterism. To avoid this, the catheter must 
be cleansed with scrupulous care ; and a new one should be 
provided after one has been used half-a-dozen times. A male 
rubber or celluloid catheter, of the size of No. 6 or 8 English 
make, is the best instrument to use. 

The above account refers to the management of simple 
straightforward cases which proceed easily and rapidly towards 
recovery. But sometimes we have to deal with conditions 
which are partly outcomes of gravity of operation, and partly 
special to abdominal cases. Among the former we may reckon 
shock or collapse, restlessness, and pain ; among the latter, 
vomiting, tympanitic distension, and peritonitis. 

Severe shock after operation is treated on ordinary surgical 
principles, by hot bottles, hot blankets, stimulating applications 
to the epigastrium, elevation of limbs, and so forth. Surrounding 
the limbs in packs wrung out of hot water has often an excellent 
effect. Hypodermic injections of ether, ammonia, or brandy, 
and rectal injections of diffusive and alcoholic stimulants, are 
frequently administered. Gill Wylie''' speaks highly of the 
value of irrigation of the cavity with hot water (105° — 110'=* 
Fah.) as preventive of shock ; and others have borne testimony 
to the same effect. Restlessness and jactitation must be treated 
by a hypodermic injection of a quarter of a grain of morphia, 
to be followed in an hour by a sixth of a grain or more, accord- 
ing to the effect of the first dose. Morphia is not to be used 
unless there is strong necessity for it. It lowers the functional 
activity of the intestines, and favours the production of tym- 
* N. Y. Med. Rec, March 19th, 1887. 



92 TREATMENT AFTER ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

panites — an effect which is specially to be avoided. The patient 
is to be encouraged to bear the pain : it rarely lasts for a long 
time ; and it will be better for her, in the event of further 
troubles arising, that she should meet them with a system unim- 
pregnated with morphia. The routine employment of morphia 
is to be condemned. The patient is always brighter and better 
without it, if there is no urgent call for its exhibition. 

In grave cases it is wise to begin at once feeding by the 
rectum in the manner to be described. Collapse is a cause of 
vomiting ; and want of food and stimulants for the customary 
twenty-four hours may encourage the very symptoms we wish to 
ward off. Free stimulation, by brandy or other spirit, adminis- 
tered in enema, during the first day or two after a very serious 
operation on a weak patient, is a therapeutic measure of supreme 
value. In many cases a glass of hot spirit and water, taken 
the last thing at night, will act as a soporific. 

Vomiting is perhaps the most troublesome single symptom 
that we have to deal with, after abdominal operations. Arising 
soon after operation, and lasting over ten or twenty hours, it 
may be nothing more than an effect of the anaesthetic. When 
it exists on the third or fourth day, and continues, we may 
conclude that it indicates peritonitis or enteritis, or some allied 
inflammatory condition, which causes paralysis of the functions 
of the bowels. In this case we must take prompt measures to 
deal with events which may have grave issues. 

The vomiting, in this case, is not the sort that can be 
controlled by medicine. Indeed, it is more than doubtful if it is 
desirable to seek to control it. It is almost uniformly accom- 
panied by distension of the bowels with gas and fluid, and 
vomiting affords relief. It is certainly not wise to let the patient 
continue feeling sick and vomiting frequently small quantities at 
a time ; but it may be wise to encourage free vomiting for a few 
minutes together. I have found that the administration of as 
much fluid as the patient will drink — soda-water, or weak tea, 
or simple warm water — is followed by the evacuation of large 
quantities of bilious fluid and gas, and makes the patient 
comfortable for some hours. In more than one bad case, I 



PERITONITIS. 93 

have found Kussmaul's treatment of washing out the stomach 
by the stomach pump of conspicuous benefit. 

The indication is rather to remove the cause of the vomiting, 
than to check it when it has set in. For this end, we must at 
once stop the administration of everything by the mouth, and 
support the patient entirely by rectal feeding. By lying on 
the side, and wearing the rectum tube as much as possible, 
the passage of flatus downwards is encouraged. And at 
least once a day, large quantities of warm water, with a little 
turpentine, are injected into the rectum, so as to completely 
remove whatever gas may be in the large bowel, and encourage 
more of it to descend from the small bowel. 

We may at the same time have to deal with peritonitis, local 
or general. I am by no means alone in believing that the 
administration of opium is not always the best treatment for 
peritonitis. Where great restlessness accompanies the vomiting, 
opium — or, better, the hypodermic injection of morphia — may 
be given at frequent intervals ; but, as a rule, the use of sedatives 
is to be condemned. Holding, as I do, that the tympanites 
which accompanies peritonitis is a real cause of obstruction, and 
thereby induces vomiting, I have for some years been in the 
habit of cautiously prescribing a saline purge, in the hopes of 
carrying off this flatulence. The results were beyond expecta- 
tion, and when I had found it had been for some time a routine 
treatment in Tait's practice, I had no hesitation in extending it. 
A purge carries off" great quantities of gas and fluid, relieves 
the distension, and probably, by its physiological action, 
relieves engorgement of intestinal vessels. A Seidlitz powder 
or a dose of Epsom salts will sometimes act like a charm in 
these cases, putting an altogether new complexion on the case. 
I believe also that a saline purge may be of advantage where there 
is fluid collecting in the pelvis. The engorgement of its vessels 
being relieved, the peritoneum is able to absorb more fluid. Tait 
tells us that in many cases where others would drain, he purges. 

Over and over again I have been able to demonstrate to 
students and medical men the value of a saline purge in cases of 
incipient peritonitis. A case seen with distension, sickness and 



94 TREATMENT AFTER ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

restlessness at the visit on one da}^, has a SeidHtz powder pre- 
scribed, to be followed by a hot water or turpentine enema ; and it 
is almost taken for granted that, at the visit next da}^ the patient 
will have a flat abdomen, the sickness will have disappeared, 
and she will express herself as feeling infinitely better, but weak 
from the exertion necessary in passing motions. A brandy 
enema at once counteracts any feeling of w^eakness. Food is 
now jtolerated ; and the patient is practically out of danger. In 
grave abdominal cases, I positively like to see diarrhoea — natural 
or artificial : diarrhoea very rarely goes with vomiting. It is one 
mode of draining the peritoneum, as well as being an antagonist 
to tympanitic distension. It may be that purges do good rather 
as removing gas than as draining the peritoneum and relieving 
engorgement of vessels : how they do good matters not so much 
as the fact that they do. 

Slowly but surel}^ the therapeutic virtues of purges in opera- 
tion-peritonitis are being recognised. Among the most enthu- 
siastic supporters of the plan are such well-known surgeons as 
Gill Wylie," Boldy,t Penrose, | and Gardner. § The last named, 
the well-known Professor of Gynaecology in McGill University, 
in recording his highly successful work during the year 1886, 
thus wTites of it: "In my work during the year I have given 
no opium, and invariably, immediately on the appearance of 
distension, pain, or vomiting, I have given enemas and purga- 
tives with the most signal advantage. I am convinced that, in 
my own experience, I have thus seen many lives saved, besides 
a vast diminution of the trouble and difficulty in managing the 
cases afterwards." 

Tympanites is a symptom which always accompanies peri- 
tonitis and vomiting. In a slight degree, elevating the infra- 
sternal depression, it may mean nothing more than passive 
accumulation of gas from relief of intra-abdominal pressure. 
Drum-like distension accompanying peritonitis is quite another 
affair; it may cause distress from interfering with respiration : it 
is certainly a cause of vomiting, probably through its acting as 

* N. Y. Med. Rec. Mar. 19th, 1887. f N. Y. Med. Rec. Nov. 5th, 1887. 

J Phila. Med, and Surg. Rep. Oct. 22nd, 1887. 

§ Canada Med. and Surg. Journ., p. 147. Oct., 1887. 



THE RECTUM TUBE. 95 

an obstructive, and must be relieved as soon as possible. Tap- 
ping with a fine trocar may give temporar}' relief; but this relief 
is so slight and so evanescent as to be practical^ of no account. 
Speaking from a personal experience of six cases, and from the 
observation of several more in the practice of colleagues and 
friends, I would characterise tapping of the bowels for tympa- 
nites as a simple trifling with the complaint, and as a dangerous 
trifling.* More advantage will be derived from encouraging 
free vomiting in the manner indicated above, and by large fluid 
rectal injections, supplemented, where it is considered advisable, 
by a saline purge. Spirits of peppermint, ether, or chloroform, 
facilitate the eructation of gas, and may be of some benefit. 

A most valuable adjuvant in the treatment of distension 
after abdominal operations is the employment of the rectum 
tube. The vaginal tube supplied with a Higginson's syringe, 
or an ordinary lithotomy tube, answer the purpose perfectly 
well. But sometimes a longer tube, such as that used for w^ash- 
ing out the stomach, will be required. If there is fluid in the 
rectum, such as remains of enemas or liquid faces, then the 
long tube should be employed to carry the discharge well away 
from the patient's body, or a piece of rubber tubing should be 
attached to the ordinary tube, and carried outside the bed- 
clothes. As soon as there is a collection of gas in the bowel 
which the patient cannot pass, the rectum tube should be in- 
serted and left in position. When there is much distension, the 
tube should literally be worn for as long periods as possible 
consistently with the administration and retention of enemas. 
The patient very soon appreciates the virtues of the rectum 
tube, and frequently will ask that it be inserted. 

The trinity of peritonitis, tympanites, and vomiting are the 

furies of abdominal surgery. When they have taken firm hold 

of a case, we may make up our minds for a fierce struggle before 

they can be ousted. The longer they abide, the more difficult 

* See, on this subject, Ogle, Lancet, July i6th and 23rd, 18S7. In cases 
of tympany occurring in cattle, the part punctured is not the bowel, as Dr. Ogle 
seems to suppose, but the rumen or paunch. Not only in this respect but 
in others, such as the thickness of the visceral walls, and the nature of the 
contents, the analogy between human beings and cattle is not correct. 



96 TREATMENT AFTER ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

are they to be got rid of : therefore, we ought to be prepared at 
every point to meet them with the most trustworthy weapons 
and the most approved tactics. 

Rectal Feeding. — The frequent necessity, in abdominal cases, 
of feeding by the rectum demands a practical familiarity with 
the best modes of preparing the food, and the best means of 
adniinistering it. I have closely followed the accounts of modern 
improvements in the artificial digestion of foods, and have 
specially taken note of the results found from introducing these 
into the system by rectal absorption. Most of the plans recom- 
mended I have either tried or seen tried in practice. Now, it is 
of supreme importance that feeding by rectum shall produce 
a maximum of result with a minimum of disturbance. The 
worry of rectal feeding must be counterbalanced by very definite 
and palpable results ; it must be something very much more 
than an interesting physiological experiment. 

I have come to the conclusion that all rectal foods ought to 
possess two qualifications — namely, that they should be pep- 
tonised, and that they should be very dilute. It is idle to argue 
that enemas are not nutritive unless they are peptonised ; long 
and extensive experience has abundantly proved the contrary. 
But it seems fairly well established that digested food is more 
readily absorbed by the mucous membrane of the bowel than 
undigested food, and is possessed of a higher nutritive value. 
The nutritive value of dried bullock's blood, or any of the 
nutritive boluses or capsules which are now prepared by various 
chemists, is no doubt considerable. But, for the treatment of 
abdominal cases at least, I believe that the best results are got 
from enemas that are dilute. 

It is just possible that the benefits of dilute enemas may, to 
some extent, be accounted for by the relief to thirst which they 
give. Thirst is undoubtedly a frequent complaint in abdominal 
cases ; and in such as have vomiting, the thirst is often trying. 
No doubt the fluids of the blood are largely drawn upon to 
provide the intestinal fluids which are secreted so abundantly; 
but the feeling of thirst may also be partly accounted for, as 



PYREXIA . 97 

analogous to the thirst which is felt after shock or fainting. 
However it is explained, there is no doubt that the feeling is 
removed by the use of liquid enemas, when drinking of fluids 
may be ineffectual. On the other hand, as regards the supply 
of nourishment, enemas are not, in operation cases, usually ad- 
ministered because the patient is famished for want of food, but 
because we wish to provide temporary support, to enable the 
patient to tide over a few days of exhausting sickness. Only in 
the case of gastrostomy for stricture of the oesophagus have we 
to combat real hunger ; in other operations, it is temporary 
support or stimulation which we seek to provide. Prof. Bauer* 
insists upon it that by the help of nutrient enemas, however 
prepared; it is impossible to effect the absorption of more than 
a fourth part of the nourishment necessary for subsistence. 
This tells in favour of the exhibition of stimulants in the 
enemas, which undoubtedly are absorbed. 

Now, in practice' these principles may be carried out in two 
ways — either by the administration of enemas that are very 
dilute, and therefore in considerable bulk, or by the administra- 
tion four or five times in the twenty-four hours of small con- 
centrated bulks of food, with, once a day, the ingestion of a 
considerable quantity of tepid water. Some patients will, with- 
out discomfort, retain a pint of fluid in the large bowel ; these 
I should feed with dilute peptonised enemas. A few can retain 
no more than four or six ounces ; these I should feed with concen- 
trated or solid peptonised materials, supplemented by the adminis- 
tration, once or twice daily, of a pint or more of warm water. 

Pyrexia. — A few surgeons consider it necessary to make 
special provision for the treatment of excessive pyrexia occur- 
ring after abdominal operations. Nothing perhaps is more 
remarkable in the whole range of practical surgery than the 
slight amount of febrile reaction which is observed after 
abdominal operations. Case after case occurs in which the 
maximum temperature does not reach ioo° Fah. ; in fact, a 
temperature of ioo° may be considered as abnormally high. It 
is also true that the greatest dangers after laparatomy are not 
* Von Ziemmssen's Handhooh of General Therapeuties, vol. i. p. 266. 

8 



98 TREATMENT AFTER ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

associated with severe p3frexia. Peritonitis of the most virulent 
sort may co-exist with a normal or even sub-normal temperature; 
and ordinary peritonitis, mild or local, rarely causes great eleva- 
tion of temperature. Pyrexia after laparotomy is not of the 
nature of the pyrexia in specific diseases such as typhoid fever: 
it does not continue for weeks together, and it is not at all likely 
to cause danger from mere continuance of excessive fever heat. 
It is probably true that laparotomy involves a likelihood of rapid 
and dangerous rise in temperature no more than any other major 
surgical operation ; and this likelihood must be exceedingly 
small. In the unrivalled experiences of Tait and Keith, such 
dangerous rises of temperature have not occurred ; and it may 
reasonably be argued that, in the practice of others, no special 
preparations need be made to meet them. 

In the Samaritan Hospital, the ice-cap is kept in reserve and 
frequently used for the treatment of rises in temperature. Cold 
packs on the limbs are used for the same end. And in America 
a few surgeons speak of the value of Kibbee's fever cot, which 
is essentiall}'^ a water-bed, through which cold water can be 
passed, so as to abstract heat from the body with which it is in 
contact. If I had to deal with a temperature above 104° lasting 
for more than two hours, I should administer a full dose of 
antipyrin, and possibly supplement it with sponging of the 
cutaneous surface. Under 104°, I should adopt no special 
treatment to reduce the temperature; the strong probability 
is, that it will soon drop of its own accord. 

Parotiiis. — Goodell, Stephen Paget, and others have called 
attention to the fact, that after abdominal injuries and opera- 
tions a small proportion of cases is attacked with inflammation 
of the parotid gland, which may or may not proceed to sup- 
puration. The explanation of this fact has been supposed to be 
due to the sympathy between the parotid gland and the ovaries. 
But the disease has been found in connection with abdominal 
operations not concerned with the sexual organs. The treat- 
ment is carried out on ordinary surgical principles. 

{See Bibliography at end of Book.) 



Section III. 



OPERATIONS ON THE OVARIES, THE FALLOPIAN 
TUBES, AND THE BROAD LIGAMENTS. 



By far the most important and extensive part of abdominal 
surgery is concerned with tumours of the ovary. It was here 
that the surgery of the abdomen signahsed its first triumphs ; 
and it has been chiefly through the practical experience gained 
in this field that the present proud position of peritoneal surgery 
has been established. 

In this section we have to deal with the ovaries, the broad 
ligaments and parovarium, and the Fallopian tubes. For the 
sake of practical convenience, inflammatory diseases of the 
ovaries are considered along with diseases of the Fallopian 
tubes ; the whole being collectively treated under Removal of 
the Uterine Appendages. Operations for growths in the broad 
ligament and parovarium, though they are usually described as 
ovariotomies, are here separately considered. 

8 * 



Ovariotomy. 

SURGICAL ANATOMY OF THE OVARY. 

The ovaries lie in the posterior fold of the broad ligament, 
at the level of the brim of the pelvis. In front, they are in 
contact with the broad ligaments ; behind, they are separated 
from the rectum by the coils of ileum which usuall}^ occup}^ 
Douglas's pouch. Their position is not fixed and stable ; dis- 
placements are caused, normally, by the filling and emptying 
of the bladder and the rectum ; and, pathologically, by enlarge- 
ments and malpositions of the uterus. 

The ovary is attached to the broad ligament along one 
border, and to the uterus by a rounded fold of peritoneum 
containing muscular fibre (the utero-ovarian ligament), which 
is inserted into its internal extremity ; at its external extremity 
is attached that part of the upper border of the broad ligament 
known as tubo-ovarian or infundibulo-pelvic. The ovary there- 
fore occupies the apex of a ligamentous triangle, the base of 
which is in the broad ligament, and the angles of which lie at 
the uterus and the pelvic brim. 

At the junction of the ovary with its fold of broad ligament 
is the hilum of the ovary. Here is situated the mass of spongy 
vascular erectile tissue known as the bulb of the ovary, and to 
this point converge the numerous small vessels, branches of the 
ovarian artery, which supply the gland. The ovarian arter}^ a 
branch of the aorta, leaving the inner aspect of the iliac vessels 
at the pelvic brim, runs a tortuous course along the upper border 
of the broad ligament, between its folds, to its bifurcation near 
the uterus. On the outer side of the ovary, it gives off branches 
to the ampulla; and on the inner side, to the isthmus of the 
Fallopian tube and to the round ligament ; midway, it gives off 
the branches which supply the ovary. As many as ten or 
twenty branches may be given off. The veins are even more 
numerous, and constitute a closely-set network, which com- 
municates above with the pampiniform plexus, and below with 



SURGICAL ANATOMY OF THE OVARY. 101 

the vaginal plexus, and is finally gathered into the ovarian vein, 
which discharges itself into the renal vein on the left side, and 
into the vena cava on the right side. 

The fold of broad ligament containing these numerous 
arterial and venous branches constitutes the surgical pedicle. 
A ligature placed close to the ovary necessarily constricts all 
these, but may not include the trunk of the ovarian artery. 
Under -ordinary circumstances, however, constriction of these 
branches by ligature interferes with the circulation of the 
ovarian artery, and may even check it : if the Fallopian tube 
is included as well, the chances of complete occlusion of the 
ovarian artery are increased. 

The relations of the ovary to the Fallopian tube are of 
importance. The observations of His, confirmed by Doran, 
Tait, Hart, and others, seem to show that the generally 
accepted views as to the mutual position of these organs are 
erroneous. The ovary hangs obliquely from its ligament, and 
the Fallopian tube forms a loop round it, running from without 
inwards and downwards. The fimbriae of the tube, thus lie 
behind and below the ovary, covering a considerable portion 
of its surface. It would further appear that the long axes of 
the ovaries do not lie transversely, but in lines extending for- 
wards and outwards. Considerable variations in position are, 
however, compatible with normal conditions. 

In tumours of the ovary which rise into the abdomen, the 
ovarian attachments are stretched and drawn out, forming the 
so-called " pedicle." Such a pedicle contains, not only the true 
ligaments of the ovary, but also part of the broad ligament, and 
in the great majority of instances the Fallopian tube as well. 
The surgical management of this pedicle, not yet finally settled, 
has been one of the most fertile sources of dispute in abdominal 
surgery. 

The weight of the healthy ovary, according to Farre, varies 
from 60 to 135 grains. Its average diameters are: longitudinal, 
I J in.; transverse,!- in.; perpendicular, | in.; but these are 
liable to considerable variations. 

It is necessary to emphasise the fact, that in women who 



102 OVARIOTOMY. 

have borne children, as well as in many who have not, the 
normal topography of the ovary may be much disturbed with- 
out causing symptoms. I have, on many occasions, noted the 
position of the ovaries in cases which have appeared on the 
post-mortem table of the Bristol Infirmary, and I have been 
much impressed with the variety of position which the ovaries 
have assumed without causing symptoms which were noted 
during life. The most common displacement is downwards, 
chiefly from elongation of the infundibulo-pelvic ligament, 
permitting the outer extremity to drop lowest, and the whole 
to gravitate towards Douglas's pouch. On the left side, dis- 
placements are perhaps most common. I have found health}^ 
non-adherent ovaries on the brim of the true pelvis at the 
insertion of the broad ligament, at the sacro-iliac articulation, 
in front of the broad ligament, behind the internal inguinal ring, 
and in an almost endless variety of abnormal situations. 

This distensibility of the ovarian ligaments has advantages 
from the surgical point of view. It permits of the glands being 
brought to the surface in abdominal sections ; or into the vagina, 
where removal by this method is contemplated. 

MULTILOCULAR AND GLANDULAR CYSTS OF THE OVARY. OVARIAN 

CYSTOMA. 

Pathological Anatomy, — The investigations of our most com- 
petent pathologists would seem to favour the view that true 
cystic disease has its origin in connection with the natural 
retrograde metamorphosis of the Graafian follicle.* The steps 
which lie between the first changes in the ovary and the 
fully developed cystoma have not been clearly traced. The 
pathological appearances vary much in detail, but they are 
sufficiently definite in general to make the recognition of an 
ordinary cystoma a matter of no difficulty. 

An ovarian cystoma usually consists of one large cyst and a 
varying number of small ones. As a rule, the large cyst lies 

* This and other questions in ovarian pathology are philosophically 
handled by Alban Doran, in his work on Tumouys of the Ovary, Fallopian Tube, 
and Broad Ligament. London, 1884. 



OVARIAN CYSTOMA. 103 

farthest away from the peduncular attachment of the tumour, 
the smaller cysts being placed near to this site of attachment ; 
but there are many exceptions to this rule. The walls of the 
cyst are composed of pure fibrous tissues of varying thickness. 
They are covered, on the outside, with flattened cubical cells, 
closel}^ resembling ordinary endothelium ; on the inside, with 
endothelium and varieties of glandular cells. The fluid in 
ovarian cysts is typically of a glairy or colloid nature ; white, 
■or grey, or greyish-yellow, in colour ; very albumious, and of 
high specific gravity. 

When exposed to view, an uninflamed multilocular cyst 
presents a white glistening or pearly surface, perfectly smooth 
to the touch. If secondary cysts be in the cyst-wall, they may 
protrude outwards, forming smooth rounded bosses of varying 
size on the main cyst ; or they may bulge inwards, showing 
areas of different colour and consistency on the surface of the 
cyst -wall. The fluid found in the chief cyst is usually of the 
glairy nature already described ; but sometimes it is watery and 
colourless, when we are told to expect papillomatous growths 
inside ; and not unfrequently it is dark red, brown, or chocolate 
coloured, from admixture with blood. When masses of glandular 
semi-solid material are developed in the centre of the cj^st, the 
fluid is said to become thick and colloid, almost coherent. In 
the secondary cysts the nature of the fluid is still more variable. 
Some of these have pale watery contents ; others, almost pure 
blood ; others, very thick stringy or colloid material ; and some 
may contain fluid indistinguishable from pus. In closely-set 
small cysts the contents are most frequently colloid or jelly-like, 
capable of being lifted out by the fingers, and too thick to be 
drawn off by cannula. 

Much has been written on the possibility of diagnosing 
ovarian fluid through its chemical composition and microscopic 
constituents : even the spectroscope has been called in to aid 
us. Chemistry has certainly failed, and so has the spectroscope; 
and the presence of certain peculiar cells, which were for some 
time considered as pathognomonic, has now been proved almost 
valueless for diagnostic purposes. The vacuolated cells of 



104 OVARIOTOMY. 

Thornton and Foulis are now known not to be characteristic of 
maHgnant disease, as was at one time thought certain ; and we 
are now practically left without any single reliable physical 
test of the contents of an ovarian cyst. We can say that a 
fluid is ovarian with a greater probability of truth than we can 
say that it is not ; and in most cases the grounds of this state- 
ment might rest as securely on the simple visual appearance 
of the fluid, as on its composition or the nature of the cells 
contained in it. But the value of all such tests is best 
estimated by the weight which practical men put upon it — 
and that is almost nil. We never hear of the removal of 
ovarian fluid for examination ; the diagnosis is made by other 
means. 

Certain developmental changes are found in cystomata. 
Thus, from crowding of secondary cysts, their continguous walls 
may disappear, and the cavities may communicate. Or the 
wall of the main cyst may be ruptured, and the secondary cysts, 
protruding through the opening, may form the chief bulk of the 
tumour. In such cases the operation for removal is usually 
difficult, on account of the tenuity of the cyst-walls, the density 
of their contents, and their tendency to become adherent to 
abdominal organs. A curious variety is the so-called tubo- 
ovarian cyst, where there is a free communication between the 
cyst-cavity and the distended Fallopian tube adherent by its 
fimbriated extremity.''' From the fact that the cyst in the 
ovary is usually monolocular and thin-walled, and rarely is found 
large, it is probable that the original growth in these cases is not 
a true glandular cystoma, but a simple cyst such as is found in 
chronic inflammation. A rare and somewhat puzzling condition 
arises when there are two ovarian cysts, and their walls become 
fused, while their cavities communicate. In this case there are 
two pedicles to deal with. Solid matter inside a cystoma, 
Doranf found present in 26 out of 366 cases, and in 14 of 
these the structure was adeno-sarcoma. In nearly a third of 
his cases glandular material was present in varying amount. 

* See Griffith, Obstct. Trans., xxix., 1887. 
t 0/. Cif., p. 21. 



DIAGNOSIS OF CYSTOMA. 105 

Thin-walled pedunculated and sessile cysts are sometimes found 
attached to the main wall. Other peculiar developments — as, 
small localised masses of connective tissue, or wart-like bodies, 
or even true papilloma — may be found growing on the inner 
surface of the cyst. Certain changes or accidents liable to 
take place in the developed growth will be referred to 
further on. 

All such growths have a pedicle : a so-called sessile ovarian 
cystoma is simply one with a very short pedicle. This pedicle 
is a very variable structure. In length, it varies from six inches 
or even more, down to a vanishing point ; in breadth, it varies 
between that of the whole length of the broad ligament and 
some fraction of an inch ; and in thickness, its dimensions lie 
between the tenuity of membrane and the bulk of the palm of 
the hand, or even more. The vessels that supply the growth, 
also most variable in size and number, lie in the pedicle. 
Anatomically, a true pedicle is composed of the ovarian 
ligaments, some portion of the broad ligament, and the 
Fallopian tube — all of them hypertrophied. 

Diagnosis. — There is something characteristic in the appear- 
ance of an abdomen enlarged by an ovarian tumour. There is 
a bulging forwards, not so marked as in pregnane}^, where the 
tumour appears to start straight out of the pelvis ; and more 
marked than in ascites, where the enlargement involves the 
whole abdomen and causes bulging in the flanks. The position 
of an ovarian tumour of moderate size is best suggested by 
supposing that it rests chiefly upon the promontor}/' of the 
sacrum. It occupies the lower portions of the abdominal 
cavity, and causes stretching of the parietes, chiefly in these 
portions. This is apparent by the increase of distance between 
the umbilicus and pubes, greater than between the sternum and 
umbilicus, and by the appearance of lineae albicantes (where 
they exist at all) at each side of and below the umbihcus. 

Palpation reveals a rounded, cystic and probably fluctuating 
growth, movable in most cases, and remotely connected with 
the uterus. Small tumours appear to be perfectl}' globular, and 



106 OVARIOTOMY. 

are "Smooth on the surface; large growths are usually somewhat 
irregular in shape, from the development of secondary cysts in 
their walls. In thin-walled cysts which are not greatly sub- 
divided by septa, or in which one cj'st considerably exceeds the 
others in size, a fluctuation thrill may be distinctly felt. If the 
cyst-wall is thick, or if the growth is very mutilocular, or its 
contents colloid, fluctuation may be absent. 

■A sensation of crepitus may be produced by the friction of 
inflamed surfaces ; such crepitus, of course, centra-indicates 
adhesions at the spot where it is felt. The diagnosis of 
adhesions is very imcertain ; free mobility of parietes over 
tumour indicates that there are not closely set, dense, or short 
adhesions ; long bands may permit considerable mobility. A 
condition of fixity between cyst-wall and parietes, it is very 
difficult to be assured of. Doran mentions a case in which he 
and several of his colleagues thought that a cyst was fixed 
to the abdominal walls ; but not a single parietal adhesion 
was found when the operation was performed. I have met 
with several analogous instances ; and I am convinced that 
the diagnosis of parietal adhesions is most difficult and un- 
certain. 

Vaginal palpation reveals a uterus normal in size, displaced 
either backwards or forwards, or to one side, and most frequently 
depressed. The uterus is somewhat frequently enlarged — 
always so, if the growth is closely adherent to it. If the tumour 
is small and has not escaped from the pelvis, the uterus will be 
displaced forwards ; when the growth is of considerable bulk 
and placed in the abdomen, the uterus lies indifferently in front 
of or behind the growth. When it lies in front, it is sometimes 
quite easy to palpate its outlines through the abdominal wall 
above the pubes. Rotation of the growth on its transverse axis, 
by no means a rare occurrence, causes the uterus to be dragged 
upwards. If the growth is movable and the pedicle not very 
long, movements communicated to it are felt in the uterus. If 
the growth is large or fixed, and the pedicle short, or the uterus 
adherent to it, passage of the sound will show that the fundus 
of the uterus cannot be moved away from the tumour. This 



DIAGNOSIS OF CYSTOMA. 107 

sign introduces an element of confusion between ovarian and 
uterine growths. 

By percussion we diagnose the presence of a non-resonant 
body in the lower, or lower and middle, abdomen. From the 
point where the growth comes into contact with the parietes 
above, down to the pubes, dulness is absolute. Over the 
anterior aspect of the tumour there is also absolute dulness ; at 
the sides this dulness is not so absolute, and in the flanks there 
is positive resonance. Tait well describes the ovarian tumour 
as being surrounded with a " tympanic corona," a ring of 
resonance marking the lateral and upper limits of growth, 
where the bowel crowds round it and comes into contact with 
the parietes. If the tumour is large, there may be dulness in 
one or even both flanks ; sometimes, in very large growths, 
resonance is absent over the whole abdominal area. Ascites 
associated with the tumour may cause lumbar dulness, as may 
loaded bowels. 

Auscultation reveals little of positive value in the diagnosis 
of ovarian cysts. Negatively it may be useful, as showing the 
absence of sounds characteristic of other conditions. Ex- 
ploratory puncture has practically been abolished as a means of 
diagnosing ovarian cysts. 

As regards general and subjective symptoms, experience 
shows that they are almost valueless. Some tumours grow 
quickly, some slowly ; some are very painful ; others attain to 
enormous dimensions, producing nothing more than discomfort 
from their bulk. Menorrhagia, amenorrhoea, or normal uterine 
functions, are found present with equal impartiality. Dis- 
turbances of micturition or of defaecation may exist, or they 
may not. Sickness is not a very common symptom, but there 
are cases where sickness and vomiting are very troublesome. 
CEdema of legs, parietes, or vulva, may be found in small 
growths, and they may be absent in very large ones. Disturb- 
ances of the renal functions are present or absent. And so it is 
through the whole group of rational and associated symptoms ; 
there is not one whose absence disproves ovarian disease, and 
not one whose presence proves it ; indeed, there is perhaps no 



108 OVARIOTOMY. 

association of such symptons which would be of the slightest 
value for accurate diagnosis. This must rest on the physical 
bases alone. 

The diagnosis of ovarian from other abdominal tumours is a 
very large subject indeed. It is literally the fact that there is 
scarcely a single form of abdominal growth, of dimensions as 
large as a child's head, that has not been mistaken for ovarian 
tumoiir. No doubt some of these mistakes are to be accounted 
for by carelessness or ignorance ; but many of them have 
occurred in the hands of our most distinguished operators. 
But such mistakes are daily becoming less common ; advancing 
knowledge of all tumours is narrowing down the diagnosis of 
each. The earlier writers put before us a list of growths which 
might be mistaken for ovarian that was almost co-extensive 
with abdominal tumours ; at present, we should be perhaps 
right in limiting our differentiation to half-a-dozen. Ovarian 
C3'stic disease is, I think, most liable to be confounded with the 
following : 

Encysted Peritoneal Dropsy. 

Renal Cystic Tumours. 

Cysts of the Broad Ligament. 

Fibro-cystic Disease of the Uterus. 

Ascites. 

In many cases encysted dropsy of the peritoneum cannot be 
diagnosed from ovarian C3^st. The points specially to be looked 
into are : whether or not there is resonance between the pubes 
and the tumour — a condition sometimes found in enc3'sted 
dropsy, but never in ovarian cyst ; whether, on deep pressure 
at the periphery of tlie cyst, the bowels appear to be sessile on 
its walls — or rather, whether the growth appears to spring from 
the midst of the coils of intestine. It is rarely the case that 
an ovarian cyst small enough to be examined in this way is 
palpably connected closely with bowel. The walls of an 
encysted peritoneal collection of fluid are thin ; and there 
is no evidence of secondary cysts, and herein it resembles 



FIBRO-CYSTIC DISEASE. 109 

parovarian cyst. But the latter is very rarely adherent to 
bowel, and still more rarely appears to be imbedded in intestinal 
coils. The fluid is under low pressure, and fluctuates freely, in 
encysted dropsy. 

In the case of cystic renal tumours, mistakes are not likely to 
arise unless the growth is of a large size, filling the whole of 
the cavity, and unless there is absence of special urinary 
symptoms. The most important differentiating sign is, in the 
case of renal growths, deep and firm fixation in one or other 
loin. It is not often that an ovarian cyst, even of ver}^ large 
growth, so completely occupies a lumbar hollow as a renal 
growth. An ovarian growth may completely fill the costo-iliac 
space, and may cause the flanks to bulge ; but it does not 
app£ar to spring from this region, having most of its bulk in 
and around it. Not much value can be attached to the absence 
of signs derived from vaginal palpation. A sign of importance 
is the palpation of large bowel on the surface of a renal tumour. 

Cysts of the hroad ligament may be simple monolocular growths 
containing fluid, which are best known as parovarian. cysts ; or 
polycystic growths, arising in the hilum of the ovary, or else- 
where in the broad ligament, which most frequently contain 
papillomatous material. A simple parovarian cyst is thin- 
walled, fluctuates freely, and is globular and smooth on the 
surface. A papillomatous cyst of the broad ligament is multi- 
locular, deeply sessile in the pelvis, and is often intimately 
connected with the uterus, which is usually dragged upwards. 
If the papillomatous material is abundant, there is bogginess 
rather than fluctuation. 

Fihro-cystic disease of the uterus is more rare than is commonly 
supposed. It is probable that most of the cases described as 
fibro-cyst of the uterus would, in the light of our more perfect 
recent pathological knowledge, have been recognised as ovarian 
or broad ligament growths which had become intimately adherent 
to the uterus. Beyond an intimate connection with the uterus, 
which may exist in other growths, there is little to guide us in 
diagnosing fibro-cyst. The striking cases described by Spencer 
Wells presented symptoms which were not very characteristic. 



110 OVARIOTOMY. 

Ascites is perhaps least liable of the conditions mentioned 
to be mistaken for ovarian cystoma. Error can scarcely arise 
unless the abdominal distension is very considerable. In dis- 
tinguishing minor degrees of enlargement, the most important 
guides are the sites of the areas of resonance and dulness. An 
ovarian cystoma grows upwards from the pubes, and gives a 
circular area of dulness in the middle, surrounded by a ring of 
resonance which extends backwards into the flanks. (Fig. 3.) 
Ascites increases from the flanks forwards (speaking of the 
supine posture), and when the fluid comes into contact with the 
anterior parietes, gives a crescentic area of dulness, the con- 
cavity of which looks upwards, with resonance only between 
the sternum and this crescentic hollow. (Fig. 2.) In ascites, 
when the enlargement is very great, there may be dulness up to 
the sternum ; and when ascites is present with ovarian tumour, 
there may be dulness in both flanks. Under these conditions 
diagnosis may be somewhat difficult. Variations of posture 
increase the resonant areas in ascites more than in cystoma, 
and the fluctuation thrill is more distinct in ascites. Also, in 
ascites, there is more bulging or bagging of the distensile 
portions of the abdominal sac at the loins, in Douglas's pouch, 
and at the umbilicus ; and the whole belly is flatter than in 
cystoma. 

DERMOID CYSTS OF THE OVARY. 

About one of ten ovarian tumours is either entirely or 
partially dermoid. Their exact origin is still matter of un- 
certainty, and need not here be discussed. It is generally 
agreed that the rudiments of all dermoid cysts exist at birth, 
and that they may remain quiescent indefinitely, or start into 
active growth at any period from, or even before, birth to old 
age. Dermoid ovarian growths most frequently manifest them- 
selves after puberty. 

Dermoid cysts are rarely of large size ; it is not often that 
they are larger than a child's head. The bulk of their contents 
is composed of a thick greasy material, such as is found in 
sebaceous tumours of the scalp. The cyst-wall inside the 



DERMOID CYSTS. Ill 

fibrous envelope is composed of structures similar to those found 
in the skin. From within outwards, we meet, first, with a layer 
of epidermis, from which sprouts a growth of hair, and in which 
we may often detect rudiments of all the elements found in 
healthy skin ; outside of this lies a la3'er of connective tissue, 
corresponding to the cutis ; and outermost of all, under the 
fibrous capsule, is a layer of fatty tissue, corresponding to the 
panniculus adiposus. 

A dermoid ovarian cyst is usually divided by septa into 
separate portions ; and the contents may differ in the various 
loculi. The main cyst often contains a greasy chocolate- 
coloured fluid, while the others are full of the characteristic 
sebaceous material. Hairs may be shed into the cavities in large 
quantities, and sometimes form masses which appear as if they 
had been rolled into balls. But the most striking contents are 
pieces of true bone, most frequently stunted alveolar pro- 
cesses, with teeth either free or embedded in the alveoli. As 
many as three hundred teeth have been found in one dermoid 
cyst. 

There usually exists a very perceptible enlargement of the 
sebaceous follicles in the cyst-wall. Frequently they attain to 
the dimensions of secondary cysts, and a similar development 
may take place in the sweat glands. Hyaline cartilage is often 
found in the cyst-wall ; and nerve-tissue, unstriped muscular 
fibre, and other elements may be detected. Malignant tumours 
have been found growing in dermoid cysts. Last year in the 
Bristol Infirmar}' I removed from a woman aged 59 a suppu- 
rating dermoid cyst, in the wall of which was a solid sarcomatous 
growth as large as an hen's egg. As yet there has been no 
secondary development. More than one observer has noted 
that malignant tumours of the abdominal cavity sometimes 
follow removal of dermoid cysts : no doubt the primary elements 
existed in the dermoid growths. 

Both ovaries are liable to be diseased in a proportion of 
cases larger than in cystoma. Also, ordinary glandular cystic 
disease is found to co-exist with dermoid cyst in a proportion of 
instances larger than would be likely if it were mere coincidence. 



112 OVARIOTOMY. 

Any casual connection between the two is not likely to be more 
than a stimulus to development started by increased vascular 
supply from the one which first began to take on diseased 
action. 

The outer aspect of a dermoid cyst is different from that of 
an ordinary cystoma. The glisteniug pearly aspect of the latter 
is replaced by a muddy or opaque appearance darker in colour, 
sometimes even approaching to brown. Adhesions are common 
in dermoid cysts, chiefly because they are liable to become 
inflamed. 

Diagnosis. — A dermoid cyst may be suspected ; but it can 
rarely be accurately diagnosed. The history' and physical signs 
of dermoid growth may be identical with those of cystoma 
containing colloid material. In the very rare event of bone 
being discovered by bimanual palpation, diagnosis is certain ; 
and this is perhaps the only sign, short of operation or explora- 
tory puncture or discharge of contents by suppuration, which 
can be looked upon as definitely diagnostic. A thick cyst-wall, 
bogginess and not fluctuation, and a size less than that of a 
man's head, nearly always found in dermoid cysts, are not 
infrequently found in other cystic growths of the ovaries. 



ACCIDENTAL CHANGES IN CYSTIC GROWTHS OF THE OVARIES. 

Cystic ovarian growths are liable to certain accidents which 
are not necessarily connected with their pathological develop- 
ment. The most important of these are. Rupture of the Cyst- 
wall, Twisting of the Pedicle, and Inflammation or Suppuration 
in the growth. 

Rupture. — Any breach in the continuity of the cyst-wall may 
be defined as a rupture. It may exist either as a slow leakage 
through a minute opening or openings, or as a rapid evacuation 
of contents through a large rent. The general effects of rupture 
will depend on the size of the cyst, the nature of its contents, 
and the rapidity with which they are discharged into the peri- 
toneal cavity. Simple oozing or leakage may, if the contents 



TWISTING OF THE PEDICLE. 113 

are benign, produce no symptoms be3'ond diminution in the size 
of the cyst. A large rent may result in collapse or rapid death, 
or may slowly pass off, or may terminate in peritonitis. If the 
contents are suppurating, death usually results from peritonitis, 
unless operation is performed ; if they are benign and watery, 
recovery may take place without much difficulty. 

The causes of rupture are varied. A frequent cause is over- 
growth of intra-cystic solid matter, usually papillomatous ; and 
in this case the rupture is of the nature of a slow leakage 
through thinned and necrosed portions of the C3^st-wall, and 
does not produce very acute symptoms. Spontaneous rents 
may take place in thin parts of over-distended cysts. A tense, 
but otherwise healthy, cyst-wall may be ruptured by a blow, or 
even by rough handling ; and in such a case the immediate 
symptoms may be very acute and very alarming. The rupture 
of an acutely inflamed or suppurating cyst is of the nature of 
the bursting of an abscess inside the peritoneal cavity, and is 
immediately followed by grave and alarming symptoms. 

Haemorrhage after rupture of a cyst is not usually severe. 
If bleeding is free, it is more likely to arise in the form of a 
passive oozing from the abundant vessels of intra-cystic papillo- 
matous growths, than from the torn vessels in the rent. 

Cysts containing papillomatous growths are peculiarly liable 
to undergo rupture — not once only, but several times. The 
immediate danger is not great, because the free flow of fluid is 
prevented by the villi plugging the opening ; but the remote 
danger is considerable from infection of the peritoneum. In 
multilocular cystomata, the thin -walled secondary cysts are 
most liable to rupture. Dermoid cysts usually rupture into 
some neighbouring cavity — bladder or rectum most frequently — 
rather than into the peritoneum. 

Twisting of the Pedicle. — Rotation of ovarian tumours, result- 
ing, as it sometimes does, in twisting of the pedicle and stran- 
gulation of its vessels, may be an accident of serious moment. 
Terillon estimates that it occurs in about 6 per cent, of all cases. 
Much speculation has been offered as to its cause. Tait very 

9 



114 OVARIOTOMY. 

ingeniously seeks to explain it as caused by repeated small dis- 
placements of the growth round its axis, through the passage of 
the faeces along the sigmoid flexure and rectum. Slight twisting 
may produce no effects ; but the result, if the twisting is two, 
three, or more times,* may be atrophy, rupture, or gangrene of 
the tumour. Complete detachment is rare. Sometimes the 
tumour continues to live while remaining free in the cavity ; 
more frequently it contracts adhesions with neighbouring 
organs, and especially with the omentum. 

In many cases a twisting of the pedicle is attended with no 
symptoms. In such the pedicle will probably be long, thin, and 
lax. Usually, however, with pedicles of ordinary conformation, 
signs of congestion or inflammation are present, such as opacity 
and want of lustre in the cyst-wall, with extravasation of blood 
into the cyst-cavity. The haemorrhage into a cyst whose pedicle 
has been twisted may be so considerable as to produce symp- 
toms of loss of blood. Inflammation may proceed to suppura- 
tion in these cases ; and not a few of the described cases of 
gangrene have been attributed to twisting of the pedicle. 

Doran,i Chalot,]: myself, § and others have recorded some 
remarkable cases where the vitality of the tumour has been 
maintained by adventitious adhesions after the pedicle has been 
twisted through. It is probable that many dermoid cysts of 
the abdomen that have been described as non-ovarian are really 
ovarian cysts that have been separated from their pedicles. 

Suppuration in Cysts. — Suppuration in the growth, attended, 
as it always is, with acute peritonitis, is a most serious compli- 
cation. The immediate causes of suppuration are various : 
inflammation, from traumatism; localised gangrene; strangu- 
lation of the pedicle, from twisting ; introduction of septic 
matters into the cystic cavity, from tapping. Inflammation 

* See Hunter in N. Y. Med. Rec, 1885, xxvii., p. 359. 

t Med. Clu'r. Trans., vol. Ixviii., 1885. 

+ Atm. de Gyn. et d'Obst. Mar., July, 1887. 

§ Brit. Gynac. Joiirn., Nov., 1887 — where there is a full description of the 

growth with drawings by Mr. Bland Sutton. 



ROKITANSKY'S TUMOUR. 115 

in the cyst-wall is communicated to the peritoneum, and may 
set up general peritonitis of the most dangerous character. 
Localised inflammation of a non-septic nature may exist in a 
minor secondary cyst without producing alarming symptoms t 
as a rule, however, suppuration signifies its presence in an 
unmistakable and emphatic manner. 

When any of these accidents occur — suppuration, twisting 
of pedicle, or rupture — immediate operation is indicated. The 
danger from suppuration is greatest : twisting of the pedicle is 
dangerous chiefly when followed by congestion, which runs oa 
to gangrene or suppuration, and is only inferred from the exist- 
ence of such inflammatory disturbance ; rupture is least dan- 
gerous as a rule, but is sometimes rapidly fatal. In all, danger 
to life, immediate as well as remote, is lessened by operation, 
Keith first taught us how to deal with suppurating cysts : his- 
successful teaching has been extended to the treatment of the 
other accidents to which pedunculated cystic growths are liable. 

Some reference must be made to that peculiar variety of 
ovarian cystoma called by Tait " Rokitansky's tumour." It 
was first described by Rokitansky as a special variety of C3'S- 
toma ; and Ritchie first described the presence of ova in its 
cysts. " These tumours are always double, no case having yet 
been described as having occurred on one side only. They are 
always of very slow growth ; their cysts are uniformly small^ 
rarely reaching the size of an orange, and generally being little 
bigger than grapes. The tumours are never large, and it is only 
the fact that both ovaries are always aff"ected that makes them, 
objects for surgical interference. The contents of the cysts are 
invariably limpid, and the ovum may nearly always be found ; 
and in these two respects, as well as in the immense number 
of the cysts, the tumours differ absolutely from ordinary^ 
cystoma." " Tait has operated upon two such cases, and a 
preparation from one of his cases is placed in the Hunterian 
Museum. A full account of this rare disease is given in. 
Tait's work. 

* Tait, Diseases of the Ovaries, p. 169, 1885. 
9 '■■• 



116 OVARIOTOMY. 



TAPPING OVARIAN CYSTOMATA. 



The present position of tapping as a surgical procedure in 
ovarian cystoma is rather as a measure for temporarily relieving 
symptoms, than as a plan of treatment. As an aid to diagnosis, 
it has been practically discarded. As a method of cure, it has 
long been accounted futile. And even as a means of ameliora- 
ting symptoms, it is doubtful if the combined risks, immediate 
and remote, are not often as great as those following complete 
removal of the tumour. 

The occasions on which tapping may be legitimately adopted 
are twofold : firstly, when removal of the growth is inadmis- 
sible ; and secondly, when the patient is suffering from some 
incidental ailment which renders postponement of operation 
necessary. In the first case, tapping is used simply to promote 
euthanasia ; in the second, to gain time for improvement of the 
patient's condition. The coincidence of any grave and incur- 
able disease, such as cancer, phthisis, or advanced disease of 
the heart, or in fact any condition which negatives surgical 
operation of any sort, negatives ovariotomy. Here tapping may 
be advisable, to prolong life or to render it less painful. On the 
other hand, if a patient is suffering from an acute disease — such 
as bronchitis, or pneumonia, or typhoid fever — which negatives 
ovariotomy, and the progress of which is likely to be favourably 
influenced by relieving a distended abdomen, tapping is expe- 
dient. Also in chronic complaints, such as bronchitis with 
dyspnoea, tapping may contribute to the patient's improvement, 
and so increase the chances of success for the major operation. 
"When the renal functions are upset, or when there is oedema of 
the limbs from pressure, or generally where the condition of the 
patient is deteriorated by the existence of intra-abdominal pres- 
sure, tapping may, by temporarily removing this pressure, cause 
material improvement in the patient's condition. 

The operation must be conducted with a supreme regard to 
antiseptic purity. The skin at the site of puncture must be 
thoroughly cleansed ; and the instrument, inside as well as 
outside, must be perfectly pure. The antiseptic trocar of Ward 



TAPPING OVARIAN CYSTS. 



117 



Fig. 17. 



Cousins is a very suitable instrument for the pur- 
pose ; and the blunt ascites tubes of Tait and of 
Wells (Fig. 17) would leave nothing to be desired, 
if they did not require previous puncture of the 
abdominal walls by lancet — a necessity which 
many would consider a disadvantage. The exact 
nature of the instrument matters little, provided 
it be small, simple, and as nearly as possible a 
closed tube. It ought not to be larger than a 
No. 6 English catheter. A large trocar is doubly 
objectionable, as causing a large opening in the 
cyst-wall, which may leak ; and as permitting too 
rapid a flow of fluid, which may cause shock to 
the patient. A long rubber tube is attached to the 
end of the cannula, and conducts the fluid into a 
suitabl}' placed receptacle. Bandages to compress 
the abdomen are quite unnecessary. The patient 
lies on her side near the edge of the bed, and the 
trocar is inserted at a suitable place, usually 



Wells's Ascites somewhere in [the middle line, between the um- 

,^ ,, : bilious and pubes. The end of the rubber tube 

Half size. _ -^ _ _ 

is kept under carbolic lotion, and never removed 
therefrom, as air is liable to enter. A piece of glass tubing 
inserted in the middle of the rubber tube will show whether 
fluid continues to flow. When the cannula is removed the 
opening is pinched between the fingers, and the tissues moved 
about, so as to destroy the continuity of the perforation. A 
small piece of lint, soaked in collodion, is sufficient to close 
the opening. A binder relieves the uncomfortable sense of 
emptiness which usually remains after relief of abdominal 
tension. 

Conducted properly, the operation of tapping is attended 
with very slight risks. It is just possible that the disrepute into 
which the proceeding has fallen is to be attributed to careless 
manipulation or unclean instruments. Men who have not 
before their eyes a complete foreknowledge of its possible effects 
are liable to have recourse to tapping on every occasion when 



118 OVARIOTOMY, 

they have a patient suffering from fluid distension of the 
abdomen, and such men are not Hkely to take full scientific 
precautions. 

HISTORY OF OVARIOTOMY. 

The history of ovariotomy reads almost Hke a romance. 
From being dreamed of as a remote possibihty by advanced 
thinkers some century and a half ago in the capitals of Europe, 
and attempted by one or two daring enthusiasts, it first reached 
its consummation as a definite schemed operation far away from 
the centres of civilisation. In Great Britain, as in its birth- 
place, America, the operation had struggled into existence and 
was thriving in the provinces, before it had established a footing 
in the capital. It was true of this, as of so many other im- 
provements in practical surgery, that it owed its birth to the 
freedom and independence of the provincial mind : the spirit of 
the pioneer had certainly entered the soul of Ephraim McDowell, 
almost in the backwoods of Kentucky. 

There is no doubt but that some form of mutilation of the 
female sexual organs has been practised from the most ancient 
times. In most instances this was probably removal of some 
parts of the external organs of generation ; in some, however, it 
would appear certain that the ovaries were actually removed. 
This .was essentially female castration, or spaying ; and the 
removal, in righteous anger, of the ovaries of his unchaste 
daughter by the Hungarian sow-gelder, two centuries ago, is 
probably the last operation of this sort known to history. Such 
operations, demonstrating, as they did, the possibility of 
removing ovaries that were healthy, were probably not without 
their value in clearing the way for the removal of ovaries that 
were diseased. The value of such operations, however, will be 
best estimated in considering the operation of oophorectomy. 

To the active and enquiring minds of many surgeons living 
in the early parts of the eighteenth century, the possibility 
of removing cystic ovaries was often presented. Willius of 
Basle, in 1731, spoke perhaps most clearly in favour of the 
operation, though he had not the courage to attempt it. 



HISTORY. 119 

Delaporte* actually treated an ovarian cyst by incision through 
the abdominal wall, but did not remove it. Morand, who 
follows up Delaporte's paper in the same volume by some 
remarks of his own, desires to give the latter credit for having 
been the first definitely to propose the removal of an ovarian 
cyst, and expresses his own opinion that the operation is 
feasible, provided there be no adhesions. Hunter, in 1762, 
with the far-seeing genius which we now fully appreciate, 
actually suggested the small incision, tapping the cyst, re- 
moving it, and ligaturing the pedicle. A Russian surgeon 
named Segdel is said to have, in 1784, begun an operation with 
the view of removing what he believed to be an ovarian tumour; 
it turned out, however, to be a distension of the Fallopian tube 
with pus, which, being unable to remove on account of adhe- 
sions, he simply incised and drained.! The surgeon who came 
nearest to being the first ovariotomist was Chambon, who, in 
1798, published in Paris a treatise on The Diseases of Women, 
wherein he strongly recommended the removal of diseased 
ovaries. He gave accurate accounts of the anatomy of cystic 
tumours of the ovaries, and tried to show how to diagnose 
adhesions, and how to deal with them. John Bell, no doubt 
familiar with the work of French surgeons, constantly dwelt in 
his lectures on the possibility and the advisability of removing 
such tumours, and his teachings bore fruit ; for one of his 
pupils, Ephraim Mc Dowell, was the first ovariotomist. 

The claims of Mc Dowell of Kentucky to be considered as 
the first surgeon who deliberately and scientifically planned and 
performed the operation of removal of an ovarian tumour are 
now established beyond dispute. The operation of Houston of 
Glasgow was almost certainly not a complete ovariotomy, j and 

* Mem. de I'Acad. Roy. de Chir., torn. ii. ; Paris, 1753. 

' , t New York Med. Journ., Feb: nth, i88g. 

§ It is right to say that Tait, who has made special enquiries into the 
subject {Dis. of Ovaries, 1883, p. 239), claims for Houston the honour of 
having been the first ovariotomist. Now, an ovariotomy is not complete 
unless the tumour is removed and the pedicle is secured. In Houston's 
account of his case there is not a suggestion that he did either. It seems to 
me scarcely credible that a surgeon who could describe, as minutely as 



120 OVARIOTOMY. 

those of Lammonier of Rouen, Dzondi of Halle, and Galenzowskj'- 
of Wilna, even if they had been ovariotomies, which they were 
not, were performed subsequently to the first operation of 
McDowell. In December, 1809, McDowell operated on Mrs. 
Crawford, and seven years later he published his report of this 
and two other operations. In America, the operation thus 
initiated was taken up by Dunlap of Ohio, by Nathan Smith 
of Connecticut, by Alban Smith of Kentucky, by Gallup of 
Vermont, and by many others. Up to the end of 1863, accord- 
ing to Peaslee,* ovariotomy had been reported as performed in 
America 117 times, with 68 recoveries and 49 deaths. Since 
then, American surgeons have taken a prominent and honour- 
able share in perfecting the operation, which is now performed 
everywhere throughout the Continent. 

In Great Britain, the operation did not at first make much 
progress. Lizars operated in Edinburgh once in 1824, and 
three times in 1825, but with such small success that Listen 
boasted that he took good care that Lizars did not set about any 
such operation in the Infirmary after he became attached to it. 
The medical papers of those days were also dead against the 
operation ; and few attempts and an equal number of failures 
were recorded till 1836, when William Jeaffreson, a surgeon of 
Framiingham, operated successfully by the small incision. In 
the same year. King of Saxmundham had a successful operation ; 
and in 1839, West of Tonbridge had two successes. A few 
London surgeons operated in the next year or two, in every case 
unsuccessfully. The thread of success was then picked up by 
Charles Clay of Manchester in 1842, who, in the words of 

Houston did, the somewhat trivial expedient adopted for removing the glairy- 
fluid should leave unmentioned the far more important proceeding of removing 
the tumour, and dividing and securing the pedicle. " I then squeezed out all 
I could [of the contents], and stitched up the wound in three places." If 
between the squeezing and the, stitching the grand measures of removing the 
tumour and securing its pedicle really did occur, I think he must have at 
least mentioned them. Houston says the tumour was of the left ovary, but 
the only proof he adduces in support of this is that it lay on the left side. The 
after-history of the case is in no way inconsistent with his having incised an 
ovarian growth. 

* Ovarian Tmnours, p. 247 ; London, 1873. 



HISTORY. 121 

Peaslee, "soon became the most successful ovariotomist living," 
and to whom, " more than to all other operators, the credit 
belongs of having placed the operation of ovariotomy on a sure 
foundation." Up to 1850, eight years before Spencer Wells 
began to operate, he had chronicled twenty-one successes out of 
thirty-three operations — a result more favourable than Wells 
could show in the same number of cases, not finished till twelve 
years later. Between 1852 and 1856, Baker Brown operated 
nine times, with seven deaths. This mortality checked him for 
four years, when he began a career which, but for its untimely 
and unfortunate termination, would probably have done much 
for ovariotomy. 

The year 1858 brings us to the beginning of the remarkable 
career of Spencer Wells. Commencing with a promise faithfully 
to record every case, successful or unsuccessful, upon which he 
operated, he has pursued this course to the present day, when 
he has well passed the thousand. Round his personality centred 
all the changes, improvements, and, we must add, retrogressions, 
which have followed the fortunes of the operation. His hearty 
readiness to try the recommendations of others, though it has 
not always been conducive to reduced mortality, has testified to 
his honesty of purpose and breadth of view. 

The next prominent figure in ovariotomy is that of Thomas 
Keith of Edinburgh. In 1865 he performed his first ovariotomy, 
and he very soon proved himself the most skilful of all. To-day 
some of his operations, such as those for removal of large 
fibroids, seem almost to have reached the limits of successful 
human surgery. 

And, among those who have more recently entered the field, 
the brilliancy of results seems still to be on the increase. Tait 
of Birmingham has attained to a success which is as remarkable 
as it is well deserved. He can show the extraordinary record 
of one hundred and thirty-nine ovariotomies without a death, a 
result which could scarcely be shown for the most trivial surgi- 
cal operation. At the Samaritan Free Hospital, in London, the 
mantle of Wells has worthily fallen on the shoulders of Thornton 
and of Bantock. On the Continent, the names of Koeberle, 



122 OVARIOTOMY. 

Schroeder, Billroth, Martin, and a host of others, are honour- 
ably associated with the operation. And all over the civilised 
world, in every capital, town, and village, there are surgeons 
who, with honour to their art and credit to themselves, success- 
fully perform the operation, which half a century ago was 
condemned by the leaders of surgery as being little removed 
from murder. 



APPRECIATION. INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 

Ovariotomy is the most successful major operation in surgery. 
Within the memory of living surgeons its mortality has dimin- 
ished from what was almost the limit of the justifiable in 
surgery, to a figure which, as statistics are estimated, is practi- 
cally zero. Our best English operators — Keith, Thornton, 
Bantock, and others — in the last few years had brought their 
death-rate down to the marvellously low figure of about ten per 
cent., more or less, when Lawson Tait's records beat all, by the 
extraordinary result of one hundred and thirty-nine cases with- 
out a death, and a general mortality over several hundreds of 
cases of less than five per cent. Keith's recent mortality, in 
private operations with cautery-clamp, is, he tells me, under two 
per cent. Surely this is the 7ie plus ultra, not only of abdominal 
surgery, but of all surgery. If it is not a justification for the per- 
formance of ovariotomy, wherever an ovarian tumour exists, it 
is undoubtedly a stern command to all who seek to perform the 
operation, so as to give their patients the best chance of life, to 
spare no pains to perfect themselves in every detail of attainable 
knowledge. 

With such prospects of recovery, it would seem that little 
more than the diagnosis of ovarian cystoma was necessary to 
justify operation. Excluding the just and proper contra-indica- 
tions to this or any other serious surgical operation, and which 
need not here be mentioned, there is scarcely a condition in the 
tumour itself which absolutely forbids operation. The only 
question is as to the best time for operating. The futility of all 
modes of medical or incomplete surgical treatment has long been 



OVARIOTOMY DURING PREGNANCY. 123 

admitted ; complete removal alone gives certain recovery. When 
twenty or thirty, or even forty per cent, of the cases operated 
upon died, there was some justification for the postponement of 
the operation till such time as the patient's health and comfort 
were being interfered with. But with such mortality as the 
operation now gives in the best hands, this position is scarcely 
tenable; in fact, it has been quietly given up. The rule is now to 
operate early — as soon, in fact, as the existence of the tumour has 
been proved. The arguments in favour of early operation need 
not here be dilated upon.* Suffice it to say that, as there is but 
one escape from the disease, by removal ; and as delay involves 
the risks of changes and accidents in the tumour, of secondary 
disease in other organs, and of general impairment of health, 
it is right that the operation should be performed as early as 
possible. 

The question of ovariotomy during pregnancy can scarcely 
be answered in general terms. A good many successful ovari- 
otomies performed during pregnancy have been recorded ; and 
many examples of healthy gestation, followed by normal partu- 
rition, going on side by side v/ith the growth of an ovarian 
tumour, could be quoted. W. W. Potterf of Buffalo has per- 
formed a double ovariotomy for cystic disease — the two tumours 
weighing thirty-eight pounds — during the fourth month of preg- 
nancy, and the patient went to full term and was normally 
delivered of a healthy child. Ovarian cystoma no doubt pre- 
disposes to abortion, and other dangers of the pregnant state ; 
and pregnancy renders more likely the ordinary accidents to 
which cystoma is liable. Each case must be judged on its 
merits. The points specially to be attended to are : the rapidity 
of the growth of the tumour, the period of gestation, and the 
condition of the patient. A tumour of rapid growth, discovered 
in the early stages of pregnancy, might be removed, when 
another of slow growth, large, and possibly difficult of removal, 
might be tapped, particularly if the expected time of delivery 

* See Dr. Bsintock's Plea for Early Ovariototny. London, 1881. 
t Amer. Journ. Obstet., Oct., 1888. 



124 OVARIOTOMY. 

was close at hand. Beyond these general statements, it would 
be unwise to dogmatise. 

THE OPERATION OF OVARIOTOMY. 

Preliminary. — The patient will have been prepared according 
to the general directions already given. Her bowels will have 
been opened by aperient, and she will have passed water 
immediately before the hour fixed for operation. She is placed 
on the operating table, dressed in a flannel jacket, and her 
limbs are covered by warm blankets or surrounded in cotton 
wool ; and, if deemed expedient, a layer of cotton wool is laid 
over the chest and abdomen, up to the limits of the opening in 
the macintosh sheet. The sheet is placed in position so that 
the hole leaves exposed the site of operation, and elsewhere 
completely covers the patient, and hangs over the edges of the 
operating table. The adhesive material spread round the 
margin of the opening keeps the sheeting closely in contact 
with the skin on the parietes. The exposed skin and the mac- 
intosh around are once more cleansed with carbolic lotion, and 
a sponge-cloth wrung out of 1-40 carbolic lotion is laid over the 
macintosh covering the thighs, which will have been confined 
by a broad bandage. The spray is placed opposite the 
patient's left shoulder, at a distance of six feet or more from 
the wound. This position is selected so that the patient 
shall not respire a carbolised atmosphere. A receiver, to 
collect the fluid, is placed at the side of the table next to the 
operator. 

Assistance. — Besides the anaesthetist, one assistant is all that 
is necessary. His special duties will be, to sponge, to manipulate 
forceps during the application of ligatures, and to help during 
the deligation of the pedicle and the suturing of the abdominal 
wound ; besides these, he will be frequently called upon to 
discharge other minor functions, too numerous to be mentioned. 
A nurse will be wanted, to cleanse and hand sponges, and to 
see to the provision of hot water, lotions, and such minor 



INSTRUMENTS. 



125 



necessities. The operator helps himself to instruments, 
which are placed in trays upon a table placed conveniently 
within the reach of his right hand. The assistant stands 
on the left side of the patient, facing the operator. (See 
Fig 5-) 

Instnmients. — The following instruments are recommended 
for the performance of ovariotomy : 



Tait's haemostatic pressure forceps 

Thornton's T-shaped pressure forceps 

Wells's large cyst forceps — angular and straight 

Wells's medium cyst forceps 

Nelaton's cyst forceps 

Knife 

Scissors 

Pedicle needles, in handles, blunt 

Cyst trocar, with tubing, Tait's large (Fig. 20) 
,, ,, Spencer Wells's, with Fitch's dome 

(Fig. 21) 

Suture instrument 

Reel-stand with silk ligatures 



12 
2 
4 

4 
2 
I 
I 
2 
I 

I 
I 
I 



With these instruments most ovariotomies may be satis- 
factorily performed. In routine operating, they are laid out in 
three trays containing enough carbolic lotion to cover them. 
One tray contains the small haemostatic forceps, fourteen in 
number; another, of larger size, contains the large and medium 
cyst forceps, ten in number ; while the third contains the knife, 
scissors, pedicle needle, and suture instrument. The trocars, 
with tubing attached, are kept apart, in a large basin. The 
ligature silk, of assorted sizes of finest Chinese twist, is kept on 
reels in carbolic lotion — the reel-stand already described (Fig. 4) 
is very convenient for this purpose — and ligatures cut off as 
they are wanted. 

These, or similar instruments, are absolutely essential ; but 
few surgeons would care to begin operation without several other 



126 OVARIOTOMY. 

instruments being at hand, in case they were wanted. Among 
these might be mentioned : 

Koeberle's clamp, with pedicle skewers. 

Cautery irons. (Paquelin's thermo-cautery requires 

a separate assistant.) 
Six Keith's glass drainage tubes — assorted sizes. 
A second dozen of pressure forceps. 
Two retractors. 
Silk-worm gut sutures. 

Each operator will probably like to have, in reserve, a few 
special instruments to which he has become accustomed : the 
writer, for instance, never likes to be without his crushing 
scissors. A Lister's sinus forceps, with points a little sharper 
than ordinary, is an excellent substitute for the needle which 
carries the ligature through the pedicle : the point is pushed 
through, the blades are separated, and they catch the ligature 
thread and draw it backwards through the opening made. 
Many surgeons use a director and a dissecting forceps. Special 
instruments for crushing the pedicle before tying it ; an ex- 
hausting air-pump, attached to the trocar ; peculiar needles for 
suturing the abdominal wound, and many other appliances, are 
in vogue ; but the above may be taken fairly to represent the 
instrumental aids necessary to a skilful performance of the 
operation. 

Some of the instruments require special description. Tait's 
pressure forceps (Fig. 6) — a modification of Koeberle's — is 
superior to Wells's instrument in being more pointed, thus 
permitting the ligature to slip over it in tying adhesions, 
and in being more powerful in grasp. In other respects, the 
instruments are practically identical. Thornton's T-shaped 
forceps is a most useful addition to our haemostatic agents. 
It is scissors-handled like the other catch forceps, with a 
rack catch, but differs in having the compressing blades set 
at right angles to the handle. For holding broad adhesions, 
or compressing a piece of omentum which has to be secured 
with multiple ligature, or closing a small rent in a cyst. 



INSTRUMENTS. 



127 



Thornton's instrument is simply invaluable. I have found a 
very large forceps on the same principle most useful for like 
purposes. For firmly grasping and holding the tumour itself, 
the cyst forceps of Nelaton (Fig i8) and of Spencer Wells leave 
nothing to be desired. Nelaton's forceps, with its round, 
serrated, and spiked biting surfaces, maintains a grasp on the 
cyst-wall which is as powerful as the area it grasps can make it. 
Wells's large cyst forceps, on the same principle as his small pres- 
sure forceps, is perhaps less likely to cause tearing, and holds 

nearly as firmly as Nelaton's. 
It is made with straight and 
with bent blades. (Figs. 7, 8, 10.) 
A size of Wells's forceps midway 
between the smallest and the lar- 
gest will be found very handy. 
Wells's clamp forceps (Fig. ig) 
may occasionally be found useful 
for closing rents in the cyst, or 
for compressing large bleeding 
areas. The only advantage which 
they pos- 
sess over 
large 
sure 




pres- 
for- 



FiG. 18. 
Nelaton's Cyst Forceps, Half size. 



ceps is that 
they oc- 
cupy less 
room. 

For evac- 
uating the 
fluid, we 
have a 
choice of 
many tro- 
cars. It is 
wise to 
have two 




Fig. 19. 

Wells's Clamp Forceps. 
One-third size. 



128 



OVARIOTOMY. 



instruments in readiness — one of 
large size, and another not very large. 
The two I should select are Tait's 
large instrument (Fig. 20), with conical but not cutting 
point, and Wells's (or Fitch's) small instrument (Fig. 
21), which is essentially a double tube, the outer one of 
which is the trocar — sharp and pointed, and the inner 
one is the cannula — blunt and extrusible. For a large 
thick-walled cyst, Tait's trocar is best. Wells's small 
puncturing trocar is suitable for small and multilocular 
cysts, and for those which have thin walls. Some 
amount of fluid usually escapes by the side of it ; but 
this may either be collected by a sponge, or its flow may 
be checked by the pressure of a large cyst forceps. 

Wells's large trocar (Fig. 22) is used by many sur- 
geons. It consists of an outer tube or trocar proper, 
cut obliquely and sharp at the point, for 
piercing, and an inner tube or cannula, blunt 
■p and cut square, which is pushed be- 

yond the trocar by an attached 
Tait's Cyst Trocar. , , . "^ , 

One-third size. thumb-piece as soon as the cyst- 
wall is pierced. To the sides of the 
trocar are attached two spring hooks or clasps, with 
sharp teeth which fit into pits on the trocar; these 
are intended to grasp the cyst-wall and pull it for- 
ward as the cyst empties. Volsella are usually 
required to pull the wall of the cyst under the hooks 
on the trocar. To the trocar is fitted a piece of 
india-rubber tubing of a calibre as large as that of 
the instrument, and long enough to reach the bottom 
of the vessel which is intended to receive the ovarian 
fluid. A dozen sponges are pre- 
pared ready for use. They are 
selected as follows : one large 
flat sponge; four moderately Fig. 21. 

flat sponges, about six inches ^y^j^^,^ ^mall Cyst Trocar, with Fitch's 
long and from three to five Dotn,^. Half size. 



THE ABDOMINAL INCISION. 



129 



inches broad ; and seven round sponges, of various sizes. They 
are kept in warm 1-40 carbolic lotion, and wrung out of this fluid 
by the nurse or assistant when required. As they are soiled they 
are handed to the nurse, who cleanses them thoroughly in warm 
water, and then places them in 
the warm carbolic lotion. A con- 
tinuous supply of clean sponges 
is thus provided. 

For use in ovariotomy, and indeed in all 
other surgical operations, I become daily more 
impressed with the value of sponge-cloths for 
many purposes for which sponges are used. 
They are thick, very soft, have great absorbing 
powers, and are very easily cleansed. Most 
important of all, they are improved by being 
boiled, whereas boiling destroys sponges. Laid 
over the abdominal wound under a bleeding 
tumour ; coiled around a piece of intestine 
while it is being sutured ; folded over omentum 
which has been stripped off a tumour, and in 
many similar ways, sponge-cloths will be found 
very useful. 

The Abdominal Incision. — The incision is made 
in the middle line between the umbilicus and 
the pubes. The structures divided are : the 
skin, the subcutaneous fatty layers, the linea 
alba, the layers of the fascia transversalis with 
the subperitoneal fat, and the peritoneum. The 
skin in this region does not usually present 
features of special practical interest. It may be firm and 
resilient, and intimately adherent to the subcutaneous fat ; 
or it may be flaccid and soft, and readily movable over the 
underlying tissues. In the former case it is easily divided in a 
straight line by the knife held in the first position ; in the latter 
case, it may run before the knife, and will be most satisfactorily 
divided by pinching it up and transfixing it, as in herniotomy. 

10 




Fig. 22. 

Wells's Large Cyst 

Trocar. 

One-third size. 



130 OVARIOTOMY. 

The thickness of the subcutaneous fatty layer varies very con- 
siderably. In cases where there is much emaciation, it may be 
practically absent — the first incision exposes the fibrous aponeu- 
roses ; in very stout individuals, the subcutaneous fat may be 
several inches in thickness. The thickness of this layer may 
be increased by oedema. In most cases the subcutaneous 
areolar tissue is divisible into two layers. The outer layer is 
pre -eminently fatty ; the inner, mainly fibrous. Only in young 
subjects, however, is this distinction well marked. The vessels 
ramify chiefly in the outer fatty layer ; usually they are quite 
small, but sometimes a moderately large branch is divided. 
The veins are occasionally large and tortuous, and sometimes 
bleed so freely after division as to require forcipressure or even 
deligation. 

The linea alba is a structure of fairly constant composition 
and thickness. In muscular individuals with small tumours, 
the recti lie quite close to each other, and the linea alba is then 
little more than a fibrous partition ; in thin subjects whose 
abdominal walls are distended, the linea alba may be stretched 
so that the recti are separated by half an inch or even more. 
In the latter instance, it is easy enough to divide the linea alba 
without opening the sheath of the rectus ; in the former, this 
is a matter of some difficulty, and in practice one or both 
sheaths are frequently opened. Indeed, in some cases the 
linea alba is so narrow that division of it accurately in the 
middle line must result in exposure of both muscles. It must 
be remembered that the posterior wall of the sheath of the 
rectus stops short at the falciform edge, and that the aponeu- 
roses of the muscles below this — in the lowest fourth, that is 
to say — all pass in front of the recti. If the sheath is opened 
above this point, an additional layer of fascia, the posterior 
wall of the sheath, has to be divided before the subperitoneal 
fat is reached ; below this point there is no additional layer, or 
only a thin fascia. As a matter of fact, the cavity is usually 
entered below the falciform edge; and if the opening is too 
small, it is extended upwards with scissors, when no account is 
taken of anatomical layers. 



THE ABDOMINAL INCISION. 131 

If the incision has to be carried above the umbilicus, it is 
wise to deviate a httle way to the left, and not to pass through 
it. This is done partly to avoid the round ligament of the liver, 
which passes from the umbilicus obliquely upwards and to the 
right, and may contain an unobliterated umbilical vein, but 
chiefly because the tissues in the umbilical area are thin and 
liable to be cut through by the sutures if there is straining from 
sickness. Such an accident happened to me in a case of 
hysterectom3^ and a large coil of intestine escaped. Fortunately 
the accident was soon discovered and no harm was done. The 
urachus, normally transformed into the vesico-umbilical liga- 
ment, may also be found pervious. Sometimes small openings 
exist in the linea alba, through which masses of fat protrude 
(hernise adiposse). 

The areolar tissue between the fascia transversalis and the 
peritoneum is very loose and elastic, and contains a varying 
amount of fat in its meshes. Its fibres can easily be teased 
apart, so as to expose the underlying peritoneum ; and if it con- 
tains little fat, or if the peritoneum is adherent to an abdominal 
tumour, it may be mistaken for the tumour wall, and be sepa- 
rated from the parietes for some distance before the mistake is 
discovered. It may usually be separated into two or more 
layers. 

The peritoneum varies in thickness according to idiosj-ncrasy, 
or as it is thickened by inflammation or thinned by distension. 
When there is much inflammation, the peritoneum may be a 
thick highly vascular tissue, which bleeds freely on division ; 
when the acuteness of the inflammatory process has subsided, it 
may be united more or less firmly, by organised bands of fibrous 
tissue, to the underlying tumour; and in this case also its vascu- 
larity will be increased. Generally speaking, an undue amount 
of bleeding during division of the parietes may be taken as indi- 
cating adhesion of peritoneum to intra-abdominal structures. 

The first incision need not be longer than two or three 
inches, according to the thickness of the abdominal walls. The 
lower extremity of the wound is at a distance of two inches from 
the pubes. Lower than this it is not advisable to go, on account 

10 * 






132 OVARIOTOMY. 

of the proximity of the bladder ; if the opening is found to be 
too small, it is enlarged upwards. The amount of subcutaneous 
fat is estimated by touch, and the first incision divides skin and 
more or less of the fatty layer. One or two rapid cuts along 
the whole length of the wound complete the division of this layer, 
and expose the linea alba. Bleeding points are caught up in 
pressure forceps. A glance at the fibrous aponeurosis may, by 
showing a symmetrical arrangement of its fibres, indicate exactly 
the middle line. One or two dexterous movements of the scalpel 
divide the aponeurosis in the middle of the wound. If the 
muscle is exposed, a little movement of the divided fibres over 
it will show on which side of. the linea alba the opening has been 
made, and the rest of the division is completed, upwards and 
downwards, close to the middle line. This exposure of muscular 
fibre is of little practical moment. Indeed, some operators prefer 
always to expose muscle, and more than one skilled operator 
recommends that the opening be made through the muscular 
fibres. The reason given is, that a firmer and broader cicatrix 
is got from union of muscle than from union of fibrous tissues. 
Whether this be true or not, which is more than doubtful, it is 
certain that perfectly good union is obtained when exposed 
muscular surfaces are brought into apposition. The division is 
made by the knife alone, or by scissors ; no director is required. 
The loose transversalis fascia is now exposed. If it contains 
a considerable amount of fat, this is pushed aside, and the 
peritoneum exposed by teasing. The deeper fibres of this 
fascia are usually divisible into several layers. These may be 
divided in various ways — by director and knife, by director and 
scissors, by scissors alone, or by forceps and knife. As a general 
rule, I think the last is the best plan. Where it seems to be 
feasible, the best plan of all is to pinch up fascia and peritoneum 
between the forefinger and thumb ; roll it from side to side to 
make certain that no bowel is included, and open the peri- 
toneum by a minute incision, through which the blade of the 
scissors may be inserted to complete the division. The most 
generally applicable proceeding is, to catch up a small portion 
of fascia between pressure forceps and divide it between them. 



EMPTYING THE CYST. 133 

pulling the peritoneum outwards ; if this does not effect an 
entrance, another little piece is caught between two pairs of 
forceps, pulled outwards and divided till the cavity is entered. 
The peritoneum is thus divided towards the outside, and all 
risk of wounding intra-abdominal structures is avoided. The 
completion of the opening is made by scissors, protected by the 
finger inside the abdomen. The forceps may, if so desired, be 
left lying on the abdominal wall attached to the edges of the 
peritoneum, keeping it everted, and preventing it from being 
stripped in the subsequent manipulations. For picking up the 
peritoneum, Spencer Wells recommends the use of Adams's 
double sharp hook. Before opening the peritoneum, all bleeding 
must be checked by forcipressure ; and, after dividing the peri- 
toneum, before proceeding further, its edges should be inspected 
to see that no haemorrhage is going on. 

The incision should be long enough to admit of the extraction 
of the collapsed and empty cyst without using force ; that is to 
say, it will range between one and a half or two inches to eight 
or ten. The size of the tumours and the efficient treatment of 
adhesions alone should regulate the length of incision. While 
the chances of ventral hernia are diminished by a short incision, 
the actual difficulties of the operation should never be increased 
by working through a cramped opening. The rule to make the 
first incision long enough to admit the hand should be abolished : 
the length of the incision is to be regulated by principles more 
weighty than mere exploration, which is usually both meddle- 
some and unnecessary. 

Emptying and Removing the Cyst. Separation of Adhesions. — 
Some idea of the nature of the exposed tumour will have been 
rapidly formed by sight and touch. The characteristic appear- 
ances, already described, of a cystoma and of a dermoid growth ; 
the density, toughness, or friability of the cyst-wall; the nature 
of the contents as to fluidity or viscidity ; the multiplicity of 
secondary cysts ; and the presence or absence of adhesions or 
inflammation, will all be noted. A skilled surgeon will instan- 
taneously decide as to the best practical means of dealing with 



134 OVARIOTOMY. 

each and all of such peculiarities in the growth to be removed ; 
here it is possible to give only general directions. 

Whatever be the condition, it is always best to begin by 
emptying the cyst. To explore with the finger is, in the great 
majority of cases, to satisfy curiosity rather than to help in the 
treatment. And to begin by separating adhesions, is a double 
mistake. By so doing, not only do we run the risk of rupturing 
the cyst-wall and letting the contents of the full cyst escape 
into the peritoneum, but we also deal with the adhesions at the 
most inopportune period, when there is little room for manipula- 
tion, and a likelihood of leaving bleeding points unsecured 
because they may not be seen. 

The best mode of emptying the cyst is, in the large majority 
of cases, by tapping. When the growth is divided into a great 
number of cysts, or if the cyst-contents be very viscid, incision 
may be the best plan. 

For a cyst of small size, the best tapping instrument is 
Wells's small cyst trocar (Fig. 21) ; for a large cyst, Tait's 
instrument, with blunt conical point, may be used. (Fig. 20.) 
Keith uses a very large exhausting aspirator, and this is probably 
the best plan of all. To prevent the escape of fluid by the side 
of the trocar, a sponge is all that is requisite. To keep the 
bowels from extruding the best plan is, not to push the abdominal 
walls backward on the cyst, but to pull the cyst forwards on the 
edges of the opening. As the cyst becomes flaccid, Wells's 
large forceps are made to grasp the cyst-wall and pull it steadily 
but gently out of the wound. A flat sponge placed between the 
cyst and the parietes, may be useful in preventing the escape 
of fluid into the abdominal cavity. Secondary cysts may be 
emptied without removing the cannula from the main cyst : but, 
whilst this is being done, the fingers, inside the abdomen, should 
make certain that the trocar is not pushed through the main 
cyst-wall. As the cyst becomes flaccid the trocar opening is 
pulled over the edge of the wound ; and as soon as it is clear of 
the abdominal opening, a fold of the cyst-wall, above and 
below, is caught in strong forceps, the trocar is removed, and 
the wall freely incised between the forceps, permitting the cyst 



SEPARATION OF ADHESIONS. 135 

contents to run over the macintosh into the receptacle below. 
Secondary cysts are broken down by two fingers inserted into 
the incision in the large cyst, or, if necessary, by the whole hand. 
Should bleeding be free during the breaking down of the septa, 
the incision must be prolonged, to permit of the whole tumour 
being delivered so that its pedicle may be compressed. If 
adhesions do not prevent it, the whole cyst is delivered as soon 
as it is sufficiently diminished in bulk ; if adhesions do exist, 
they are divided as they come into view, in a manner to be 
presently described. 

When it is deemed advisable to evacuate the cyst contents 
by incision (a few surgeons always adopt this method), two 
large Wells's forceps are attached to the cyst-wall, opposite the 
ends of the wound, and an incision made between them, while 
they are forcibly pulled upwards, so as to keep the cyst-wall in 
contact with the parietes. Interposed flat sponges gather up 
any escaping fluid. The cyst-wall is sometimes so tense that it 
is not easy to get a grip by the forceps ; in this case, as much 
as possible is first pinched up by small forceps, and the large 
forceps are placed below the fold thus made. Dermoid cysts 
are in most cases best emptied by incision. 

If, after emptying the cyst as completely as possible, adhe- 
sions prevent its being delivered, a large T-shaped forceps is 
placed on the opening, so as to close it, ane the important steps 
of separating the adhesions are begun. For separating very 
soft, fine, and recent adhesions, nothing is better than a sponge. 
The adherent organ is, so to speak, sponged away from the 
tumour, and the sponge is left overlying the adhesions it has 
pushed aside, so as to absorb any blood that may ooze from the 
divided minute vessels. Adhesions of firmer consistency are 
dealt with in various manners. If comparatively recent, they 
may be carefully peeled off the tumour with the fingers, while 
forceps are applied as often as necessary and left attached. If 
the adhesions are old, fibrous, and thick, they are surrounded 
by ligatures and divided. Speaking generally, soft adhesions 
which may be sponged off are usually found on the parietes or 
the liver ; adhesions which may be peeled off by the fingers are 



136 OVARIOTOMY. 

most frequently omental ; and division between forceps is in 
most cases required when bowel is attached to the tumour. 
Attachments to uterus and bladder, if they exist at all, are 
usually intimate and dense, and their separation requires care 
and judgmeut. 

Wherever it is possible, forceps are brought out through the 
wound and left there while the soft tissues are placed between 
the folds of a flat sponge or thick sponge-cloths. And, generally, 
as the separation proceeds, sponges are placed in every gap 
made between the tumour and the detached organ. When the 
whole tumour is delivered, a large sponge is placed over the 
bowels, to protect them and to prevent their escaping. 

During the separation of adhesions the wails of any of the 
hollow viscera may be torn. Such lacerations must, of course, 
be immediately closed by suitable sutures. If at any point the 
connection to bowel or bladder is so intimate that complete 
separation seems fraught with danger to the integrity of the 
organ, then the adherent portion of cyst-wall must be cut off 
and left behind. In removing a very large suppurating, putrid, 
and universally adherent Fallopian cyst, I had to leave behind 
a considerable portion of the thick cyst-wall in a matted mass 
of inflammation sessile on the left iliac vessels and the sigmoid 
flexure. After drainage and daily syringing for more than a month 
this came away through the drainage opening as a slough which 
filled a three-ounce bottle. "A fsecal fistula resulted, which 
spontaneously healed. Considerable portions of uninflamed and 
healthy cyst-wall may be left behind without incurring risk. 

For the management of many abnormal conditions which 
are constantly arising in bad cases, definite instructions can 
scarcely be given. Such instructions would be as endless as the 
complications ; they could never be exhaustive. If broad guiding 
principles are fully mastered, and the surgeon has a fair know- 
ledge of the general surgery of the abdomen, he may safely be left 
to manage the ordinary complications met with in ovariotomy. 

Treatment of the Pedicle. — The pedicle has been subjected to 
almost every conceivable surgical treatment. " It has been tied 



TREATMENT OF THE PEDICLE. 137 

entire, tied in sections, been twisted off, burnt off, crushed off, 
cut square off, cut off in flaps, left inside, left outside, and been 
made to slough off." * 

It has always seemed to me that this qncEstio vexata of 
ovariotomy has been unduly magnified in importance. To a 
surgeon accustomed to deal with amputated limbs the pedicle 
is, comparatively, a small matter. A few small vessels to 
supply a pound or two of not very vascular tissue, with slight 
fluid-pressure and little foreign material around them, ought not 
to alarm us. We rarely have a vessel larger than the radial to 
deal with, and very rarely one that will spout a stream to a 
distance of six inches. The cases are few indeed where the 
whole of the vessels may not easily be compressed between the 
fingers. True, the very facts that the blood-pressure in the 
vessels of the pedicle is low, and that the vascular walls are 
thin, are against their capacity for self-occlusion by the ordinary 
* Sutton, Trans. Amev. Gyn. Soc, 1883, vol. vii., p. 119. 

From this source is derived the following instructive historical summary of 
the treatment of the pedicle in ovariotomy : 

1809. McDowell tied with single ligature, and left ends outside. 

1820. Chrysmar of Wttrtemberg tied in two portions, leaving ends out. 

1 82 1. Nathan Smith tied arteries separately with strips cut from kid glove, 

cut ligatures short, and dropped in pedicle. 
1837. Stilling of Cassel used cautery, and suggested stitching pedicle in 

wound. 
1846. Handyside of Edinburgh carried ligatures through Douglas's pouch 

into vagina. 

1848. Stilling treated pedicle outside peritoneal cavity. 
1850. Duffin, London, began Stilling's plan in England. 

1849. Maissonneuve of Paris twisted the entire pedicle. 

1850. Atlee used the ecraseur, and many followed him. 
1850. Hutchinson invented clamp. 

i860. Sir James Simpson, acupressure inside abdominal wall. 

1865. Koeberle invented his serre-nceud, or wire-constrictor, with which 

he grooved the pedicle prior to ligation. 
1864. Baker Brown used Stilling's cautery. 
1868. Masslovsky, double flaps, and stitched them. 
i86g. McLeod of Glasgow, torsion between two pairs of strong forceps. 
1870. Emmet, 18 cases treated with silver wire. 

Billroth catches pedicle between two forceps, ligatures, and divides 
with thermo-cautery. 

Nussbaum ties pedicle in sections with catgut and drops in. 



138 



OVARIOTOMY. 



pathological process after deligation. If haemostasis is easy, 
it must be thorough and all-embracing. But it need not be 
overdone. 

At present we are practically left to choose between two 
methods of securing the pedicle, both almost perfect — the 
ligature, complete and intra-peritoneal ; and the clamp and 
cautery. It is almost certain that extra-peritoneal treatment 
by the clamp is now permanentl)^ 
abolished, and I shall not describe it. 
With scarcely an exception, there is 
no sort of pedicle which can be clamped 
that may not be tied ; and almost any 
form of deligation is as good as any 
method of clamping. 

In the hands of Keith, the method 
of cautery and clamp has reached per- 
fection as nearly as any surgical pro- 
cedure can. The minute accuracy of 
his manipulation, leaving a thin, grey, 
translucent band of anaemic but still 
living tissue, few surgeons can hope to 
equal, and certainly none to excel; and, 
in the face of the undoubted safety of 
the more easy and rapid ligation, I 
doubt if many surgeons will seek to 
imitate him. 

The clamp which Keith uses is 
essentially that introduced by Baker 
Brown in 1864. (Fig. 23.) Two flat 
steel bars, each provided with a 

powerful handle, are joined at their distal ends by a strong 
hinge ; on their under surface are two thick ivory plates, 
which extend a little way beyond the metal and act as non- 
conductors. On the left blade is fitted an upright guard, 
against which the cautery may be pressed, so as to prevent 
slipping. The cautery irons are very large, so that they retain 




Fig. 23. 

Keith's Cautery Clamp. 
One-third size. 



CAUTERY AND CLAMP. 



139 




their heat for a long time, and they are variously shaped 
(Figs. 24 & 25) to suit the nature of the work. A hatchet-shaped 
cautery may be used for cutting through the pedicle, pressing 
it into the angle formed between the guard and the clamp. 
Disc-shaped cauteries are used for smooth- 
ing down and finally coagulating the seared 
edge. The cauteries, of which there should 
be two or three at hand and ready for use, 
are heated in an ordinary coal fire. 

In using the cautery-clamp, the ped- 
icle is laid out at a convenient distance 
from the tumour between the blades. 
The tissues in the pedicle are left un- 
disturbed as far as possible ; compression 
is put upon them in the position which 
they naturally assume, and there is thus 
no tendency for the pedicle to untwist. 
The blades are tightened up by the screw 
as firmly as possible. Then the tumour 
is cut off" with scissors about half an inch 
from the clamp. Before applying the 
cautery to the pedicle, wet cloths are laid 
around the clamp under the ivory, so as 
to prevent over -heating of the neigh- 
bouring tissues. 

The cauteries used must be as hot as 
possible. They are rubbed up and down 
the blades of the clamp against the up- 
right guard, till the line of compressed 
pedicle lying between the steel blades is 
perfectly smooth and level. No black 
charred tissue is left behind to slough ; 
when efficiently dealt with, the stump 
terminates in a thin grey margin of dry 
semi-translucent tissue, not unlike cartilage in appearance and 
consistence. The clamp is removed with circumspection, catch 
forceps being placed at each side of the pedicle, to prevent its 



Fig. 24. Fig. 25. 

Cautery Irons for Searing the 
Pedicle. One-third size. 




I-IO OVARIOTOMY. 

slipping into the abdomen. Sometimes a seared vessel sticks to 
the blades of the clamp, and may be torn through if the blades 
are roughly removed. 

The silk ligatiive is now almost universally used for securing 
the pedicle. There is no objection to catgut, beyond the extra 
trouble necessary in preparing it ; I have used it successfully in 
more than twenty cases, but have now given it up for silk. 
And, as far as written records may be trusted, no special virtue 
resides in any form of silk, provided it be strong and pure. 
Chinese twist, of thickness varying according to the size and 
vascularity of the pedicle, is most generally used. It is first 

scalded in boiling water, and then 
soaked in antiseptic lotion. There 
are many methods of tying the liga- 
ture ; no method, in my opinion, is 
superior to Lawson Tait's Stafford- 

FiG. 26. ^^^^^ ^"°^- (^^^- ^^-^ 

" An ordinary handled needle, armed 
Tait's Staffordshire Knot. ^^it^ a long piece of the silk required, 
is passed through the pedicle and then 
withdrawn, so as to leave a loop on the distal side. This loop 
is then drawn over the ovary or tumour, and one of the free ends 
drawn through it, so that one end is above, while the other is 
under, the retracted loop. Both ends being seized in the hand, 
they are drawn through the pedicle, against which the thumb 
and forefinger of the left hand are pressed, as a fulcrum, till 
complete constriction is made. A simple hitch is then made, 
as in the drawing, and tightened ; and that is followed by 
another, as in ordinary ligature-tying. There is another and 
more complicated way of making the knot, by passing each end 
of the thread round the corresponding half of the pedicle, and 
crossing them within the loop in front, which is equally effective, 
and which may be used in cases of large solid tumours. But 
the former is by far the more elegant and rapid method." 

The advantages which Tait justly claims for his knot are, 
that " while it ties the pedicle in two halves, these halves are 



LIGATING THE PEDICLE. 



141 




Fig. 27. 

Triple Interlocking Ligature, 
threads inserted. 



The 



compressed really into one surface ; the two halves are equally- 
well compressed ; and from the mechanical arrangement of the 
knot, very great constricting force can be employed." 

The Staffordshire knot is, as 
every ligature applied to the 
pedicle should be, an interlock- 
ing one. Ligatures should never 
be applied to the pedicle in sec- 
tions so as to split it. Such 
splitting extends downwards 
some way below the site of deli- 
gation, and may pass through a 
thin - walled vessel which may 
bleed very freely. In some 
cases of thick or broad ped- 
icle, double deligation by the 
Staffordshire knot may not seem 
sufficient ; then ligation in three 
or four portions may be ad- 
visable. In such a case the 
threads must be interlocked so 
that the pedicle, while it is tied 
in sections, is still compressed 
as a whole towards its centre, 
and splitting is thus rendered 
impossible. The accompanying 
diagrams (Figs. 27, 28, 29) show 
how this may easily and rapidly 
be done, when we desire to make 
deligation in three portions. A 
piece of silk long enough to 
form three ligatures is threaded 
in the blunt pedicle needle. The 
needle is passed, at about a distance of one-third of the 
breadth of the pedicle from one of its margins, through an 
area in which there are no vessels, or from which the vessels 
have been pushed aside ; the silk is caught in a loop over 




Triple Interlocking Ligature. The 

threads interlocked ready 

for tying. 




Fig. 29. 

Triple Interlocking Ligature Tied. 



142 OVARIOTOMY. 

a finger of the left hand, and the needle withdrawn still 
threaded. It is re-inserted midway between the point of inser- 
tion and the other margin, the loop is caught up on another 
finger, the needle is withdrawn unthreaded and laid aside. The 
pedicle is now transfixed by a continuous ligature, which has 
two loops showing on one side, and one loop and two free ends 
on the other side. (Fig. 27.) The two free ends are now passed 
under- the loop lying on their own side. (Fig. 28.) The two 
loops on the other side, still held on the fingers, are now divided 
by scissors, and the ends of the middle ligatures surrounding 
the middle of the pedicle, and including the ligatures which 
surround the two sides of the pedicle, are tied as tightly as 
possible. The lateral ligatures are then tied one after the other. 
Thus a complete interlocking ligature holds the pedicle. (Fig. 
29.) The same process may be carried out with four or five, 
or indeed any number of ligatures. 

It is always wise to use a blunt needle for transfixing the 
pedicle, as there is often some risk of wounding vessels. I use 
an aneurism needle for this purpose. A finely-pointed forceps, 
like a Lister's sinus forceps, is an excellent instrument for this 
purpose ; the thread is caught between the blades and pulled 
backwards through the opening. If the pedicle is very bulky, 
it may be advisable to squeeze it in a temporary clamp, or 
between the blades of powerful compressing forceps at the site 
of deligation, before tying the thread. Bantock in particular 
uses this method, employing two powerful Wells's forceps, bent 
at an angle, for the purpose. The needle transfixes the ped- 
icle near the tips of the blades, and the ligatures are tightened 
while the forceps are being removed. Such compression drives 
the fluid out of the tissues at the point where the ligature lies, and 
prevents their slipping away from under the encircling thread. 
In thick oedematous pedicles this plan is valuable, and should 
be always adopted ; for ordinary pedicles, experience has abun- 
dantly shown that it is at least not essential. It is possible to 
overdo crushing of the pedicle ; there is undoubtedly some 
theoretical force in the reasoning of Thornton and Doran, that 
over- compression is likely to lead to sloughing. But, as a 



CLEANSING THE CAVITY. 143 

matter of fact, it would appear that no positive harm arises 
from the almost universal practice of pulling the ligatures as 
tightly as possible. It will always be found that in fleshy or 
cedematous pedicles the ligature may be drawn more tightly 
after the tumour is cut away. While the first hitch is being 
drawn tight the pedicle is cut through about half an inch 
above the ligature by successive snips of the scissors cutting 
from periphery to centre ; the tissues at once become softer, and 
the thread may be drawn in more tightly. But this is rarely 
necessary. With Tait's knot, very ordinary force will be amply 
sufficient to render hasmostasis complete and permanent. 

Experienced operators use other modes of securing the 
pedicle by ligature. But for simplicity and efficiency, no 
methods are superior to those described. 

A single thickness of silk, placed by transfixion as described, 
and secured by a true reef-knot, will suffice for the great 
majority of pedicles. Extra ligatures, to provide against the 
chance of haemorrhage, import a new danger in the risk of 
their not becoming absorbed or encapsuled. The thinnest silk 
compatible with safety, the smallest knot, and the least possible 
handling of the pedicle, is the most perfect surgery. 

The pedicle, secured and divided, is dropped into the cavity 
and, in most cases, need not be again looked at. If there is any 
doubt as to its being properly secured, a catch forceps may be 
attached to the stump, whereby it may be drawn to the surface 
and inspected before finally closing the wound. The sponges, 
however, which are subsequently carried into Douglas's pouch 
will scarcely fail to show if there is bleeding from the pedicle. 
At this stage the alternate ovary should be inspected. If it is 
diseased, it should be removed. 

Cleansing the Peritoneal Cavity. — One of the most important 
steps in the operation is the complete removal of all foreign 
material from the cavity — the "toilet of the peritoneum," as 
it has well been called. Mc Dowell himself partially anti- 
cipated this proceeding ; but to Keith we are indebted for 
fully demonstrating its extreme value. The modes of carr3ing 



144 OVARIOTOMY. 

out this proceeding are the same for all abdominal operations, 
and need not again be fully described. With a suitable 
sponge-holding forceps, sponges are successively carried into 
Douglas's pouch and into the hollows of the loins ; and they 
are re-introduced till they return dry. If glutinous or semi- 
solid foreign matter is present, Tait's excellent plan of washing 
out the abdomen b}^ warm fluid should be adopted. If there is 
no special apparatus, the rubber tubing of the trocar, to act as 
an irrigating tube, and a basin or ewer to hold two or three 
quarts of fluid, will suffice. The wound is kept as close as 
possible with one hand, while the fingers of the other are 
moved about among the intestines, washing and cleansing them 
thoroughly. The process is continued till the fluid returns 
clear. Dry sponges are then placed in the pelvis and in the 
loins, to be removed after the sutures have been inserted, but 
before they have been tied. In many cases the fluid may be 
poured in from a jug. 

It is impossible to insist too strongly on the importance of 
removing all foreign matter from the peritoneal cavity. But 
a judicious balance between efficiency and excess must be 
observed here, as well as everywhere else. Too much sponging 
may irritate the peritoneum ; one may go on for a considerable 
period squeezing out a few drops of fluid from the sponges, 
which contain nothing more than peritoneal secretion thrown 
out from irritation. And if the patient is seriously collapsed 
from a prolonged operation, it may be wise, in balancing possi- 
ble evils, to curtail the cleansing of the peritoneum, and either 
run the subsequent risks or drain. 

Drainage. — The question of drainage is a very difficult one to 
speak about in theory. In practice, a good rule to follow is, 
" When in doubt, drain." If little or no fluid comes away 
through the tube, it may be removed in twenty-four hours, and 
no harm is done. If fluid does come away, we have the satis- 
faction of seeing that a danger has been avoided. Fewer cases 
have died from drainage than from the want of it. 

In cases with deep pelvic adhesions, the bleeding from which 



DRESSING THE WOUND. 145 

it may be impossible to see or effectually to control, drainage 
is specially indicated. Where a raw surface has been left be- 
hind — on bladder, pelvis, or parietes — we may expect subsequent 
sero-sanguinolent oozing, and we drain if we expect the amount 
to be considerable. In any case where putrid fluid had escaped 
into the cavity we should be careful to drain. If, generally, we 
apprehend an excessive secretion of fluid, or if we are in doubt 
as to the peritoneum being thoroughly cleansed, drainage ought 
to be adopted. 

Keith's glass tubes are the best for use after ovariotomy. 
The tube must not be too long or too short. The end of it 
should touch the bottom of Douglas's pouch, without pressing 
upon the rectum ; while the collar rests upon the edges of the 
wound, at its lower extremity. Pressure must not be put on the 
tube by dresser or binder. The end of it is passed through a 
button-hole opening in a sheet of rubber ; over the end is 
placed an absorbent dressing ; and in the tube is placed a 
twisted roll of gauze, to exhaust fluid by capillary action. If 
capillary action and intra-abdominal pressure do not remove the 
fluid from the abdomen, then a suction apparatus, such as Tait's 
(Fig. 14), must be used at frequent intervals. 

Suturing the Wound. Dressing. — Little need be added to the 
general remarks already made on these points. At the lower 
extremity of the wound, the first suture is placed very carefully, 
so as to close completely the opened connective tissue spaces, 
and the peritoneum is here brought together with special 
accuracy. The needle is inserted about two lines from the 
edge of the wound, and carried straight through all the layers in 
the parietes; the peritoneum usually requires adjustment, so 
that it is pierced in a corresponding position. When the sutures 
have been inserted, and the underlying sponge removed, the 
wound is finally sponged free of all blood, while it is pulled 
outwards by the sutures gathered together in the hand. The 
sutures are accurately tied and their ends cut off. 

For dressing, carbolized gauze or boracic lint cut into squares 
and secured by strapping is as good as any. As we expect very 

11 



146 OVARIOTOMY. 

little discharge from the wound, and no subsequent dressing is 
required, the full Listerian dressing with macintosh and gauze 
bandages in unnecessary. The advantages claimed for strapping 
over the whole lower abdomen, fixing its walls as in a splint, 
and preventing passive gaseous distension, need not be re- 
capitulated. I have practically given up the binder, as I believe 
it causes more annoyance, from getting into folds under the 
patient's back, than the little good it does is worth. Putting on 
the binder, as the completion of every form of surgical inter- 
ference with the abdomen, is a time-honoured observance ; it is 
difficult to say how much more it is. 



ACCIDENTS DURING THE OPERATION. 

Mishaps may occur during the most simple ovariotomies ; 
they are especially frequent in difficult cases. It behoves the 
surgeon to be able, promptly and efficiently, to deal with these ; 
for such accidents, unattended to, may involve consequences 
far more serious than the operation itself. 

Vomiting and retching during operation is a disagreeable 
complication. The straining, which is sometimes quite violent, 
tends to force the intestines out of the wound. While the cyst 
is being emptied, merely dragging it forwards, so as to keep 
it in close contact with the abdominal wall, will probably 
suffice to keep back the bowels. As the cyst collapses, its 
place may be taken by large sponges packed around the ab- 
dominal opening. Sometimes it will be necessary to cease 
operating, and temporarily to close the wound by hooking 
the forefinger under the upper extremity of the abdominal 
opening and squeezing the walls together between the thumb 
and fingers. The force of the contracting abdominal muscles 
is sometimes enormous, and requires considerable exertion to 
oppose it. 

Stripping the Parietal Peritoneum is an accident likely to occur 
only with inexperienced operators. In thin subjects the peri- 
toneum may be peculiarly well defined, while it is loosely 
attached to the abdominal wall; and if, in addition to these 



INJURIES TO VISCERA. 147 

peculiarities, it is adherent to the underlying cyst, it may be 
peeled off the parietes to a considerable extent before the error 
is discovered. In such a case it is better to cut the peeled 
flap clean away, than to leave it to run the risk of becoming 
gangrenous. 

Tearing of the Cyst-wall and escape of the cyst-contents into 
the cavity is not a serious accident, unless the contents are 
putrid. A large tear at the site of puncture is best managed by 
grasping the edges of it with forceps and pulling the opening 
out of the wound. A laceration elsewhere is either closed by 
forceps, or, if large, is surrounded by flat sponges. Bleeding 
from such tears is sometimes profuse, and must be treated by 
immediately delivering the tumour and securing its pedicle. 

Injuries to the Hollow Viscera are likely to occur only when 
there are dense, strong adhesions between them and the cyst- 
wall. The walls of any part of the intestine may be torn through ;; 
such a tear must be stitched up before doing anything else^ 
Removal of a considerable portion of mesentery, incurring a risk 
of gangrene of the intestine, raises the question of resection, 
I have had to remove the vermiform appendix, for injuries done 
to it during operation. Rupture of the bladder, if properly treated 
by accurate suturing, is not so dangerous an accident as might 
be supposed. I have wounded the bladder somewhat exten- 
sively on two occasions, once followed by free escape of urine ;: 
in neither case did any harm result. If the gall-bladder is 
ruptured, we may, according to the extent of the injury, either 
remove the whole viscus or establish a fistula ; to stitch up the 
laceration is not always safe. Rupture or division of the ureter 
is a serious accident. The ureter has been included in a ligature 
more than once. Only once (Nussbaum's case) after such injury 
to the ureter has permeability been restored ; if the patient does- 
not die, a fistula remains, which can be cured only after removal 
of the kidney. If the patient is fairly strong and the ovari- 
otomy is not a severe operation, perhaps the best treatment of 
complete division of the ureter is to remove the kidney. If 
suturing the division is out of the question, and it does not seem 
wise to attempt nephrectomy, the next best plan is probably to- 

11 * 



148 OVARIOTOMY. 

bring the end of the ureter out of the wound, and wait for the 
recovery of the patient before taking any further steps. Simon's 
first nephrectomy was performed for a fistula of the ureter made 
during an ovariotomy. 

Injuries to the Solid Viscera — Hver, spleen, or kidney — are not 
common. If bleeding continues after sponge-packing, the raw 
surface must be mopped with iodine or perchloride of iron 
solution. A serious injury to the kidney involves risk of urinary 
extravasation, and the best treatment may be nephrectomy. 

Foreign Bodies — instruments or sponges — may be left in the 
adbominal cavity. The best preventive is the use of a definite 
number of each sort of material, and counting after operation. 
The counting of the instruments would seem to be a simple 
enough proceeding ; yet it is a fact that no one but the operator 
himself can be made to recognise the vital importance of being 
absolutely exact in this duty. Time after time have skilled 
assistants and nurses been found at fault ; and this petty dutj^ 
like every other one, is almost forced upon the operator. It is a 
good plan to make the assistant count the items aloud in the 
hearing of the operator ; and if the surgeon has secretly 
abstracted one or other of the instruments, it will add to the 
security. A foreign body must of course be removed as soon as 
it is certain that it is left behind. 



ENCAPSULED OVARIAN CYSTS. 

Doran has given this name to ovarian cysts which grow 
between the layers of the broad ligament and carry it, along 
with the pelvic peritoneum, upwards into the abdominal cavity. 
The capsule on exposure is of a pale red colour, contrasting with 
the glistening white appearance of the underlying cyst-wall. 

The cyst is tapped and delivered in the ordinary way. 
Should the capsule completely envelop the cyst, and show a 
marked constriction between the uterus and the tumour, the 
whole of it may be removed with the tumour, and the constriction 
treated as an ordinary pedicle. More commonly, however, the 
tumour is not completely encapsuled ; it has burrowed down- 



TREATMENT AFTER OVARIOTOMY. 149 

wards into the pelvic fascia, and the broad ligament and pelvic 
peritoneum may be but slightly disturbed from their connection 
with important organs. Then the tumour must be shelled out 
from the capsule ; and the capsule must, in whole or in part, 
be left behind. Whilst the collapsed cyst is being dragged up- 
wards by the assistant, the operator peels off the capsule by 
sponging and tearing, placing forceps on bleeding points, till the 
true pedicle, which is represented by a few large vessels at the 
bottom of the tumour, is reached. The vessels are tied and the 
tumour is cut away. 

The empty capsule, if it can be drawn together at the base, 
and has no important outlying connections, may be cut com- 
pletely away after deligation. If it lies very deep, or has a 
broad base, or is intimately connected with important structures, 
it may be necessary to leave the whole or a portion of it behind. 
If the cavity left after removing a portion of the sac is small, 
and there is no oozing, the edges may be drawn together by a 
continuous suture and the abdominal cavity closed over it. 
Usually, however, there is some oozing, and then it is wise to 
stitch the edges of the capsule, gathered together by a purse- 
string suture, to the bottom of the parietal wound and insert 
a drainage tube. 



TREATMENT AFTER OVARIOTOMY. 

One of the first lessons that experience teaches in ova- 
riotomy is the futility of all fussy regulations as to feeding, 
medicines, catheterism, posture, and such like. It is wise, 
for the first twenty-four hours, to give nothing but small 
quantities of hot water, or hot toast-water. In the next 
twenty-four hours, a little oatmeal gruel, or Brand's essence 
of meat, or similar preparation, may be given with the 
water. Thereafter, if the case is doing well, the patient may 
have almost what she asks for. Milk as food is to be avoided ; 
sucking ice for thirst usually results in accumulation of fluid in 
the stomach, which is rejected. Thirst is usually considerable 
after these operations : the best way to allay it is to administer 



150 OVARIOTOMY. 

a pint of tepid water by the rectum. Often, after such an enema, 
not only is the thirst reHeved, but the patient breaks into a 
gentle perspiration and falls off into a refreshing sleep. The best 
foods, from the third day to the fifth or sixth, are : arrowroot, 
sago, oatmeal-gruel, ordinary beef-tea, and such like. A cup of 
tea with thin bread and butter is often much appreciated. At 
the end of a week the patient may have ordinary diet. 

All medicines are, if possible, to be avoided, particularly 
opium. Pain I believe to be not so strong an indication for 
opium as restlessness. Sickness and tympanites are predisposed 
to, if not often caused by, opium. One expects, after the first 
dose has been administered, to see the patient wake up in the 
morning with a dry tongue, increased thirst, and some feeling of 
nausea, which during the day do not pass off, but culminate in 
restlessness at night, requiring the administration of a second 
dose. We rarely see a case treated throughout with a perfectly 
flat or retracted abdomen if opium has been administered. When 
the patient tosses about in bed, fidgety and restless, without 
any particular symptoms beyond those incident to a serious 
operation, opium is undoubtedly of great value. Many surgeons 
administer the opium by the rectum, and leave its adminis- 
tration to the discretion of the nurse : I believe that a 
hypodermic injection of morphia, administered by the surgeon 
himself, is a more satisfactory and efficient method. 

Of other medicines, all that need to be kept in readiness are, 
a saline purge — a Seidlitz powder is as good as any — and tur- 
pentine for giving in enemas. Of all the effects of therapeutics, 
none is perhaps more striking than that following the exhibition 
of a saline purge, supplemented, if necessary, by a turpentine 
enema, in abdominal distension, on the third or fourth day after 
ovariotomy. Such distension is usually taken as indicating 
peritonitis, and so, no doubt, it frequently is ; but this is no 
contra-indication — rather the reverse. For moderate degrees of 
flatulence, wearing the rectum-tube is usually quite sufficient ; 
in greater amount, the flatus may be removed by a hot-water 
enema, with or without turpentine; when the abdominal walls be- 
gin to become brawny, these means ought to be supplemented by 



TREATMENT AFTER OVARIOTOMY. 151 

a purge. Opium, except in the special circumstances mentioned 
and in others to be noted, is in such conditions to be avoided. 

The urine need not be drawn off till the patient asks to be 
relieved, and this may not be for twelve hours or even longer. 
The secretion of urine, in these cases, is at first scanty; from 
fifteen to twenty ounces in the first twenty-four hours is about 
the average amount. The full amoimt is not usually secreted 
till five or six days have passed. Catheterism twice on the first 
day, and three times on the second, will usually be all that is 
required ; thereafter the patient will probably be able to pass 
water herself. To ensure absolute cleanliness of the catheter, 
and avoid the risks of vesical catarrh, it is wise to give the 
nurse a new instrument when the one in use has been passed 
six times. 

From the beginning the patient may be permitted to lie in 
whatever position is most comfortable, the nurse moving her. 
If the abdomen is supported by strapping, this change of posi- 
tion involves no risk. I have often seen a patient, wakeful in 
the supine position, drop off to sleep at once when turned on 
the side. Raising the limbs on pillows, elevating the head and 
shoulders, and numerous little attentions of this sort, which an 
intelligent and conscientious nurse will observe, all add to the 
patient's comfort. The advantages of two beds, one for the day 
and one for the night, are self-evident. 

The condition of the wound may be absolutely ignored till 
the seventh or eighth da}^, when, for the first time, the dressings 
are removed and the stitches taken out. Almost without excep- 
tion the wound will be found perfectly healed. Stitch-abscesses 
ought never to occur. They are caused either by filthy sutures, 
or by tying them too tightly. When the stitches have been 
removed, a piece of dry boracic lint or absorbent wool is placed 
on the wound, and the abdomen is strapped up again. It is 
wise not to let the patient get up within the fortnight, however 
much she may desire it. 

Such is the ordinary treatment of a simple, straightforward 
case of ovariotomy ; and the large majority of cases proceed 



152 OVARIOTOMY. 

in this satisfactory manner. In skilled hands, the average case 
goes on, almost as a matter of course, in an uneventful manner; 
only difficult and severe cases are expected to be followed by 
serious illness. We often see cases recorded as severe which 
recover "without a bad symptom." Every genuinely severe 
operation must be followed by grave symptoms ; and it is in the 
saving of such cases after operation, almost as much as by skill 
in the operation itself, that the greatest triumphs in abdominal 
surgery are secured. 

The first danger to be surmounted is shock and collapse. 
This is combated on ordinary principles by hot-water bottles, 
warm blankets, elevating the limbs, stimulating enemas, and, if 
necessary, by hypodermic injections of ether or brandy. In such 
cases feeding by the mouth is out of the question. In every bad 
case rectal feeding and stimulation should be begun almost from 
the moment the operation is concluded. Nutritive enemas with 
brandy, graduated according to necessity, administered every 
few hours for the first forty-eight hours or so, will tide the 
patient over the first stage. Restlessness and jactitation are 
here best treated by full hypodermic injections of morphia. 

All cases of severe operation are of necessity followed by 
more or less peritonitis. The symptoms of peritonitis appear 
from the second to the fourth day, and manifest themselves by 
sickness, vomiting, and tympanitic distension of the abdomen. 
The pulse is small, wiry, and rapid ; the breathing is quick, 
superficial, and entirely costal ; the countenance becomes dusky, 
the lips blue, and the aspect generally that indescribable but 
characteristic one which is familiar to every experienced oper- 
ator. Therapeutic measures must now be prompt and decisive, 
and of vigour corresponing to the gravity of the case. 

In the first place, the administration of all foods, drinks, and 
medicines by the mouth must be stopped. They are simply 
vomited, and perseverance in their exhibition is bootless, and 
only worries the patient. A definite system of feeding by the 
rectum is at once instituted and continued. A good routine 
enema is, an ounce of brandy, a teaspoonful of Valentine's 
fluid meat or Brand's essence or Benger's peptonised jelly, 



TREATMENT AFTER OVARIOTOMY. 153 

and four ounces of peptonised milk;, to be administered every 
five or six hours. Once in the twenty-four hours a pint of 
tepid water is passed into the bowel : much of it is absorbed 
and relieves thirst ; some of it may be returned with flatus and 
the residues of the enemas. For an hour or more at a time 
before the period when an enema is due the rectum-tube is worn, 
and much flatus may pass through it. If morphia is given at 
all, it must be given in full doses and continuously, so as to 
keep the patient semi-narcotised. If the distension is excessive, 
causing dyspnoea, a large turpentine enema, or, perhaps better, 
repeated small turpentine enemas are of conspicuous benefit. 
Though it is not always possible to give it on account of the 
vomiting, it must not be forgotten that the greatest good will 
probably follow a saline purge : liquid and flatus may be passed 
in enormous quantities, to the patient's great relief. 

In the worst cases, passage of the stomach-tube may be 
called for. I have more than once seen the passage of this tube 
in cases of extreme distension followed by a forcible ejection — 
almost an explosion — of fluid and gas that produced instan- 
taneous relief. Once or twice a day the patient may be 
encouraged to drink a large amount of hot water or hot tea, 
with the purpose of causing free vomiting. A free vomit is 
less exhausting than continual retching, and it is highly effectual 
in getting rid of intestinal accumulations. 

When it is evident, after two days of this treatment, that the 
patient is losing ground, that the distension increases and the 
vomiting continues unabated, I believe that we ought to re-open 
the wound and wash out the abdomen with a stream of warm 
antiseptic lotion. Two or three stitches at the bottom of the 
wound are removed, and two fingers are gently insinuated 
amongst the bowels. A celluloid catheter attached to a piece 
of rubber tubing, coming from a cistern elevated a few feet 
above the level of the patient, conveys the fluid into the cavity. 
The fingers move the bowels about, while the stream of fluid 
cleanses the peritoneum. Probably the bowels will be glued 
together at one part or everywhere by soft adhesions : these are 
broken down by the fingers. If a drainage tube has not beea 



154 OVARIOTOMY. 

used, it is now inserted. It is unnecessary to sponge out the 
peritoneum, unless a collection of septic pus is discovered — an 
unlikel}^ accident in these days. I believe that these cases die 
as much from a form of intestinal obstruction induced by the 
adhesions and the distension, as from mere peritonitis. A sepa- 
ration of these adhesions, setting the bowels free and keeping 
them floating in non-irritating boracic lotion or similar fluid, 
gives the patient a chance of life which is by no means a remote 
one. No case ought to be permitted to die without giving it 
this chance of recovery. 

With reference to subsidiary details in treatment, little need 
be said. If drainage is used, the sponge which collects the fluid 
is changed as often as necessary, not less frequently than twice 
a day ; and the most scrupulous care is given to keeping those 
sponges, and every part with which the fluids come into con- 
tact, sweet and pure. 

As regards the temperature, I truly believe that it is the 
least important of all the signs. Case after case occurs in 
which the temperature after the second day becomes and con- 
tinues absolutely normal. A rise on the second day to 99.5° or 
100° is the rule : in the simplest cases this rise is usually higher ; 
in the worst cases there may be no rise at all, or even depres- 
sion. It is better to have elevation than depression of tem- 
perature in the first few days. A rise later on indicates some 
inflammation, probably of a simple traumatic nature : the most 
severe cases of peritonitis cause little elevation. The ice-cap 
and such devices for lowering abnormal temperatures are very 
rarely called for : probably a dose of antipyrin or thallin would 
be preferred. 



Solid and Malignant Growths of the Ovary. 

Solid tumours of the ovary are rare. Of all tumours of the 
ovary, probably not more than three per cent, are solid. Most 
of them are malignant, sarcoma or cancer : true myoma has 
been found; pure fibroma is almost unknown. Doran has never 
met with fibroma. Tait says that "growth of the fibrous stroma 
of the ovary, so as to form a large abdominal tumour requiring 
removal, has not yet been described." I have, however, suc- 
cessfully removed a solid ovarian tumour as large as a child's 
head, in which repeated examinations by competent histologists 
failed to show any other histological element than pure fibrous 
tissue. Pain was the most prominent symptom in this case. 
Curiousl}^, in the only other case I have seen recorded''' pain 
was described as being very intense. The so-called ovarian 
fibroid is usually a pure myoma, though we have the authority 
of Virchow for believing that considerable amounts of pure 
fibrous tissue may co-exist with the muscular fibres. Cysts 
have been found in these tumours; and Waldeyerf has recorded 
a case which was almost completel}^ transformed into bone. 

Malignant growths are either sarcomatous or cancerous. 
Papilloma of the ovary — a very rare disease — may also be 
reckoned among malignant growths. Sarcoma is usually of 
the spindle-celled variety. The blood-vessels are usually of 
very large dimensions, giving the divided tumours almost a 
cavernous appearance, and cysts are frequently found contain- 
ing blood or serum. In one case recently operated upon, I 
shelled out nearly a bucketful of blood-clot from the centre of a 
sarcomatous growth. These tumours often attain to enormous 
dimensions, and their existence is usually accompanied by 
ascitic fluid, which is often stained with blood. 

Prof. Leopold]; considers that malignancy, as a character of 
tumours of the ovary, is far more common than is generally 

* Ricord, Lyon. Med., Nov., 1886. t ArcJiiv. f. Gyndk, Bd. ii., p. 440. 
X Deutsche Med. Woch., Jan. 4th, 1887. 



156 OVARIOTOMY. 

supposed. Among 600 ovariotomies in Schroeder's Clinic, no 
fewer than 100 are said to have shown signs of mahgnanc}'; 
and only 19.5 per cent, of the cases operated upon remained 
free from disease for more than a year. Many of these cases 
were no doubt malignant disease grafted upon cystic ovarian 
growths. Leopold found that in no completed ovariotomies, 
20 (18 per cent.) had malignant growths. If to these are added 
six cases where removal was not completed, on account of im- 
plication of neighbouring structures, we have 116 operations for 
removal of ovarian tumours, in which 26 were found malignant — 
a proportion of 22.4 per cent., greater even than Schroeder's. 
Of the cases where the tumour was removed, 20 per cent, made 
complete recoveries. 

Butlin* has collected from the writings of Cohn, Olshausen, 
Billroth, and Thornton 78 cases of operation for malignant 
diseases of the ovaries of various kinds. Cohn's collection of 
cases (from Schroeder's Clinic), when weeded out, gave 55, of 
which 13 died; Olshausen, 13 cases, with 3 deaths; Thornton,. 
10 cases, with 3 deaths; Billroth, 21 cases, with 14 deaths. 
The general mortality was thus 33 per cent. And the after- 
results were not very encouraging, for only 5 out of 47 patients 
whose cases could be followed were alive and well three years 
after operation. 

The results of these operations, when carefully worked 
out, are not, I suspect, so favourable as they are generally sup- 
posed to be. In the first edition of this work I quoted Cohn's 
statistics! in support of his statement that the number of per- 
manent cures would be found about equal to the number of 
deaths after operation. This was clearly too sanguine an ex- 
pectation. Still, a certain proportion do, apparently, recover 
permanently ; and it is reasonable to believe that this propor- 
tion would be increased if operations were done at the earliest 
possible period after diagnosis. And of those cases in which 
recurrence takes place, the subsequent course will usually be 
less painful than in cases not interfered with. As a matter of 

* Operative Surg, of Malig. Disease, London, 1887, p. 346. 
t Zeitschr.f. Geb. und Gyn., p. 14, 1885. 



DIAGNOSIS OF SOLID OVARIAN GROWTHS. 157 

fact, however, malignancy is rarely diagnosed till after oper- 
ation ; the fact that so many ovarian tumours are malignant is 
another and a very strong argument in favour of early operation 
for all ovarian tumours. 

Diagnosis. — Solid tumours of the ovary cannot be diagnosed 
from each other, and with great difficulty from similar growths 
arising from the uterus. In the case of cystic sarcoma, the 
diagnosis from polycystic glandular tumour and from soft 
nodular uterine myoma is practically impossible. Mobility 
and ascites are perhaps the most important single features 
pointing to solid ovarian tumour. The rapid accumulation of 
ascites around a solid movable tumour that has its deep attach- 
ment in the pelvis points to malignant disease of the ovary. 
A round extra-mural myoma may present clinical features iden- 
tical with those of non-malignant solid tumours of the ovary. 
It is possible to confound these growths with pregnancy ; and 
special care may be necessary when vascular bruits are heard 
in the tumour. In a majority of cases the diagnosis is not 
completed till the abdomen has been opened. 

Operation. — The only peculiarities of the operation for solid 
growths are, the length of the incision which it is necessary to 
make, and the treatment of the pedicle. In average cases the 
incision will require to be prolonged above the umbilicus. 
When the tumour is fully exposed, it is lifted out by means of 
a Tait's handled screw placed in its substance. Removal is 
helped by lateral movements of the tumour ; and the force of 
suction, which is often considerable, may be overcome by per- 
mitting air to enter the cavity with fingers or hand carried 
round the growth. As soon as the growth is delivered, large 
sponges are placed in the cavity to prevent extrusion of the 
bowels ; it may even be expedient to insert a few sutures at the 
top of the wound before doing anything else. 

The pedicle in these cases is often thick, fleshy, and vascular. 
The Fallopian tube does not often form part of it ; it is com- 
posed simply of mesovarium. The vessels are usually thin- 



158 OVARIOTOMY. 

walled and very large, so that they are liable to be injured by 
transfixion even with blunt instruments. Here, if anywhere, a 
second ligature below the double perforating ligature may be 
applied with advantage. The operation is completed and the 
case managed on the same principles as an ordinary ovariotomy. 
The removal of sarcomatous cystic growths requires no 
special description. The pedicle is usually very thick, and 
peculiarly inelastic. 



Operations for Cystic Growths in the Broad 
Ligament and Parovarium. 

SURGICAL ANATOMY OF THE BROAD LIGAMENTS. 

The broad ligament on each side is composed of a double layer 
of peritoneum enclosing cellular tissue in which lie blood-vessels, 
nerves, lymphatics and muscular fibres. The internal attach- 
ment is to the side of the uterus from the cornu to the level of 
the internal os ; the external attachment is to the side of the 
pelvis in a vertical line about midway between the obturator 
foramen and the great sciatic notch. Following its line of 
attachment from the cornu of the uterus to the cervix, the 
following structures are met with : At the cornu is the Fallopian 
tube ; a little lower down and more to the front is the round 
ligament, and close to these is the spermatic artery; at the bottom 
is a space in which lies the uterine artery, usually dividing into 
several branches with numerous veins, nerves, and lymphatics. 
The convex base of the broad ligament lies upon the lax connec- 
tive tissue which separates the vagina from the fascia which 
covers the levator ani muscle. In this tissue lies the large 
uterine artery, forming a loop with its concavity upwards as it 
courses between the internal iliac and the neck of the uterus. 
This vessel is likely to be pushed downwards by tumours grow- 
ing in the broad ligaments; but if the growth is dragged upwards 
during removal it is not out of the range of possible injury. 
The ureters, embedded in connective tissue, pass from behind 
forwards and inwards to the base of the bladder, crossing 
obliquely below the base of the broad ligament. They also are 
not beyond the risk of injury. In the pelvic attachment no 
vascular or other structures of importance are found. It must 
be remembered, however, that if the broad ligaments are pushed 
apart by an enclosed tumour, the posterior layer may be forced 
backwards so as to uncover, not only the ureter and the uterine 
artery, but the iliac vessels as well. 



160 



OVARIOTOMY. 



The free upper margin of the broad hgaments, looked at from 
above, is broader at its pelvic than at its uterine attachment. 
This is caused by the divergence of the round ligament, which 
curves forward to the inguinal opening, and which is so far 
removed from the broad ligament proper as to be described as 
l3'ing in separate folds. The position of the ovary and tube 
in their folds of broad ligament have already been described. 
The veins in the broad ligaments form closely-set plexuses, 
which are of importance in relation to sub-peritoneal haematoma. 
The veins of the uterus, ovaries, and Fallopian tubes, after being 
gathered together in the pampiniform plexus, finally coalesce 
in the internal spermatic vein which follows the course of the 
spermatic artery. 

The structures in and adjacent to the broad ligaments which 
are liable to be the starting points of disease are admirably 
depicted in the diagram here copied from Doran's work. 




Fig. 30. 

Diagram of the Structures in and adjacent to the Broad Ligament. (Doran.) 

I. Framework of the parenchyma of the ovary, seat of la, simple or glandular multi- 
locular cyst. 2. Tissue of hilum, with 3, papillomatous cyst. 4. Broad ligament cyst, 
independent of parovarium and Fallopian tube. 5. A similar cyst in broad ligament above 
the tube, but not connected with it. 6. A similar cyst developed close to 7, ovarian fimbria 
of tube. 8. The hydatid of Morgagni. 9. Cyst developed from horizontal tube of parovarium. 
Cysts 4, 5, 6, 8 and 9 are always lined internally with a simple layer of endothelium. 10. The 
parovarium; the dotted lines represent the inner portion, always more or less obsolete in the 
adult. II. A small cyst developed from a vertical tube; cysts that have this origin, or that 
spring from the obsolete portion, have a lining of cubical or ciliated epithelium, and tend to 
develop papillomatous growths, as do cysts in 2, tissue of the hilum. 12. The duct of Gartner, 
often persistent in the adult as a fibrous cord. 13. Track of that duct in the uterine wall ; 
unobliterated portions are, according to Coblenz, the origin of papillomatous cysts in the 
uterus. 



TUMOURS IN THE BROAD LIGAMENTS. 161 

Opevation may be indicated in any of the following conditions 
residing in the broad ligaments : 

(i) Simple cysts of the Broad Ligament. Parovarian cysts. 
(2) Papillomatous cysts of the Broad Ligament and hilum 
of the Ovary. 

In addition to these, myomata may develop in the broad 
ligament in connection with its enclosed muscular tissue. 
These are rarely of any surgical importance. The same may 
be said of the small pedunculated cysts attached between the 
oviduct and the ovary, and arising from a parovarian tube, and 
of those others originating among the fimbriae and known as 
Hydatids of Morgagni. Other diseases of great variety need 
not be described. One of these has recently been described by 
Mr. Taylor as having been removed by Tait, and which con- 
sisted of several minute vesicles like those of herpes. 



12 



Simple Cysts of the Broad Ligament. 

These are frequently described as parovarian cysts. But it 
is now known that many simple cysts developed in the broad 
ligament do not originate in the tubes of the parovarium, but 
elsewhere between its layers. The profoundly interesting 
questions, from a developmental as well as a pathological point 
of view, which surround the origin of these cysts cannot here be 
discussed. Suffice it to say that the cyst arising outside of the 
parovarium is of the simplest possible nature, containing clear 
fluid in a translucent wall, and not developing adventitious new 
growths in its interior. According to Doran, it is lined with flat 
or low columnar epithelium. Cysts arising from the tubes of the 
parovarium — though they are, in the majority of instances, of 
the simple character indicated above — are further peculiar in 
showing a tendency to develop papillomatous outgrowths in 
their interior. If of small size, their lining may be of ciliated 
epithelium. According to Doran " Histologically and patho- 
logicall}-, they are identical with the papillary cysts 
that appear in the tissue of the hilum of the ovary where relics 
of the Wolffian body exist, and do not tend to invade the stroma 
of the parenchyma, but rapidly grow into the broad ligament, 
forcing apart its layers." 

The leading surgical peculiarity in these growths is, that they 
are unilocular. No true ovarian cystoma is unilocular. As a 
rule, they grow away from the broad ligament, pushing aside the 
ovary and the tube, and occasionally they exhibit a well-marked 
pedicle. Sometimes, however, they grow downwards, widely 
separating the layers of the broad ligament, and stretching out 
the tube and the ovary over their walls. They contain nearly 
always a clear limpid fluid with but little albumen. Sometimes, 
however, it is thick or semi-purulent, from inflammation ; or dark, 
from intermixture with blood. Adhesions are rare. Tait de- 
scribes an occasional great thickening of the cyst-wall consisting 



TAPPING 163 

of fusiform muscular cells. Rupture is not infrequent ; the 
results are not often serious. 

Diagnosis. — A parovarian cyst is diagnosed from other cystic 
growths having similar attachments by the laxity of its walls, 
and the free and rapid wave of fluctuation which is given on 
palpation. It is perfectly round and globular, forming, if of 
moderate size, an evenly symmetrical tumour in the lower 
abdomen. Its growth is painless and unattended by symptoms 
of disturbance of the sexual organs. It is almost free from 
the dangers and complications which are sometimes found in 
connection with ovarian cystoma, and never produces the 
cachexia which so often accompanies that disease. 

The diagnosis from such conditions as ascites and renal 
cystic developments is the same as the diagnosis of ovarian 
cystomata from these conditions. These being negatived, the 
separation is then simply from ovarian growths. Fibro-cystic 
disease of the uterus is a possible source of confusion. 



THE OPERATION. 

Tapping. — There is no doubt that tapping may permanently 
cure a simple cyst of the broad ligament. More than one 
surgeon of repute, and particularly Keith of Edinburgh, em- 
ploys tapping as routine treatment in these cases. The C3'st, 
being emptied, may not refill, and the patient is cured by the 
simplest possible treatment. 

But objections may be urged to this simple proceeding. It 
is not always successful : some cysts refill. Bantock had a case 
which was tapped seven times. Tapping, even in the most 
skilful hands, may cause suppuration in a cyst. But the most 
weighty objection is the fact that papillomatous growths occa- 
sionally develop inside these cysts, and tapping then provides 
an avenue for infection of the peritoneum, a result which is 
inevitably fatal. 

As a counterpoise to these objections, there exists the 
important fact that removal of these growths is pecuHarly free 
from danger. If, in exceptional circumstances, we may feel 

12 * 



164 CYSTS OF BROAD LIGAMENT. 

justified in giving the patient her chance of cure by tapping, I 
beheve that the best routine treatment in these cases is removal. 
RemovaL — In most cases of simple cyst of the broad ligament, 
removal is a very simple proceeding. The parietal incision need 
not be more than an inch and a half or two inches in length. 
The cyst-wall is very thin and easily torn, and fluid is very 
liable to escape by the side of the trocar. If no special appliance 
is used to avoid this, the simplest plan is probably to lay aside 
the trocar, catch the edges of the opening in the cyst-wall with 
forceps, pull them out of the wound, and let the fluid run over 
the macintosh into the vessel on the floor. The tumour usually 
is delivered without any trouble whatever. The pedicle is not 
often long, but it is rarely difficult to deal with. Vessels are 
neither abundant nor large, and the tissues are but slightly 
hypertrophied. Though there may be no very strong objection 
to leaving a portion of the cyst-wall behind, the ligature should 
always be carried below the hmits of the growth. The ovary 
and tube may frequently be left behind ; but unless this can 
easily be done, it is best not to complicate the operation in the 
slightest degree by seeking to separate them. Besides, any 
traumatism applied to the appendages is likely to beget trouble 
in future by the formation of adhesions. 

In those somewhat rare cases where the cyst grows between 
the layers of the broad ligament, removal may be attended with 
considerable difficulty. Here there is no pedicle, and the base 
of the cyst Hes deep in the pelvis. The growth must be dis- 
sected out from between the layers of the ligament in the 
manner already described for encapsuled ovarian growths. It 
is usually best to begin from thS side next to the uterus. The 
flaccid cyst-wall is pulled out of the wound, which will have 
been enlarged as far as necessary, the peritoneal investment is 
teased open, and the wall of the cyst is exposed. The finger, 
pushed into the cellular tissue, separates the cyst from the liga- 
ment by stretching rather than by tearing. The larger bundles 
of cellular tissue containing vessels are caught in catch-forceps 
and divided by scissors ; and this process is repeated, step by 
step, till the cyst is completely enucleated from its bed. As a 



REMOVAL. 165 

rule there is but little haemorrhage. In the deeper and outer 
portions, special care must be taken that the ureter or the uterine 
artery, or any other branch of the iliac vessels, is not injured. 
The two flaps representing the layers of the broad ligament may, 
according as seems best at the time, be either left untouched 
or united by suturing with or without removal of portions of 
them. In a case of this sort, it will be wise to insert a glass 
drainage tube. 



Papillomatous Cysts of the Broad Ligament. 

In a practical as well as in a pathological treatise these well 
deserve separate consideration. They are not common ; but. 
from the peculiar and difficult nature of the operation necessary 
for their removal, they deserve close attention. 

The origin of these growths is not yet finally settled. The 
painstaking and able investigations of Doran leave little doubt 
that a frequent and favourite starting point is in the hilum of 
the ovary. It is well known that papilloma may develop in 
parovarian or other cysts of the broad ligament ; it is certain 
that growths arising from the hilum are peculiarly liable to 
develop abundant papillomatous material. Papillary cysts 
may appear in connection with the ovary, and may overgrow 
the broad ligaments and the uterus, but here they exist 
almost entirely as accidental, and not as ordinary or essential, 
concomitants. 

As a matter of practical surgery their remote origin is of 
little moment. What concerns us most is the fact that such 
growths always burrow between the layers of the broad 
ligament, and there develop peculiarities which may be made 
use of for purposes of diagnosis, and which make these growths 
among the most difficult to remove in abdominal surgery. 

In the early stages the diagnosis from ovarian cystic disease 
is uncertain or impossible. The clinical features of a well- 
developed papillomatous cyst are fairly distinctive. These I 
have elsewhere * described at some length ; they may be here 
abstracted as follows : 

I. In their growth, papillomatous C3^sts of the broad liga- 
ment are not symmetrical. Growing as they do in the broad 
ligament, and having no pedicle to permit their escape from the 
pelvis, they are fixed down on one side, and cannot, even when 
large, rise to the position of least pressure in the middle of the 
abdomen. Minor cysts bulge out where they can find room in 
* Annals of Surgery, Dec, 1885. 



CLINICAL FEATURES. 167 

the pelvis or on the side not occupied by the main cyst ; but 
their aggregate bulk and arrangement are not such as to 
produce a balancing symmetr3\ Ovarian cystomata are not 
so persistently one-sided or so irregular in shape as these, 
and they are not so deeply nor so firmly attached in the 
pelvis. 

2. In these cases there is usually found, in addition to the 
large papillary cyst, several small thin -walled cysts packed 
round the uterus and crossing to the opposite side of the 
abdomen. It is not a development of a multilocular growth, 
one large cyst divided by septa into several, but rather of 
several separate cysts sessile on a common base. These 
secondary growths are usually very thin-walled, and fluctuate 
freely. They can be felt through the vagina in Douglas's 
pouch, and through the abdominal walls, frequently overlapped 
by bowel on the side opposite to the main cyst. 

3. Papillomatous cysts of the broad ligament are but slightly 
movable. In the pelvis, through the vagina, this sense of im- 
mobility is peculiarly striking. The growths are doubly fixed 
by the broad ligament in which they lie, and by the minor cysts 
packed in the pelvis which spring from them. 

4. In most of these cases there is considerable enlargement 
and elevation of the uterus. That the uterus should be enlarged 
is readily understood, from its close ph3^sical and vascular con- 
nection with the very vascular growth. That it should be 
elevated is a necessary consequence of the direction of the 
growth of the tumour which is attached to it. This enlarge- 
ment is in excess of what we find in adherent ovarian cystoma. 
The uterus usually lies in a deep sulcus between the major cyst 
and the minor cysts, giving an appearance of two growths ; but 
sometimes it lies behind the growths, being overlapped by them. 
The bladder may be dragged upwards with the uterus. 

5. As a corollary from the preceding propositions, we might 
infer physical interference with the processes of defaecation and 
micturition. The enlarging growth being fixed in the pelvis, of 
necessity compresses the hollow viscera. In one case upon 
which I successfully operated the frequency of micturition 



168 07575 OF BROAD LIGAMENT. 

almost amounted to incontinence ; in this case, the difficulties 
of defaecation more than once amounted to positive obstruction. 
A curious feature in the case of this patient was that she could 
defaecate only when standing upright, probably because the 
sitting posture forced the growth down into the pelvis. In two 
other cases* troubles on micturition were considerable, but not 
urgent. 

6. Papillomatous cysts are peculiarly liable to undergo rup- 
ture. This is an indication to operate, because of the danger 
arising from infection of the peritoneum. In one of my cases 
there was an extraordinary and perhaps unique history of 
rupture on, at least, twelve occasions. Most of these ruptures 
were, however, in my belief, confined to the minor cysts ; but 
there is no doubt that rupture of the papillary cysts frequently 
takes place. It is, however, more a leakage through a small 
opening than a gush through a large one, and the opening is 
usually blocked by the papillary growths floating into it. 



THE OPERATION. 

The first element of danger in these cases refers to the 
possible elevation of the bladder, and the risk which it thereby 
incurs of being wounded in making the parietal incision. The 
incision ought therefore to be made higher up than usual, and 
it should be short. If the bladder is out of the reach of danger, 
the incision may be prolonged downwards to the requisite 
distance. 

The second peculiarity refers to the mode of tapping the 
cyst. It will not always be possible to bring the cyst-wall to 
the surface ; and as peritoneal infection might be caused by 
the escape of cyst-contents into the peritoneum, extraordinary 
precautions must be taken to collect all fluids which may escape 
by the side of the trocar. And when no more fluid flows, the 
opening must be perfectly closed by forceps or clamp. It is not 
wise to break down and remove papillomatous material by the 
hand ; the bleeding is so free, and the risks from escape of the 

* Loc, Cit. 



REMOVAL. 169 

growth are so serious, that it is better to enlarge the incision 
and dehver the tumour bodily. 

Tapping of the secondary cysts is best done by aspiratbr. 
They can rarely be brought to the surface, and they are very 
thin-walled and peculiarly liable to be ruptured in manipulation. 
A large trocar attached to an aspirating bottle is inserted, 
sponges are placed round the site of puncture, and the fluid is 
drawn off from the various cysts in succession. 

When the cysts are emptied the process of separation begins. 
It may be impossible to tell where uterus ends and tumour 
begins, so closely are they sometimes incorporated. It may 
therefore be wise to depute an assistant to pass and manipulate 
the uterine sound as a guide. The same may be necessary 
in the case of the bladder, especially if it is empty, and its 
walls are collapsed and flaccid. Here the disadvantage of an 
empty bladder is conspicuous. It may even facilitate operation 
to inject a few ounces of fluid into the bladder, so as to accu- 
rately show its limits. The peritoneum covering both uterus 
and bladder may be thickened, movable, and very similar in 
appearance to that covering the growth. 

It is impossible to give useful instructions as to where the 
process of separation is to begin for any case. This depends 
upon the position of the growth and the nature of its attach- 
ments. If possible, I would recommend that a beginning be 
made near the uterus, so as to cut off as much of the blood 
supply as possible early in the process of separation. A small 
incision is made by knife or scissors, the finger is pushed 
through this and rapidly separates as much of the growth as 
possible. This separated portion is either surrounded by liga- 
ture or caught in large pressure forceps, and the tissue cut 
through beyond. If the operation can be continued and com- 
pleted by repetitions of this process, it will be much simplified. 
But we must expect to have to carry out a much more com- 
plicated process of dissection, in which scissors, knife, forceps, 
ligature, and even actual cautery, are in constant requisition. 
I know of nothing which more fully tries the patience and skill 
of the surgeon than such a dissection. At a distance probably 



170 CYSTS OF BROAD LIGAMENT. 

of several inches from the surface, not easily seen and with 
difficulty handled, each area of adhesion has to be dealt with 
promptly and decisively. If the adhesion can be surrounded 
by forceps or ligature before being divided, enucleation is sim- 
plified. But often the adhesion must be separated by fingers 
alone, and the raw surface bleeds freely. Forceps must be 
placed on the bleeding points when they are visible : for a 
general oozing sponge -packing or the cautery must be used. 
In separating adhesions from the bladder, special care must be 
taken to avoid tearing its walls ; and if points bleed and forceps 
are placed on them, we must be particularly careful to see that 
the strong locking instrument does not grasp a piece of bladder- 
wall and so cause a risk of sloughing. If the adhesions to the 
posterior surface of the uterus are particularly strong, it may 
facilitate matters to prolong the incision upwards for such a 
distance as to permit the whole to be turned out over the pubes 
with the uterus, and then proceed with the parts in sight. In 
one such case I had tumour, enlarged uterus, and greatly dis- 
tended bladder lying, apparently as one homogeneous mass, on 
the macintosh covering pubes and thighs. If this can be done, 
it greatly simplifies operation. 

We must expect to find intestine adherent to the surface of 
the growth and in the sulci between the smaller cysts ; and here 
special delicacy in separating must be observed. The ureter 
too, and the uterine artery with branches of the internal iliac, 
may be within reach of danger, and they must be looked for 
in manipulations near the lower and outer attachments of the 
broad ligaments. 

The toilet of the peritoneum must be carried out with par- 
ticular scrupulousness. Tait's plan of washing out the cavity 
may here be used with special advantage. The insertion of a 
drainage tube will almost certainly be called for. 



Removal of the Uterine Appendages. 

Nomenclature. — The want of a good name for this operation 
is already being felt. At first, when its object was supposed to 
be limited to the production of an artificial menopause, the 
operation was known as "normal-ovariotomy." Battey, who 
introduced the name, was among the first to recognise its 
unsuitability. As a matter of principle, the operation was by 
no means restricted to ovaries that were normal ; and, as a 
matter of practice, it was found that most of the ovaries re- 
moved were actuall}- diseased. The term, " Battey's operation," 
while suitable within the limits which Battey laid down for it, 
does not include the more extended modern proceedings. 
" Oophorectomy " had already been used b}' Peaslee and others 
as a synon3'm for ovariotomy before it was sought to limit it to 
removal of small ovaries ; and as oviducts are now, in most 
cases removed as well as ovaries, the term is in a double sense 
objectionable. In connection specially with disease of the 
Fallopian tubes, Tait's name became associated with removal 
of the uterine appendages ; and when, in harmon}'^ with certain 
beliefs which he holds as to the functions of the oviducts, he 
practised removal of the tubes as well as of the ovaries where 
others had been content with removal of the ovaries alone, the 
proceeding of " Removal of the Uterine Appendages " came to 
be known as Tait's operation. Men performed Tait's operation 
with Battey's motives ; hence a confusion which has been ren- 
dered more confounded by more than one surgeon calling it the 
" Battey-Tait operation." The German terms, "spaying" and 
"castration," are objectionable on the grounds both of good 
taste and of exact naming. In many of the operations performed 
the effect of castration, as usually imderstood, is an undesirable 
accident rather than a definite aim. "Salpingectomy" for 
removal of the tubes, and " salpingo-oophorectoni)' " for removal 
of the appendages, are fairly exact but decidedly cumbrous. 
" Prosthekotomy " is equally applicable to caudal and to uterine 
appendages. A friend has suggested to me the word " thely- 
tectomy " (0/y\i'T/;v = feminine principle); but this, perhaps, is 



172 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

too suggestive of castration. Under any of these names, it is 
impossible to give a complete account of any recognised surgical 
operation ; therefore, in place of a better, the vague but com- 
prehensive title, " Removal of the Uterine Appendages," is 
adopted. Even to this name the objection may justly be raised, 
that the uterus is an appendage to the ovaries, rather than the 
ovaries to the uterus. From a surgical stand-point, however, 
the objection has less weight than from a physiological. Skene 
of Brooklyn * seeks to get over the difficulty by the use of the 
term " tubo-ovariotomy." But ovariotomy for tumour is also 
" tubo-ovariotomy " in the sense which he suggests ; and, 
according to ordinary meanings of words, his term might easily 
be interpreted as meaning something very different from what 
was intended. 

History. — As a barbarous custom, the castration of women 
dates from a very remote antiquity. In the case of female 
domestic animals, such as cows, camels, sows, bitches, mares, 
and ewes, we have abundant evidence in the writings of Aris- 
totle, Pliny, Galen, Suidas, and others, that castration was very 
generally practised. The practice is said to have been extended 
to women at the instigation of certain kings of Lydia. Accord- 
ing to Xanthus, a Lydian historian who wrote in the sixth 
century before Christ, the Lydian king Andramyte first intro- 
duced female eunuchs into the service of his palace. Gyges, 
another king of Lydia, is said to have caused the removal of 
ovaries from women with a view to prolonging their charms — 
^^ quo illis semper aetate florentibus nteretur.'' Various authors have 
thrown doubt on the reality of this proceeding, saying that the 
so-called castration was either removal of the uterus (which is 
most improbable), or ablation of the nymphse or the clitoris, or 
even (which seems an unwarrantable postulate) padlocking or 
" infibulation," a proceeding analogous to that which Celsius 
describes as having been carried out on boys. If the Lydians 
really castrated animals for domestic purposes, — and of this 
there can scarcely be a doubt, — it is quite within the bounds of 
possibility that they castrated women also. It is certainly unlikely 
* Diseases of Women, i88g, p. 509. 



HISTORY. 173 

that with the Lydians any other form of mutilation than removal 
of the ovaries should be considered as constituting castration."-'^ 

Even in times comparatively modern it is stated that the 
practice has been in vogue in Central Asia. A medical mis- 
sionary, Dr. Roberts, is said to have met, in Bombay, Hedgeras 
— attendants in harems — who were spayed. f He remarks that 
they did not menstruate, and that they had no sexual desire. 

The story of the Hungarian sow-gelder who, in a fit of parental 
anger, castrated his unchaste daughter, is supported by testimony 
of real weight.:]: Schurigius speaks of two similar cases; and 
other cases, with less weight of authority, have been recorded. 

These ancient practices were not, however, therapeutic 
measures. Among the earliest operations performed with a 
beneficent purpose is that related by Franck de Franckenau, 
in which an ovary, prolapsed through a wound accidentally 
made over the pubes, was successfully removed. Percival 
Pott's well known case of removal of herniated ovaries occurred 
in 1756. Thereafter the history of the operation is merged in 
that of modern ovariotomy for tumours. 

In 1823 James Blundell, of Guy's Hospital, a man far in 
advance of his times, in a paper read before the Medico- 
Chirurgical Society of London, suggested removal of healthy 
ovaries in cases of severe dysmenorrhcea, or metrorrhagia from 
inverted uterus. His advocacy of removal of the whole uterus 
in place of ordinary Caesarean section, and the scientific manner 
in which he sought to sustain his arguments by experiments on 
rabbits, have scarcely received the attention which they deserve. 
As more germane to the subject in hand, special reference must 
be made to his proposed method for producing sterility in cases 

* Many classical writers of the Middle Ages refer to the practice. For 
more detailed accounts see — 

Dujardin, Hist, de hi Chirurgie. Paris, 1774. 

Mahon, Medecinc Legale et Police Medicale. Paris, 1801. 

Much interesting information will be found in the second volume of Pierre 
Dufour's laborious work, Histoire de la prostitution chez tons Us peuplcs dumoiide ; 
and a moderately full summary, with numerous references, is given by Boinet 
in the article, " Ovariotomie," in the Did. Encycl. des Sc. Med. 

t " Hedgeras de I'Asie Centrale," Journal VExperience, 1843. 

J See particularly Wierus, Opera, lib. iv., cap. xx. 



174 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

of malformed pelvis, where Caesarean section had been called 
for. His words are as follows: " I would advise an incision of 
an inch in length in the linea alba above the symphysis pubis ; 
I would advise, further, that the Fallopian tube on either side 
should be drawn up to this aperture ; and, lastly, I should advise 
that a portion of the tube should be removed, an operation easily 
performed, when the woman would for ever after be sterile."* 

Dr. Robert Battey, of Rome, Georgia, generally gets the 
credit of having been the originator of the operation as it stands 
in modern surgery. In 1865 he "conceived the idea of pro- 
ducing an artificial menopause for the remedy of disease ; " but 
he did not publish his ideas till 1872. In February, 1872, 
Lawson Tait removed with complete success an ovary the size 
of a pigeon's egg, which contained a chronic abscess. This he 
claimsf as being " the first record in the history of surgery of 
the removal of a small ovary for pain." Encouraged by this 
success, on August ist, 1872, he successfully removed both 
ovaries for the purpose of arresting intractable haemorrhage.^ 
A few days before the date of Tait's second operation, Hegar 
operated on his first case with fatal result. On August 17th, 
1872, Battey performed his first operation, which was successful, 
and in the following month he published it.§ 

In discussing the history of the operation, it may be objected 
that Tait's first operation was not performed with the aim which 
Battey proposed. The ovary was felt enlarged in Douglas's 
pouch ; and as only one ovary was removed, the operation was 
not intended to "produce an artificial menopause." There is 
no suggestion that the proceeding was the fruit of any precon- 
ceived theory ; it was a local operation for a local disease. But 
who shall say of the original work of a practical man that it 
was not preceded by theory ? Tait's second case was un- 
doubtedly a physiological and pathological experiment ; in 

* Principlis and Practice of Obstetricy, p. 580. Ed. by Th. Castle. London, 1834. 

t Dis. of Ovaries, 4th Ed., p. 324. 

\ By some mistake Battey records this case as being fatal. Trans, Internat. 
Med. Congress, vol. iv., p. 287. Lond., 1881. 

§ Atliinta Med. and Surg. Journal, Sept., 1872, p. 321. 



AIM OF THE OPERATION. 1 75 

favour of its probable success only theoretical reasons could 
be advanced. Hegar, too, must have independently thought 
out the operation ; it has certainly been his fortune materially to 
influence its progress. To claim a priority measured by days or 
months is to be exact at the expense of liberality or even of 
justice ; the time was ripe for the operation, and three inde- 
pendent workers — Battey, Tait, and Hegar — may be permitted 
to share the honour of introducing it. 

As might be expected, the work of these three men has 
tended to run in different directions. Battey's name has con- 
tinued to be associated chiefly with the operation as performed 
for what may loosely be called "neuroses." Tait's name is 
mainly connected with inflammatory diseases of the tubes, and 
his influence has been strongly felt in the substitution of opera- 
tion for actual disease as against vague nerve-sj^mptoms. 
Hegar, again, is best known in connection with the operation 
for uterine m3'oma. Trenholme, in January, 1876, claims to have 
been actually the first to remove ovaries for bleeding myoma ; 
but his influence has not been so great as that of others. 

The practice of numerous followers in the footsteps of these 
pioneers has widened the range of the operation, at the same 
time that it has narrowed down its indications. Greater exact- 
itude in diagnosis, and increasing knowledge in pathology, 
have largely replaced functional neuroses by palpable disease. 
Except for uterine myoma, the field for spaying, properly so- 
called, is being greatly narrowed ; on the other hand, the field 
for the removal of incurably diseased organs is being immensely 
widened. 

The Aim of the Operation. — The purpose of the operation, as 
enunciated by Battey, was "to determine the change of life for 
any grave disease which is incurable without it, and which is 
curable with it." Though this definition may have held good 
for his own operation in its first conception, it is obviously 
imperfect as regards the operation in its modern development. 
In fact, a complete change of front would probably cover more 
cases ; it would certainly be more correct to say that removal of 



176 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

the uterine appendages is performed for local disease in the 
ovaries or tubes, than that it is done "to determine the change 
of life." But the operation has more than one aim ; the defi- 
nition of its purpose cannot be gathered into one sentence. It 
has a threefold purpose: (i) to remove organs incurably dis- 
eased ; (2) to check or modify the discharge of blood from 
the uterus ; and (3) to completely abrogate the process of 
ovulation. 

1. The removal of organs incurably diseased, and causing 
danger to life or serious disablement, is, undoubtedly, the most 
justifiable aim of the operation. Under this head we have to 
deal with such conditions as abscess in the ovaries or tubes, 
Fallopian pregnancy, and strangulated ovarian hernia which 
cannot be reduced ; these endanger life : also with the various 
cystic diseases of the tubes, the more chronic and subacute 
inflammations of the ovaries, and their displacements ; these 
cause disablement in varying degrees. 

2. It may be necessary to check bleeding from the uterus, 
either on account of its being excessive in amount, or because 
its discharge is attended with danger or great pain. Uterine 
myoma is the chief cause of metrorrhagia ; incurable obstruc- 
tion in the vagina or elsewhere to the menstrual flow causes both 
pain and danger ; and certain malformations and malpositions 
of the uterus may be attended with so much pain at menstrual 
periods as to render life a sort of recurrent martyrdom. 

3. To unsex the woman— the aim sought when castration is 
spoken of — is the least definite and the least satisfactory purpose 
of the operation. The ill-defined class of so-called reflex 
neuroses is not here specially meant ; all, or at least the great 
majority of, inflammatory diseases of the appendages are 
attended by " reflex neuroses." Here we particularly refer to 
actual nerve diseases, such as mania or epilepsy, which we 
have reason to believe are either caused or kept up by the 
processes attendant on ovulation. 

These theoretical "aims for operation" will be put into 
actual concrete and positive " indications " when the diseased 
conditions are specified and described. But with the purpose 



OBJECTIONS TO THE OPERATION. 177 

sought we must reckon the result achieved; and this result 
often oversteps the purpose. We may desire to put a stop only 
to that part of the sexual process which consists in the dis- 
charge of blood from the uterus, whereas the actual effect of 
operation is to strike at the root of the whole function of ovula- 
tion and destroy it. What exactly is the value of this per contra, 
which we have to reckon with ? 

Here we have to deal with sentiment as well as with science. 
The question is dragged hither and thither between the prac- 
tical enthusiasm of the operating surgeon and the destructive 
criticism of the arm-chair theorist. It is the pride and glory of 
abdominal surgery that it lives and thrives upon statistics ; and 
it is, perhaps, true that some men ask us to estimate their capa- 
city in general by their experience in detail. This is a fault, 
but it is a fault in the right direction. And here the legal 
maxim, ^^ Ex ahiisu non argiiitur in imim," holds true. The evils 
produced by some men doing too much will never be counter- 
balanced by other men doing too little. 

Practical men care little for fine-spun theories ; they want to 
get their patients well. If objection is taken to the operation 
on the ground of the loss of sexual feeling, they say that this is 
a petty and contemptible thing to be weighed against prolonged 
suffering. If loss of the power of reproduction is the com- 
plaint, this is a weighty reason, — one in which those first 
interested must have the last word. Put to the patient herself, 
or to her husband, these objections — if the case is one in which 
operation ought ever to be contemplated — are usually promptly 
and summarily dismissed. And when the actual fact — that the 
womanly attributes are lost no more after the artificial than 
after the natural menopause — is borne in mind, the objections 
have still less weight. In most cases, child-bearing was either 
impossible or dangerous : here there is no loss; and, in many, 
dyspareunia is changed into eupareunia : here there is a gain. 
The general effects of the operation are nowhere better ex- 
pressed than by Koeberle, as translated by Barnes:* "The 
subjects may be regarded as women who have suddenly attained 

* " On Hernia of the Ovary," Am. Joimi. Obsiet., January, 1883, p. 22. 

13 



178 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

the menopause. The affective sentiments remain untouched. 
They are no longer under the dominion of an imperious erotic 
want ; but they are not the less good, loving towards relatives 
and husband. The genital organs remain excitable ; the cha- 
racter becomes gentler, less irascible; the breasts do not atrophy; 
the tone and voice are unaltered." In one sentence, the change 
is one froni active uxoriousness to staid, gentle matronliness. 
There is nothing very repulsive in this. Here, so far, the 
matter ma}^ rest. The definite results for the definite diseases 
will be indicated further on. 

Considerations that ought to have at least as much weight 
as the ethical or sentimental ones just mentioned are, firstly, the 
danger of the operation itself, and, secondly, the not absolute 
certainty as to permanent cure among cases that recover. The 
average operator cannot count upon a mortality of less than 
8 per cent. ; and, as results go, he may expect a perfect cure in 
no more than go per cent, of all the cases that recover from the 
operation. These are grave facts to be dealt with in an opera- 
tion not always intended to save life. The patient may be 
suffering a prolonged martyrdom ; but a surgical operation 
which does not bring cure is scarcely a respite, and death is 
a terrible penalty to pay for relief. On these grounds we ought 
to be assured, in the first place, that there is a clear case for 
operation ; and, in the second place, that the full ratio of 
probability of favourable result belongs to the case under 
consideration. 



CONDITIONS INDICATING OPERATION. 

The disease — the extent of it and the symptoms which 
it produces — is the final criterion as to operative interference. 
It serves no good scientific purpose to describe a symptom 
as a cause of operation ; it is unfortunate that so many 
operations are recorded as being for ovaralgia, dysmenorrhoea, 
and such hke. The evil has not been diminished by the 
recent appearance of certain valuable papers in German 
periodicals, entitled " Castration for Neurosis." In most of 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 179 

the cases described pain was the only neurosis, and in most 
of them also there was actual disease in the appendages. It 
is just as scientific to speak of excision of the hip for reflex 
pain in the knee, as of excision of the appendages for reflex 
pain in the back. Wherever it is possible the disease ought to 
be quoted as the cause for operation, and not the symptoms of 
it. In a small and diminishing class of cases a profound neu- 
rosis, mania or epilepsy, may, under very special restrictions, 
be quoted as an indication to operation. Yet even in these, with 
a curious frequency, disease of the organs is found at operation. 
For the rest, the disease will be spoken of as the indication for 
operation. Thus, instead of speaking of removal of the ap- 
pendages for ovaralgia, dysmenorrhcea, or menorrhagia, we 
speak of the operation as being for ovaritis, pyosalpinx, or 
myoma. With this view the indications for operation may in 
skeleton outline be presented as follows : 

A — The Appendages. 

(i) The Ovaries. 

(a) Inflammation — acute, chronic, and suppurative 

(abscess). 

(b) Displacement (prolapse, hernia). 

(c) Cirrhotic and C3'stic ovaries. 
(2) The Fallopian Tiihes. 

{a) Inflammation — Salpingitis. 

ib) Pyosalpinx. 

{c) Haematosalpinx. 

(d) Hydrosalpinx. 

{e) Fallopian pregnancy. 

B — The Uterus. 

{a) Uterine myoma. 

[b] Errors of development — absence or mal-develop- 

ment of uterus with menstrual molimen. 
{c) Incurable displacements with severe nerve-symp- 
toms. 
{d) Insuperable obstruction to menstrual flow (may 
reside in vagina). 
13 - 



180 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

C — The Nervous System. 

(a) Mania ; puerperal mania, menstro-mania, nympho- 
mania, &c. 

(i) Epilepsy ; hystero-epileps}', convulsions, cramps^ 
dancing fits, &c. 

(c) Hysteria. 

It need scarcely be pointed out that the mere existence of 
any of these abnormal conditions is (with possible exceptions in 
the case of three or four of them) no indication for operation. 
The essential concomitants of these diseases must be of a grave 
nature — there must be danger to life or serious impairment of 
health — before operation is contemplated. With this prelimi- 
nary and comprehensive proviso we may proceed to consider 
the indications in detail. 

Ovaritis, Oophoritis, Inflammation of the Ovaries. — The chronic 
form of ovaritis arising from excessive functional activity, which 
is found in prostitutes, rarely calls for operation. So also those 
temporary acute congestions, as obscure in origin as they are in 
pathology, require no notice. The majority of cases requiring 
operation have their origin in gonorrhoea. Septic matter may 
be carried along the tubes to the ovaries by puerperal inflam- 
mation in the uterus, and there is no doubt that a septic catarrh 
of the endometrium set up by traumatism, as from the sound or 
tangle tent, may also be a cause. The exanthematic fevers and 
acute rheumatism sometimes beget a form of ovaritis which is 
attended with troublesome symptoms. Cases following septic 
inflammations at childbirth always pursue a rapid course and 
eventuate in abscess, which may be rapidly or even suddenl}^ 
fatal, or may pursue a more chronic course, bursting into one or 
other of the neighbouring hollow organs. Following gonorrhoea, 
or simple traumatism, or any of the exanthemata, ovaritis is 
liable to become very chronic, and here indications to operate 
are most frequent and most legitimate. 

In such cases the local signs may be marked enough, but 
urgency is usually bespoken by the reflex or the functional 
symptoms. The ovary is exquisitely tender to all mechanical 



DISPLACEMENTS OF THE OVARY. 181 

disturbance, when the patient stands or moves quickly, and 
it drags on its ligaments or is jerked ; and when it is pressed 
upon by the fingers through vagina or parietes. Engorgement 
at the menstrual period aggravates the pain. In the intervals 
also it causes pain, local on various provocations, and outlying 
and reflex in the groins, in the back, down the thigh, in the 
hypochondrium, and elsewhere. Almost every known form of 
functional sexual derangement may be associated with ovaritis — 
dysmenorrhoea, menorrhagia, amenorrhcea. 

Some weight must be given to the physical signs. An 
inflamed ovary has a tendency to fall downwards into Douglas's 
pouch and to become fixed there. Here it may be felt exquisitely 
tender, and sometimes causing a peculiar feeling of nausea on 
being pressed upon. In this situation it may rea;dily be mistaken 
for the fundus of a retroverted uterus. A skilled diagnostician 
will at once recognise the shape and consistency of the ovary ; 
he may even palpate its ligaments, and with a high degree 
of probability diagnose the presence of fluid or cysts in its 
substance. In thin patients the unprolapsed ovary may 
be palpated between the fingers in the vagina and on the 
parietes. 

In a case diagnosed as chronic ovaritis, from whatever cause 
arising, if remedial treatment has had a full and fair trial, and 
if the patient's health is being undermined by the constant pain 
and other accompaniments, operation may be recommended. 
If abscess exists, life is endangered and operation is imperative. 
In the former case the indication follows on the gravity of the 
symptoms ; in the latter, the indication is positive and absolute 
on the existence of the disease. 

Displacements of the Ovary — Hernia : Prolapse. — Among the first, 
if not actually the first, oophorectomies for a beneficent pur- 
pose were one for hernia of the ovaries through a wound, and one 
for hernia into the inguinal canal. Hernia in itself is not an 
indication for operation. The herniated organs must be irre- 
ducible or the source of great pain, or the seat of some form of 
degenerative or inflammatory disease, before operation is con- 



182 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

teniplated. A traumatic hernia following strain or parturition 
is not so likely to be attended with troublesome symptoms as a 
congenital hernia. The latter variety is twice as frequent as 
the former, and is usually not of so simple a nature. Congenital 
hernia always contains tube as well as ovary; not infrequently 
it is associated with uterus bicornis, and one horn of the uterus 
occasionally- follows the appendages into the hernial sac ; also 
under-developed uterus, with its accompanying symytoms of 
aggravated molimina, may complicate the condition. In at 
least six cases complete absence of the uterus has been noted 
as accompanying inguinal ovarian hernia. 

The diagnosis is not often difficult. The characteristic siz& 
and shape, the sensations upon pressure, the increase in size at 
the menstrual periods, and the frequent association with mal- 
formations of the uterus, form a combination Vv^hich can scarcely 
be imitated by any other condition. A sign of importance, 
where it can be elicited, is an associated movement with lateral 
displacement of the uterus. 

The tumour increases in size at the periods, and becomes 
more tender. Then the symptoms may mimic those of strangu- 
lated hernia. Actual strangulation may take place, and then 
operation is imperative. So also if extra-uterine pregnancy 
takes place in the sac, an occurrence of curious frequency, 
operation is indicated. And any degenerative or novel develop- 
ment in its tissue, cystic or glandular, demands operation. 
Otherwise the indications rest upon its resistance to palliative 
measures, its irreducibiHty, and the urgency of the symptoms 
which it produces. 

Prolapse of the ovaries is a condition by no means always 
demanding surgical interference ; it is often accidentally dis- 
covered during examination for other purposes. Symptoms of 
urgency are produced only when they become inflamed or are 
bound down by adhesions. The existence of adhesions between 
mobile abdominal organs as a cause of pain, or other abnormal 
symptoms which may be of grave import, has probably not 
received the attention which it deserves ; in the case of the 
ovary, from the nature of the organ, it is certain that this 



CYSTIC OVARIES. 183 

condition is peculiarly liable to breed trouble. Adhesions in 
Douglas's pouch are most common, but the}^ may be attached to 
almost any part of the intestinal or pelvic peritoneum. I have 
successfully operated upon a case where the left ovary was 
closely adherent on one side to the sigmoid flexure, and on the 
other to the tip of the vermiform appendix. The ovary being 
dragged upon between those restless organs, it was not surprising 
that acute symptoms of ovarian irritation were produced. Some- 
times mere prolapse started by congestion may be continued by 
a sort of strangulation of the blood supply ; in such cases oper- 
ation may be required, though no adhesions exist. Oophorraphy, 
or fixation of the ovary by a special proceeding, has been 
devised to meet this condition ; the value of it has yet to 
be decided. The left ovary is more frequently prolapsed 
than the right, probably because it is more liable to become 
congested on account of the left ovarian vein having no 
valve. 

Cystic and Cirrhotic Ovaries. — Though it is probable that small 
cystic ovaries have their origin in chronic inflammation, and it 
is almost certain that cirrhosis or fibroid thickening of the 
ovaries claims this cause, yet in actual practice the condition is 
not found to be inflammatory. In the cystic ovary the disease 
is not that of ordinary cystoma — a glandular new growth, but 
simply a distension of follicles in the thickened and contracted 
stroma. In true cirrhosis the gland tissue is replaced, in whole 
or in great part, by fibrous material ; the surface is puckered 
and scarred, and the size of the organ is diminished. It would 
seem that one termination of the ovaritis found after the ex- 
anthemata, especially after scarlet fever, is in this cirrhotic 
atrophy with follicular distension. The pathology of this 
condition is still but ill understood. 

It is a clinical fact that small cystic ovaries are often 
attended with profuse and uncontrollable menorrhagia. On 
the other hand, pure cirrhotic atrophy may be accompanied by 
amenorrhoea, though the molimina may be excessively severe. 
In many all the varied and shifting symptoms of deranged 



184 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

sexual function are present in their most aggravated forms. 
And in such — parti}', no doubt, because local disease cannot be 
physically made out — ovarian neuroses are abundantly called in 
to justify operation. Taking Schmalfuss's statistics of Hegar's 
operations as fairly representative, quite one-half of the so-called 
functional neuroses own such parench3miatous changes in the 
ovaries as causes. 

These cases run a very prolonged course ; they are peculiarly 
resistant to palliative measures, and the reflex disturbances are 
liable to be marked and numerous. If the patient cannot put 
up with her troubles, and the menopause is not near, operation 
may be performed : it is the only cure. 

Diseases of the Fallopian Tabes. — Half a century ago, diseases 
of the Fallopian tubes were well described by more than one 
writer ; ■■'■ but so completely had all knowledge of them dropped 
out of mind, that when, a little while ago, a distinguished pro- 
vincial surgeon published results of operations for such diseases, 
an equally distinguished metropolitan brother expressed a some- 
what emphatic disbelief, not only in the operation, but in the 
diseases as well. It betokened an extraordinar}^, and almost 
discreditable, ignorance of the work of our predecessors that 
Tait found it necessary to send far and near specimens of these 
diseases, in order to establish a belief in their reality. It is well 
enough known now that diseases of the oviducts are a prolific 
cause of serious functional disturbances, and that the}^ may even 
cause death. The difficulties are now not so much theoretical 
as practical : how to diagnose them, and how best to treat 
them; when palliative measures may be persevered in, and 
when operation becomes necessary. 

Clincally, it is impossible to separate simple salpingitis from 
haematosalpinx and pyosalpinx. The last two may, in fact, be 
considered as varieties of the first. When the septic inflam- 
mation reaches the fimbriae, it binds them together and to the 

* In Dekker's Excrcitationes Practice, published at Leyden in 1695, there is 
a description of a case of Fallopian distension, with a highly artistic drawing 
of the state of parts found after death. 



SALPINGITIS. 185 

ovaries, sealing up the opening. The opening into the uterus is 
either closed or too small to permit exit to all the fluid ; thus we 
have catarrhal inflammation in a closed sac, the mucous lining 
of which bleeds every month. While the peritoneal covering 
exhibits the usual changes consequent on inflammations of 
serous surfaces, the cavity may contain blood or pus or a mix- 
ture of both. The amount of the blood or pus contained in 
the tube varies greatly. Sometimes it may be less than a 
drachm : collections of blood rarely exceed an ounce. I have 
removed a Fallopian abscess which contained more than a pint 
of putrid pus along with a considerable amount of gas. 

Most cases of salpingitis are septic, the result of inflam- 
mations of the endometrium, gonorrhoeal or puerperal. Some 
cases originate in leucorrhoea, and in such Wylie tells us he 
has, by squeezing the tubes, made the pus flow into the uterus 
and appear in the vagina. A few are caused by S3^philis ; some 
are tubercular. Sanger has found actinomycosis as a cause of 
suppuration. 

Martin" of Berlin has made an elaborate study of tubal 
disease from a collection of 287 cases. The great majority (220) 
were married; 113 were barren; 61 had aborted once or 
oftener. The causes were, in 147 cases, acute or chronic en- 
dometritis ; in 70, puerperal inflammations ; in ^^, gonorrhoea ; 
in 3, syphilis; and in 10, tubercle. Tubal inflammations Martin 
divides into Salpingitis Catarrhalis, where there is infiltration 
into the mucous membrane; Salpingitis Interstitialis, where the 
muscular coat is involved ; and Salpingitis Follicularis, where 
pouches are formed on the surface of the mucous membrane. 
The whole question of gonorrhoeal inflammation in its bearing 
on tubal disease has been treated in a masterly and almost 
exhaustive manner by Sinclair of Manchester,! and to his papers 
I must refer my readers. 

An inflamed and engorged or distended tube usually falls 
downwards into Douglas's pouch, and becomes more or less 
intimately adherent there. By the vagina it may be felt as a 
moderately soft, boggy, irregularly rounded tumour, not unlike 

* Zeitschr. f. Geburt., XIII., ii. \ Med. CJiron., Aug., Sept., Oct., 1887. 



186 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

the fundus of a retroverted uterus. It is exquisitely tender to 
the touch, causing dyspareunia, and cannot readily be pushed 
upwards. Attacks of pelvic pain, greatly increased at the 
periods, but aggravated at other times with or without provo- 
cation, accompany the complaint. Menstruation is fitful and 
irregular, usually increased but sometimes diminished in flow. 
Each period, in haematosalpinx, adds to the danger as well as 
to the pain. Most cases occur in married women, and, according 
to Tail, " a very frequent feature in the history of the cases was 
found to be that they had one child, and after that were never 
free from pain till relieved by the operation." 

In every case of true and persistent salpingitis operation is 
indicated. With judicious treatment and rest, mild cases may 
get well ; but when the ends of the tubes are blocked, and they 
contain pus or blood, removal gives the only chance of relief. 
It must not be forgotten, as an indication to operate, that there is 
real danger to life in septic inflammations of the Fallopian tubes. 

Hydrosalpinx is a milder affair, and may be attended with 
very few symptoms. In many cases it is simply a retention 
cyst in a functionally inert duct containing clear fluid; in others, 
epithelial debris or pus, sometimes mixed with blood, is found. 
The cause of the occlusion being usually inflammation extending 
from the uterus, both tubes are often found blocked. In a case 
on which I operated, one tube contained several ounces of 
clear fluid ; the other contained a fluid so thick with flakes of 
cholesterine, that it looked like molten silver when poured from 
one vessel into another. 

The diagnosis is physical. A sausage-shaped or tortuous 
cyst in the retro-uterine space, with symptoms of disturbed 
sexual functions, worst at the periods, and less severe than 
in acute salpingitis, suggest the disease. 

As to operation, hydrosalpinx is said — I believe on insufficient 
grounds — sometimes to last a lifetime, producing no symptoms 
and causing no harm. In many cases the symptoms are so 
severe as to demand operation ; in all operation is advisable. 
The disease will not improve ; from accidental or other causes 
the sac may suppurate and burst, and so endanger life. 



FALLOPIAN PREGNANCY. 187 

The death-rate in 274 cases of operation for disease of the 
tubes, collected by Schlesinger, was found to be 8.76 per cent. Of 
these, 20 operations were said to have been for cancer of the tubes 
(note that Martin does not mention a single case of this disease); 
115 for pyosalpinx; 46 for hydrosalpinx ; 19 for haematosalpinx ; 
43 for salpingitis ; 7 for tuberculosis ; and 23 for papilloma. 
This list must be very far from complete ; the operation has 
been performed in Great Britain alone more than 400 times. I 
doubt also whether the proportions of the varieties of diseased 
conditions would be found to hold good over a greater number 
of cases. The general mortality is, however, probably near the 
truth ; if anj^hing, rather favourable than otherwise. Special 
mortality in the hands of a few operators, covering nearly 300 
operations, would be found considerably under 5 per cent. 

Fallopian Pregnancy. — Most men are now agreed as to the 
truth of Tait's opinion, that all examples of extra-uterine gesta- 
tion are in the beginning either wholly or partially Fallopian. 
The risks of rupture before the fourth month are very great ; 
and danger to life has by no means passed when the ovum is 
killed by electricity or otherwise. 

I hold strongly to the belief that as soon as an extra-uterine 
pregnancy has been diagnosed, operation ought to be performed. 
Though Thomas and others claim to have diagnosed the condi- 
tion before rupture (and their diagnosis has in several cases 
been verified by subsequent events, not always favourable 
to the patient however), it is unfortunately the case that the 
first sign of it usually appears at rupture, when the woman is 
dangerously ill from intra-abdominal bleeding and shock. In 
such an event it would be a surgical crime to let the patient die 
without an attempt at relief. But under all circumstances, the 
safety of the patient, immediate as well as remote, is best 
consulted by removing the ovum with the tube at the earliest 
possible period. According to Parry, the mortality of extra- 
uterine pregnancy is 67.2 per cent. ; early operation in com- 
petent hands would certainly give a death-rate of not more than 
5 per cent. In the hands of Tait, whose operations have all 



188 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

been at the time of rupture, the mortality has been very httle 
greater than this. In America, where electricity is in vogue for 
these cases, the successes claimed rest on doubtful diagnoses, 
and even then they do not equal those after operation. 

Conditions mainly Uterine. — Of these, the condition requiring 
operation most frequently is myoma, or uterine fibroid. The 
exact position of the operation for uterine myoma is not yet 
fixed. It has been much discussed and written about at 
meetings and in journals ; and the general outcome of the dis- 
cussion has been that cause for interference resides, not so 
much in the tumour itself, its size or situation, as upon the 
symptoms it produces. 

Uterine myoma has many phases. We find it frequently in 
post-mortem examinations of patients who have died of some- 
thing else, and in whom it produced slight or no symptoms 
during life. We find it of moderate size in young women, where 
it causes excessive metrorrhagia, completely or partially dis- 
abling them. And most frequently of all it is met with in 
women near the menopause, as a large slow-growing mass, 
prolonging the periods and causing excessive flow, but not en- 
dangering life or causing much disablement. Lastly, we have 
a class in which the tumour goes on growing till it reaches 
dimensions so great as to interfere with the vital processes. The 
rapidly growing oedematous myomata of Tait deserves special 
mention. These groupings may be modified and interchanged 
in numerous ways ; they broadly represent the conditions as 
most frequently met with, and that is all. 

It is impossible, without fully entering into the whole ques- 
tion of the treatment of uterine myoma, to discuss the pros and 
cons of removal of the uterine appendages for it. The treatment 
has its origin in a vera causa — the atrophy of such growths with 
the natural atrophy, at the menopause, of the reproductive 
glands. By removal of the central glands we seek to produce 
atrophy of the organs whose functions are dependent on these 
glands. The results have been encouraging, and the operation 
is received with growing favour. Even in the hands of such 



OPERATION FOR MYOMA. 189 

skilled hysterectomists as Keith, Thornton, and Bantock, re- 
moval of the appendages is a favourite operation. Tait has 
always been its chief advocate in this country. 

The indications for removal of the appendages cannot easily 
be laid down in general terms. The leading indications are 
haemorrhage and rapidity of growth. Circumstances of weight 
are the age and condition of the patient and the size of 
the tumour. In large tumours it is difficult, and sometimes 
impossible, to remove the appendages. If the patient is near 
the menopause, we may temporise, using the ordinary remedial 
measures ; if the patient is under thirty-five, we must take into 
account the past history of the growth as to rapidity of enlarge- 
ment and amount of haemorrhage, and try to forecast the 
probable risks of leaving it. If the patient is married, the risks 
are increased from pregnancy. If she is in poor circumstances, 
forced to earn her living, operation may be indicated ; while in a 
well-to-do patient, to whom chronic invalidism is not an unmiti- 
gated evil, it may not be indicated. With the above reservations, 
free bleeding, which cannot be controlled by ordinary means, is 
the leading indication for operative interference. If a growth 
of small size is growing rapidly and producing symptoms of its 
presence other than bleeding, and if the woman is some way off 
the menopause, we may interfere. And, finally, the possible 
effects of Apostoli's method of appl3'ing electricity must be 
taken into account. 

The general mortality of the operation for myomata is some- 
where near ten per cent. In the hands of individual operators 
it is, however, less. As to the results, we may, in every thirteen 
cases of recovery after operation, reckon upon complete cure — 
i.e. shrinking of the tumour and menopause — in ten cases ; 
improvement in two ; and failure in only one. But these 
results, with increasing care and judgment in the selection of 
cases and the period of operation, will no doubt improve. If 
cases of uterine myoma are kept under close and constant 
observation, and treated by removal of the appendages suffi- 
ciently early, the field of hysterectomy for this disease will 
become greatly diminished. 



190 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

Certain congenital anomalies and defects in the uterus, associated 
with a normal development of the appendages, may be attended 
with moliminal disturbances so severe as to justify operation. 
These are : complete absence of the uterus ; embryonic, fcetal 
or infantile uterus ; the so-called " uterus pubescens." In these 
the menstrual functions subsidiary to well-developed tubes and 
ovaries cannot be properly discharged. There is, not retention, 
but a complete absence or imperfect establishment of the 
menstrual flow. The uterus is overburdened by its ovaries 
and tubes, so to speak, and at the periods of menstruation it 
gives no relief to their engorgement by bleeding. The moli- 
minal pains in such cases are often very severe, confining the 
patient to bed, driving away sleep, and requiring the adminis- 
tration of opium or even chloroform. In the intervals there 
may be comparative ease ; but frequently the pain spreads over 
these intervals as well, and the patient becomes broken down 
in health and glides into chronic invalidism. It is often pos- 
sible in such cases to detect the ovaries enlarged, prolapsed, 
and tender, and the tubes are sometimes abnormally large 
as well. 

The operation is sometimes performed for incuvahle displace- 
ments of the uterus when the symptoms are severe and irremediable. 
Retroversion and retroflexion, where the uterus has become 
adherent in its abnormal position, is the most frequent con- 
dition. The uterus is enlarged and tender, free bleeding takes 
place at the periods, pessaries are either useless or unbearable, 
or both, and other local measures, after prolonged trial, prove 
ineffectual. The patient is a chronic invalid, probably confined 
to bed or couch, and there is no prospect of cure. In such an 
extreme case removal of the uterine appendages, causing atrophy 
of the uterus, affords the only chance of cure. 

Insuperable obstruction to the flow of the menstrual fluid is some- 
times an indication for removal of the appendages. In such 
cases there is extreme pain at the periods, and sometimes, 
according to Battey and others, even danger to life. Injuries 
during labour, such as extreme cicatricial contraction of the 



OPERATION IN EPILEPSY. 191 

vagina, and destruction with occlusion of the lower part of the 
uterus, are the most frequent causes. Congenital imperforate 
uterus is another cause. 

The operation in mania has an extremely limited range. 
The proposal of Goodell to remove the ovaries from all female 
lunatics who have abnormal sexual propensities cannot be 
regarded seriously, any more than we should regard castration 
under similar circumstances in the male.* Certain cases of 
mania, in which the attacks come on solely or chiefly at the 
periods, and in which a sexual element strongly predominates, 
might, under very special restrictions, be properl}^ treated by 
removal of the appendages. In puerperal mania, particularly 
if the disease has recurred after a second confinement, the 
removal of portions of the Fallopian tubes to prevent future 
pregnancy rather than complete removal of the appendages is 
indicated. For nymphomania the position of the operation is 
less assured. The operation has been performed for confirmed 
masturbation ; but for this purpose it does not appeal strongly 
to the sympathies of t4ie surgeon. Indeed, as the operation 
may not remove sexual feelings, it may not cure the habit. 

In true epilepsy, the operation has not been attended with 
very favourable results. A few cases of recovery are recorded, 
but the accounts of these do not leave it certain whether the 
disease was true epilepsy or not. It is not sufficient to justify 
operation that the fits are worse or more numerous at the 
menstrual periods ; this is true in many examples of confirmed 
epilepsy. Before operation is thought of, there must be a very 

* Castration for madness in the male has nevertheless been performed. 
Lazarus Riverius, " Counsellor and Physitian to the King of France," in his 
collected works (1678) quotes, in the following terse and apt language, a case 
communicated by one M . Samuel Formius, "a most experienced chyrurgeon 
of Montpelier, having Practised the Art fifty years": " There was a certain 
young Man mad, and for his Cure the most effectuall Remedies were put in 
practice, so far as to the use of Antimony, the Trepan, and the opening of the 
Arteries of his Temples. And when all did no good, I (Formius) advised that 
he should be guelded ; which being done, all Symptoms were abated, and his 
fury ceased quite ; yet so that he continued in melancholy dotage, his madness 
being changed into Melancholy," 



192 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

strong presumption that the disease had its origin in perturbed 
sexual function, and the disease must not be so far advanced 
as to preclude the probability of cure. Actual disease in the 
appendages is an indication for operation. 

In hysteyo-epilepsy there is, undoubtedly, a fair and promising 
field for operation. But here, also, the mere existence of the 
disease does not indicate operation. Clear and definite evidence 
of its connection with the sexual functions must be forthcoming. 
If the first fit occurred at the first menstruation ; if subsequent 
fits occurred exclusively at the periods, and if they became 
intermenstrual only after having existed over several years ; if 
there is an aura starting from the region of the ovaries; if the 
fits do not increase in severity ; if they are unaffected by the 
bromides ; and, finally and most important of all, if there is 
palpable disease of the appendages, we may consider the case 
as suitable for operation. The minor symptoms of hystero- 
epilepsy, such as muscular cramps and spasms and disturbances 
of sensation, are not of importance surgically. Of more im- 
portance are the general condition of the patient as to health, 
and her position in life — that is, whether she must earn her living 
or not. If the health is failing, and the patient is becoming a 
helpless invalid ; or if she is absolutely precluded from sup- 
porting herself by her own exertions, and has no future but 
the workhouse, these we should rightly consider as additional 
indications. 

In not a few of the cases where cure has followed operation, 
there has been very slight or no disease of the appendages ; in 
others, uterine stenosis and incurable displacements are found. 
The amount of disease does not pari passu increase the urgency 
of operation. Just as many women whose sexual organs appear 
to be perfectly normal, and who bear children, suffer more at 
their periods than others who are sterile from palpable disease, 
so may a slight amount of disease in one woman produce 
hystero-epilepsy, where in another it would produce no symp- 
toms whatever. The index of excitability to reflex neuroses 
varies in different constitutions. In a sliding scale downwards, 
it is easy to reach the condition of no local disease at all, and 



THE OPERATION. 193 

speak only of disturbed function ; and, according to a good few 
reports, we must at present accept this functional disturbance 
as a real cause. But it is only provisionally so accepted ; future 
investigations will probably displace it altogether. 

For hysteria the operation has been performed, and with 
success. But operations of less severity than removal of the 
appendages have been successful in hysteria, — a small cut on 
the abdomen, for instance. For mere hysteria, even if accom- 
panied by "convulsive attacks" or "dancmg fits," few surgeons 
would care to remove the appendages. The attacks would have 
to be very troublesome indeed, and the case would have to be 
surrounded by every conceivable inducement to operate, before 
interference could be contemplated. 

THE OPERATION. 

What will be the exact nature and extent of the operation 
depends partly on the disease for which the operation is per- 
formed, and partly on the end which the operator seeks to 
secure. 

In diseases purely local and one-sided, such as ovarian 
hernia, single hydrosalpinx, simple ovarian abscess, uncompli- 
cated prolapse of one ovary, and many examples of Fallopian 
pregnancy, there need be no hesitation in leaving the sound 
organs untouched. In double h37drosalpinx without adhesions, 
the ovaries may be left behind. But in all cases where nerve 
disturbances have existed for some time, we must reckon with 
the force of diseased habit ; and here complete delivery from 
pain may be secured by nothing short of complete abrogation of 
function. If a patient had been suffering for years from a small 
abscess in one ovar}', the appendages being otherwise normal, 
her cure would almost certainly be more speedy and more 
complete if the whole of the appendages were swept away. 
The experience of Tait" and others is decidedly in favour of 
bilateral removal of the organs for inflammatory disease. After 
26 cases of unilateral removal for inflammatory conditions, Tait 
found that a second operation was called for and performed in 4 ; 
* Birm. Med. Rev., June, 1887. 
14 



194 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

that 5 cases of pyosalpinx had subsequently died, presumably 
from rupture of abscess of the other side ; and that, in 7 others, 
a second operation would be required. In 13 out of 26 cases 
the unilateral operation was a complete failure, and complete 
success could be chronicled for only 3, in the sense that the 
disease had not recurred on the opposite side. Each case must 
be judged on its own merits. The duration 'of the disease and 
the extent" of it, the age of the patient, her position in life, her 
own and her husband's wishes, must all be taken into account. 

It happens in most cases of inflammatory disease that the 
lesions are bilateral ; and here the question is settled for us. 
In those cases where the motive is abrogation of function, or 
cessation of uterine bleeding, we have to decide between simple 
removal of the ovaries — oophorectomy ; and removal of both 
tubes and ovaries — salpingo-oophorectomy. 

Into a discussion of the influence which the tubes ma)' 
possess over the function of menstruation I cannot here enter. 
Suffice it to say, that if Tait's theories have not everywhere 
been accepted, his practice has been very generally followed. 
The modern operation is removal of the appendages, and not 
merel}' removal of the ovaries. 

Only practical considerations in support of this practice 
need be given here. A few of these are as follows : 

(i) More than one case has been recorded in which removal 
of tubes without ovaries has been followed by menopause. One 
such case has occurred in my own practice. In this case 
menopause was not sought. On the other hand, many cases of 
double oophorectomy have not been followed by complete change 
of life. The best results published so far have been got from 
complete removal of the appendages. 

(2) A better pedicle is afforded for deligation when both 
tubes and ovaries are included. A ligature surrounding the 
ovarian attachments alone is liable to cause kinking of the tube 
with subsequent risk of occlusion or distension. The hilum of 
the ovar}', with its plexus of vessels, is not satisfactory tissue 
for inclusion in ligature. 

(3) By removal of the tubes, all further risks of disease in 



THE OPERATION. 195 

them are done away with. The ovaries can scarcely be 
removed without upsetting the blood supply to the tubes, 
and causing some physical injury to them as well. Venous 
congestion or actual inflammation in the tubes might readily 
follow simple oophorectomy, and nullify the benefits of the 
operation. 

(4) The tubes are useless when the ovaries are removed. If 
one good reason for their removal can be given, and none for 
their being left behind, the question at issue is settled. 

Removal of the uterine appendages may be either a very 
simple or a very difficult proceeding. If the organs occupy 
their normal situations and there are no adhesions, as in the 
cases to which the term castration may with least impropriety 
be applied, for small bleeding myomata, or absent or malformed 
uterus, or cystic ovaries, or such like, the operation is easy. If, 
as in inflammatory disease, they are displaced and matted 
together and to the surrounding organs, the operation may be 
one of great difficulty and delicacy. For large myomata, again, 
the operation presents special features which may cause diffi- 
culties ; and finally, the proceeding in the case of ovarian 
hernia is peculiar to itself. 

Where the Appendages are Anatomically Normal, or nearly so. — The 
incision, made in the ordinary median position between the 
umbilicus and pubes, need not be longer than an inch and a 
half or two inches — enough easily to admit two fingers. At the 
second or third cut the fibres of the linea alba are laid bare 
through the whole length of the wound. Pressure forceps are 
placed on any bleeding points, and left attached. As the 
parietes are not thinned and distended by a tumour, the linea 
alba is very narrow, and it is not often that it can be divided 
without exposing one or both recti. A small opening is made 
in the fascia : if it is in the linea alba, well and good ; if not, 
the layers are pushed to one side or the other, and when the 
situation of the fibrous septum is found, the fascia is slit up to 
the length of the wound by the point of the knife cutting for- 
wards. The muscular fibres are pushed to one side with the 

14 * 



196 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

handle of the scalpel, and the sub-peritoneal fat exposed. This 
is caught up on two catch forceps, and carefully divided between 
them ; and the rest of the division is made while the tissues are 
pulled out of the wound. The peritoneum is easily recognised : 
a small opening is made in it while it is thus everted; the finger 
inserted into this opening acts as a director upon which the 
division is completed, preferably by scissors. B}^ this method 
there is no danger in wounding bowels : as each fold of tissue is 
pulled up and made tense, it is cut on its folded edge by the 
blade of the knife, held horizontally; and when the ver}' smallest 
opening has been made in the peritoneum the air rushes in, and 
the bowels, if they have been dragged forward by suction, 
fall back at once. With moderate care, there is not the 
slightest danger of wounding bowel : it is idle to use it as an 
argument against the operation, as one distinguished gynae- 
cologist has done, that there is great danger of wounding the 
intestine. 

The first two fingers are now inserted into the wound. If 
omentum covers the bowels, it must be dragged upwards ; if 
not, the fingers are pushed straight down to the fundus uteri. 
The fingers, one on each side of the broad ligament, and grasp- 
ing it between them, are now carried outwards till the ovary is 
felt ; it is then lifted out of the wound, with its mesovarium and 
its oviduct. Still held in this position in the left hand, the 
Fallopian tube is pulled out as far as it will readily come, and 
the pedicle spread out for ligature. The parts to be removed 
are the ovary with its mesovarium, and the Fallopian tube in 
its outer three-fourths, with the double peritoneal fold in which 
it lies, and which contains also the parovarium and the vascular 
erectile tissue known as the bulb of the ovary. The ligature is 
placed double by transfixing with a blunt needle. The inner 
pedicle contains the utero-ovarian ligament, the Fallopian tube 
somewhere near its isthmus, the spermatic artery and its veins, 
and the small branch which accompanies the Fallopian tube. 
The outer ligature lies at the retiring angle where the infun- 
dibulo-pelvic and infundibulo-ovarian ligaments meet, takes its 
half of the mesovarium, and also constricts the spermatic artery. 



THE OPERATION. 197 

In most cases no method of ligature is, in my opinion, superior 
to Tait's Staffordshire knot. The loop carried through by the 
needle (which must be very blunt, to prevent the accident of 
wounding any of the numerous small veins) is caught by a finger 
and the needle withdrawn. The loop is then raised over the 
parts to be removed, and one of the free ends drawn through 
the loop and over it. The free ends are now caught in one 
hand and pulled tight, while the fingers and thumb of the other 
hand act as an opposing force at the site of delegation. The 
knot is then cast and tied tightly, either by the operator unaided, 
or with the help of the assistant, who pulls on one end of the 
ligature. The parts are then cut away, b}^ successive snips of 
scissors, at a distance of about a third of an inch from the 
ligature. Before making the last cut the surface must be care- 
fully inspected, to see that there is no bleeding. The pedicle is 
then dropped in. A more deliberate, and perhaps more clumsy, 
plan is, to catch the sides of the pedicle in fixation forceps, hand 
these over to an assistant, and apply the ligature below them. 
The same proceeding is then carried out with the appendages 
on the opposite side. 

A small, thin, flat sponge is now placed over the bowels 
under the incision ; and the sutures, four or five in number, are 
introduced. 

When the Appendages are Inflamed, and Adherent. — The previous 
operation is a very simple one. From first to last, in competent 
hands, it can scarcely occupy more than ten minutes. But it 
is a very different thing if the appendages are adherent or 
inflamed, or suppurating and matted together. Then the 
operation may be one of the most difficult in surger}'. Even in 
tlie hands of surgeons of the highest skill, it has not infrequently 
been abandoned as impracticable. 

The first difficulty met with is, probably, that the appendages 
are fixed and cannot be drawn to the surface. They may be 
represented by an irregular conglomeration of cystic and cica- 
tricial material, sessile on the broad ligament or in Douglas's 
pouch, and perhaps intimately adherent to bowels. They are 



198 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

beyond the reach of sight, however much the abdominal walls 
are depressed. To deal with such a state of affairs, one of two 
courses is open. The first is to enlarge the incision to five or 
six inches ; to pull the bowels out of the pelvis and keep them 
in the abdomen by one or more sponges packed under them ; to 
pull the parietes apart by spatulge, and seek by a strong light to 
expose the parts to view, and operate by the aid of sight. 
This may be safe, but it is clumsy and difficult. If the parietes 
are muscular and firm, considerable force may be required to 
crowd the bowels into the abdomen, and to keep them there is 
still more difficult. And it is not easy at the bottom of the 
pelvis to perform delicate surgical manipulations with knife or 
scissors and ligature. Several operators have had recourse to 
the doubtful expedient of making space by turning the bowels 
outside the abdomen altogether. 

The other course is that followed by Tait. As a result of his 
unrivalled experience, Tait has come to the conclusion that it is 
best to depend entirely on the fingers to deal with such a con- 
dition, relying on the skilled sense of touch to guide against the 
dangers of tearing bowel or other structures. To control bleed- 
ing he recommends sponge-packing. Firstly, the fingers map 
out the actual limits of the diseased organs ; then these are 
gently separated from all surrounding organs, and gradually the 
mass is unfolded upwards fromb)ehind till the onl)^ attachment 
left is the proper pedicle of the parts to be removed. Even as 
thus separated the appendages will probably be found sessile on 
the broad ligament, so that they can be little more than brought 
within the range of sight. The broad ligaments are stretched 
tightly across the pelvis, and dragging on the appendages may 
tear them. The pedicle ligature may have to be carried under 
the diseased parts at a considerable depth from the surface. 
If possible, all the tissues are gathered together in one pedicle, 
as by the Staffordshire knot ; but the puckering so produced 
may drag upon the opposite ligamemt to such an extent as to 
cause tearing. To tie in two parts almost of necessity tears 
open the tissue between them. It has happened to me in one 
case, while putting on a ligature, that the broad hgament was 



THE OPERATION. 199 

torn clean away from the side of the uterus for a distance of 
more than an inch. 

In dealing with such a difficulty, Tait, always fertile in 
expedients, tells me that he is in the habit of pushing his 
finger down on the broad ligament, close to the pelvic insertion 
of it, and so causing a series of minute tears through the fibrous 
fasciae and peritoneum, but leaving the elastic, distensile, and 
tortuous vessels uninjured. 

I have thought that an air bag inflated in the rectum might 
sometimes be of use by raising the whole pelvic floor. 

The bleeding in these cases is sometimes described as being 
truly alarming, and I have had practical experience of this 
fact. Sponges are packed in everywhere as the adhesions are 
separated, and as the haemorrhage is started. If, after the 
appendages have been removed, bleeding still goes on, a little 
solution of iodine on a sponge may be applied to the raw 
surfaces. Of course visible bleeding points are dealt with by 
ligature or forci-pressure. And it may sometimes be good 
practice to leave forceps attached to bleeding points for twenty- 
four hours or so, their handles being left outside. In all such 
cases the insertion of a glass drainage-tube for a day or two is 
advisable. 

During the performance of these operations we must bear 
in mind the fact that adhesions between intestines may cause 
great pain. If it is possible to separate such adhesions 
without endangering the intestinal walls, the intestines should 
be set free. The separation must be done with great care 
delicacy, and always, if possible, within the range of sight. 

If an abscess or abscesses exist, extra care is necessary 
to avoid rupture of the abscess wall. It will be wise before 
beginning separation to aspirate the contents, and place a 
pressure forceps on the opening so made. In such cases the 
placing of sponges all round the diseased parts is peculiarly 
necessary. 

• For Uterine Myoma. — For small myomata the proceeding 
juay be in no way different from the simplest operation. In 



200 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

fact, as the appendages are raised with the fundus, and the 
broad hgaments are usually soft and distensile, the operation 
may be rendered easier. 

When the tumour is large, and especially when it is 
adherent, the difficulties may be great, even insuperable. Not 
a few such operations, begun as oophorectomy, have had to be 
finished as hysterectomy. If the tumour grows away from the 
uterus, being sub-peritoneal and near the fundus, the append- 
ages ma}^ be deep in the pelvis. Where the growth lies between 
the broad ligaments the ovaries will be elevated, and squeezed 
between the tumour and the parietes. In an unsymmetrical 
growth one ovary may be quite conveniently near the surface, 
while the other lies out of reach and behind. Indeed, we must 
expect an endless variety of situation, and in some cases be 
prepared not to find ovaries at all. 

When one ovary is found, we must, before proceeding to 
remove it, find the other : and before removing one we must be 
certain that it is possible to remove both. Having decided to 
remove the appendages, we rotate the tumour to one side, so as 
to bring the parts first to be removed as close as possible to 
the surface. The pedicle is secured in the ordinary way by a 
Staffordshire knot, or in any other way that seems suitable for 
the case. Thornton's plan, of not cutting off" the first ovary till 
all manipulations are over with the second, is a good one : it 
minimises the risk of bleeding from the divided pedicle. 
Forceps are left attached to the appendages first ligated : 
the appendages on the other side are brought as near to the 
surface as possible by rotating the growth, tied, cut off", and 
covered with a flat sponge. The appendages on the other 
side are then cut off", and also covered with a sponge. When 
the sutures have been inserted in the parietal wound, the 
sponges are removed and the wound closed. 

For Ovarian Hernia. — When, from pain or symptoms of 
strangulation, it has become necessary to operate upon an 
ovarian hernia, it is usually found the best surgery to remove 
the herniated parts. The incisions are made as for ordinary 



PROGRESS OF THE OPERATION. 201 

hernia, and the appendages are removed according to the 
principles laid down. Mr. Lawson advises that the divided 
end of the Fallopian tube be fixed in the wound by a suture : 
this procedure seems to be no more necessary in operating here 
than by abdominal section. In most cases there will be found 
adhesions fixing the herniated organs in the sac. Hulke has 
operated upon a case in which one cornu of a bifid uterus lay 
in the sac with the appendages, and " the inguinal portion of 
the uterus was invested by peritoneum, which passed directly 
into that of the hernial sac, and thus fixed the organ in situ." 
In herniated ovaries which are easily reducible there is danger of 
their slipping into the abdomen during operation; to avoid the 
risk of this, it is suggested that a needle be passed behind the 
ovary to fix it — a proceeding which is open to the objection that 
bowel may be pierced. In some cases, where the hernia only 
occasionally takes place, it may be most expedient to remove 
the appendages by abdominal section. 

Ligature instead of Removal. — In cases where removal is- 
extremely difficult, or impossible, the proposal of Professor 
Simpson, to strangulate the blood supply by ligation, is worthy 
of a trial. In his hands, and in the hands of Leopold of 
Leipzig, and others, it has done good. Dr. Geza v. Antal, of 
Buda-Pest," urges atrophic ligature of the ovaries, not only for 
uterine fibroids, but for uterine versions or flexions, ovarian 
displacements and other conditions. More than one writer has 
suggested that the whole proceeding of removal of the ap- 
pendages does good entirely by cutting off blood-supply. 

Removal by the Vagina has now practically been abandoned, 
and need not be described. I have once operated in this way 
with success. 

PROGRESS AFTER OPERATION. 

The progress immediately after operation in all essential 
particulars so closely resembles that seen after ordinary ovari- 
otomy, that it need not be described. Two peculiarities may be 
mentioned — pain and uterine haemorrhage. 

* CentralbL f. Gyndk., 1882, No. 30. 



*i02 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

After removal of the appendages there is usually, for a day 
or two, considerable pain in the hypogastrium, far more than is 
seen after removal of cystomata. We ought to be chary of 
having recourse at once to opium. Flatulence and sickness are 
such frequent sequences of opiates, however administered, that 
it is always wise to postpone their administration up to the limits 
of the patient's endurance. The pain soon passes off; it rarely 
continues over the second day. Battey used to divide the pedicle 
by ecraseur, to try and do away with this pain ; statements as to 
the success of his practice are not published. If there is rest- 
lessness or jactitation, opium is specially indicated. 

On the second, third, or fourth day after operation we may 
expect bleeding from the uterus to take place. The bleeding is 
usually considerable in amount, and may continue over four or 
five days. It is in no way harmful ; indeed, it is usually ac- 
companied by amelioration of the subjective symptoms. Some 
surgeons consider it part of the cure in the operation for myoma. 
It requires no treatment, and need cause no anxiety. 

Remote Effects of the Operation. — The individual results of the 
operation as performed for specific disease have already been 
described, and the general results so far as they affect the 
feminine attributes have been sufficiently discussed. It remains 
shortly to give an account of the behaviour of cases, with par- 
ticular reference to the uterine functions and with general 
reference to bodily health as observed for a year or more after 
operation. Each disease has its own record, and all diseases 
have points in common. 

For inflammatory disease, which is perhaps the most satis- 
factory source of operation, the record is broadly as follows: — 
At the end of a fortnight or three weeks the patient will probably 
express herself as feeling peculiarly well, and will be anxious to 
get up. When she has been getting about for a week or so, and 
at the time when menstruation is due, she will probably complain 
of backache and feelings of weight in the hypogastrium, and pos- 
sibly her spirits may become a little depressed. Most probably 
there will be molimina, but no menstrual flow. During the next 
month slight backache, with some general weakness, may be 



EFFECTS OF THE OPERATION. 203 

complained of; and somewhere near the next period these 
symptoms may be aggravated. These cases do not get quite 
well very quickly as a rule ; and this, of course, is not to be 
expected, considering their previous prolonged illness. In 
from three to six months perfect recovery may be expected. 
But all the old pain will have disappeared; and this alone, even 
in the most tedious cases, the patient will say was more than 
enough to justify operation. Regular menstruation is very rare, 
irregular and slight bleedings are more common; neither is 
likely to continue over more than six months. In a considerable 
majority amenorrhoea, immediate and permanent, follows the 
metrorrhagia which occurs a few days after operation. 

In myoma the result is very variable as to subsequent course. 
There occurs the ordinary metrorrhagia immediately after 
operation. Thereafter we may expect complete arrest of men- 
struation, with, at first, cessation in the growth of the tumour, 
and then slow but steady diminution in size. This shrinking is by 
no means confined to small tumours, and it is rarely possible to 
tell what tumours will shrink and what will not shrink. 

There is one variety of myoma — the soft, cedematous — 
which, Tait tells us, goes on growing after removal of the 
appendages, and which can be treated only by hysterectomy. I 
can find no definite information as to the utility of removal of the 
appendages after the period of the menopause has passed ; and 
it would be dangerous, considering how little we really know of 
their functions even when supposed to be physiologically inert, 
to speculate as to the possible benefits to be derived from the 
proceeding. A tumour may not show signs of diminution in 
size for several months, when it may begin to decrease in bulk 
over one or two years, and then reach dimensions which are 
stationary. 

For the neuroses, the results are at once highly encouraging 
and deeply disappointing. The balance, however, lies largely on 
the side of encouragement. The failures have been chiefly in cases 
of epilepsy ; and here, no doubt, errors arising from an improper 
selection of cases have been most numerous. In favourable cases 
we are not to expect complete and perfect cure from the beginning. 



204 REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

For the first few weeks there may be a complete cessation of the 
abnormal nerve- phenomena ; at the time of the next period there 
may be a few fits ; then in diminishing numbers a few more fits, 
lasting over several months. Perfect recovery must not be 
counted upon within six months at least ; and this recovery must 
be encouraged by strict attention to regimen and surroundings. 

Battey, at the twelfth annual meeting of the American 
Gynsecologists, held in New York, September 15th, 1887, read a 
paper on the matured results of 54 cases operated upon by him. 
His conclusions seem to fairly and clearly state the experience 
of others. He says : — 

(i) That the change of life is the most important factor in 
securing the complete result of the operation, 

(2) That only in exceptional cases did cure immediately 
follow operation ; in the vast majority the patient had to pass 
through the ups and downs incident to the change of life before 
the restoration to health was complete. This period lasted from 
one to five years. 

(3) Very long standing cases reach a stage when they become 
absolutely incurable by any operation. 

(4) In some cases which seemed suitable for operation the 
pain continued ; and his experience has not yet taught him how 
perfectly to select the cases. 



Section IV. 



OPERATIONS ON THE NON-GRAVID UTERUS. 



In this section we have to consider removal of the uterus for 
malignant disease, for incurable inversion, and for myoma. For 
malignant disease, removal by the vagina — Kolpo-hysterectomy — 
is the operation described ; it means complete excision of the 
vi^hole organ. For incurable inversion, removal may or may not 
be complete. For myoma the operation is in the first place a 
myomectomy ; in most cases, however, it is also a hysterectomy, 
total or partial. The operations are usually named according 
to the purpose for which they are performed — Hysterectomy 
for malignant disease, for inversion, and for myoma. 

SURGICAL ANATOMY OF THE UTERUS. 

The relational anatomy of the uterus is of extreme practical 
importance. It is chiefly the close contiguity of bladder, ureters, 
and other impo rtant structures which renders removal of the 



206 



OPERATIONS ON THE UTERUS. 



uterus such a difficult and delicate proceeding. No surgeon 
ought to attempt the operation of hysterectomy who has 
not previously made himself familiar, by study, dissection, and 

operation on the cadaver, with every 
anatomical and technical detail. 

The ligaments of the uterus have 
already been sufficiently described ; 
here we have specially to consider 
its vascular supply, and its relations 
to bladder, ureters, rectum, and peri- 
toneum. 

Over the fundus uteri the peri- 
toneum is closely adherent. In the 
front, as it descends to the junction 
of the body and the cervix, it is less 
intimately attached to the muscular 
tissue ; and, at the bottom of the 
vesico-uterine depression, it is so 
loosely attached that it can readily 
be stripped with the finger. Here is 
the most important surgical region. 
The reflection of peritoneum from 
uterus to bladder is usually at the 
level of the internal os, but it is 
liable to be elevated or depressed. 
(Fig, 31.) In children it is higher 
up, in multiparae and old women it 
is lower down, than the average 
level. In close relation with the 
under surface of the vesico-uterine 




Fig. 31. 

Vertical antero-posterior section of 
the uterus. (Courty.) 

2, isthmus separating the cavity of 
the body from that of the cervix ; a, 
anterior lip of the cervix ; p, poste- 
rior lip ; /, posterior vagino-uterine 
cul-de-sac ; va, va, vagina ; b, b, con- 
nections of the urinary bladder with 
the anterior surface ot the cervix ; r, 
reflection of the peritoneum from the 
posterior surface of the uterus and 
vagina to the rectum ; 



commence- 
ment of the utero-lumbar suspensory pQ^^h lie the baSC of the bladder, 
ligaments. i^ 

and the ureters imbedded in cellular 
tissue. The bladder wall, for a distance of fourteen millimetres, 
lies on the cervix uteri ; below this, as far as the pubes, it rests 
on the vagina. Courty found, as the result of a great number of 
measurements taken at all ages, that the distance between the 
opening of the ureter into the bladder and the insertion of the 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 207 

vagina into the cervix was on an average between one and two 
centimetres in length. The distance between the margin of the 
uterus and the ureter varies according to the size of the cervix, 
and also according to the condition of the bladder as to empti- 
ness or distension. With an empty bladder and a normal uterus 
a distance of quite half an inch may be reckoned upon as 
separating the cervix from the insertion of the ureter into the 
bladder wall. 

The peritoneum covering the posterior surface of the uterus 
is continued over the utero-sacral ligaments, and carried down 
for about three-quarters of an inch over the posterior vaginal 
wall, when it is reflected up the rectum, forming Douglas's pouch. 
Though the sub-peritoneal cellular tissue is not so abundant 
behind as in front, the peritoneum can be readily peeled off as 
high as the level of the internal os. 

The cellular tissue lying between the folds of the broad 
ligament is continuous below with that which ascends in front 
over the lateral surfaces of the bladder up to the hyppgastrium, 
and that which descends behind over the levator ani and upper 
perineal aponeuroses. In this cellular tissue course the uterine 
vessels and the ureters. 

The uterine artery, a branch of the anterior trunk of the 
internal iliac, passes obliquely downwards and forwards from its 
origin near the synchondrosis towards the spine of the ischium. 
Just above the ischial spine it leaves the pelvic wall, but con- 
tinuues to descend half-way to the tuberosity of the ischium, 
where it turns upwards, bending towards the vagina to which it 
gives branches, and reaching the uterus at its junction with the 
vagina. It runs up the side of the uterus between the folds of 
the broad ligaments, supplying the organ with vessels, and finall}^ 
anastomoses with the ovarian artery near the cornu. (Fig. 32.) 
Opposite the external os the uterine artery gives off a consider- 
able branch, the circular artery of the cervix, and it gives off 
other branches in its course upwards. Throughout its course the 
vessel is tortuous and loosely supported by cellular tissue. At its 
lowest point it is on a level with the external os, and here it 
passes directly over the ureter, almost in contact with it, but not 



208 



OPERATIONS ON THE UTERUS. 



at all attached. The lateral branches given off to the uterus by 
the uterine artery are so numerous that local compression 
from flexions or other causes can scarcely render any part of 
the organ 
ansemic. 

The ova- 
rian or sper- 
matic ar- 
teries arise 
from the 
aorta be- 
low the 
level of the 
renal ar- 
teries, and 
cross the 
pelvic brim 
at, or in 
front of, the 
bifurcation 
of the com- 
mon iliac, 
crossing 
the ureter, 
and run- 
ning along 
the upper 
border of 
the broad 
ligament to 
the cornu. 
More ex- 
actly, they 
may be said 




Fig. 32. 

Drawing from a dissection made to show relations of ureters, 
uterine arteries, bladder, &-c. 

nr., ureter ; nt.Ar., uterine artery ; o.ti., os uteri exposed by an incision, 
X, made through the top of the vagina ; bl., bladder, the walls of which are 
cut away down to the insertion of the ureters into its base ; Vag., vagina. 
Two bands of fibrous tissue are seen passing between the cervix uteri 
and the top of the vagina. Arterial branches of considerable magnitude 
accompany the ureters. The space between the bladder wall and the 
unshaded body of the uterus (artificially enlarged by traction of hook) is 
covered by peritoneum, in the loose cellular tissue underlying which the 
bladder wall rises upwards to a varying distance. 



to lie between the folds of the infundibulo-pelvic ligament. In 
the round ligament is a branch from the epigastric artery which 
reaches the uterus. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 209 

Although the uterine artery is usually larger than the ovarian, 
the reverse is occasionally the case. Their relative dimensions 
are liable to endless variation. 

The relations of the ureters to the uterus are of prime 
importance. The researches of Holl of Innsbruck, * Garrigues 
(quoted by Hart and Barbour) and Polk,f painstaking and 
thorough as they are, by no means agree. Mr. J. Collier and 
Prof. Morrison Watson, quoted by Dr. Thorburn,| have given 
a description of the course of the ureters, which I have several 
times verified by dissection, and which, I think, may be trusted. 
Entering the pelvis, the ureter crosses the common iliac near its 
bifurcation, and then runs downwards and forwards in front of 
the internal iliac and its anterior divisions. Where this division 
of the internal iliac splits into its branches, the ureter bends 
backwards and is crossed to the inside by the uterine artery. 
(Fig. 32.) The ureter then turns forwards at the level of the 
internal os, and at a distance of about half an inch from it runs 
along the side of the vagina for a little way, finally bending 
over it so as to enter the junction between the vagina and 
bladder. It perforates the latter organ just above the middle 
of the anterior vaginal wall, and obliquely enters the viscus 
a little lower down. 

* Weiner med. IVoch., Nos. 45 and 46, 1882. 

t New York Med. Joimi., May 3rd, 1884. 

\ Dis. of Women, 1885, p. 534. 



15 



Hysterectomy for Malignant Disease. 

History. — It is probable that excision of the uterus was 
practised by the ancient Greeks, but it is certain that the 
operation was subsequently forgotten. Soranos of Ephesus, in 
his book on Diseases of Women, published a century before Christ, 
speaks of the operation. It is probable, however, that it was 
performed for prolapse only. We hear nothing of hysterectomy 
till 1560, when Andreas a Cruce is said to have performed it. 
In 1 81 3 Langenbeck successfully removed the whole uterus, for 
what was supposed to be cancer. The reality of his operation 
was questioned ; but, when the patient died nearly thirty years 
later, it was proved at the post-mortem examination that he had 
removed the whole organ. Mikulicz''' tells us that one Gutberlet 
received a prize in Vienna, in 1814, for proposing a mode of 
removing the uterus not unlike that of Freund. In 1822 Sauter of 
Constance had the first successful vaginal extirpation for cancer; 
but a urinary fistula remained. In 1828 Blundell recorded four 
cases of removal of the uterus for cancer, only one being 
successful. In 1829 Recamier registered one success; but this 
was followed by failures in the hands of Siebold in 1831, of 
Delbech in 1839, and others ; so that the operation fell into 
disuse till 1879, when Czerny,f struck with the report of Lan- 
genbeck's case, re-introduced the operation with a success. 
Billroth, Mikulicz, Schroeder, Condereau, Hennig, Freund, 
and others, soon followed ; and the operation now took its place 
among established proceedings in surgery. 

Freund struck out a new path for himself by using abdominal 
section. Crede modified Freund's operation by making a 
resection of the pubes. Massari, Spiegelberg, Baum, and others, 
proposed modifications more or less ingenious. But Freund's 
operation has died out. It has had a mortality of nearly seventy 
per cent, in 106 published cases, and it has been almost univer- 

* Wiener Med. Wocli., 1880, No. 47, et seq. 
t Zeitschrift fi'ir Gebuiishulfe mid Dyndkologie, Bd, vi,, Heft, i., 1881. 



MORTALITY. 211 

sally discarded for the vaginal operation — Kolpo-hysterectomy 
(*:o\7ros=vagina). To the latter operation we shall therefore 
confine our attention. 

Mortality and Appreciation. — By some authorities the operation 
of removal of a cancerous uterus is absolutely condemned as 
unjustifiable. The objections offered are mainly on three 
grounds — the high death-rate, the liability to recurrence, and 
the favourable results got from partial removal. 

Kolpo-hysterectomy has been performed more than 380 times, 
with a general mortality of about 20 per cent.* This death- 
rate is spread over nearly 50 operators. Martinf collected 311 
cases reported up to the end of 1886, with a general mortality 
of 15. 1 : this, I think, must be a little too favourable. The 
papers of Post and Dudley:]: gave a total of 381 operations, with 
a per-centage mortality of 20. Since then about 80 operations 
have been performed by 25 surgeons, or more, with a mortality 
of 10 per cent. Now, it may be pointed out that ovariotomy 
itself, in the first 300 operations performed by a few selected 
surgeons, had a mortality greater than kolpo-hysterectomy has 
had. And it is certain that if the combined results of all opera- 
tors at the present day were tabulated, the death-rate would be 
nearly as large for ovariotomy as for kolpo-hysterectomy. The 
statistics of individual skilled operators in excision of the uterus 
are nearly as favourable as the average statistics of ovariotomy. 
Thus, Brennecke has had 21 cases, and Staude 16 cases, all suc- 
cessful ; Fritsch lost 7 out of 60 operations ; Martin lost 1 1 out 
of 66 operations ; and Sanger, Olshausen, Leopold, and a few 
others have had results nearly as brilliant. Dudley§ has col- 
lected 38 cases of operation done in America by 22 surgeons, 
with 13 deaths. It should be noted that Bernays of St. Louis 
had 6 cases, all recovering ; and Bull of New York, 5 cases, 
with one death. It will therefore be seen that, in skilled hands, 
the operation is far from being unjustifiable on account of its 

* See Post's elaborate paper, Intern. Journ. Med. Sc, Jan., 1886. 

t Internat. Med. Congress, 1887. 

I Internat. Journ. Med. Sc, Jan., 1886. 

§ N.Y. Med. Journ., July gth and i6th, 1887. 

15 * 



212 KOLPO -HYSTERECTOMY. 

mortality. The operation has suffered at the hands of untrained 
operators ; but the operation itself must not therefore be 
condemned. 

With regard to the objection urged against hysterectomy, 
that the disease is extremely liable to recur, we have no trust- 
worthy data to argue from. This objection holds good against 
all operations for malignant disease ; and there is no evidence to 
show that this recurrence is more likely to take place after exci- 
sion of the uterus than after other excisions for cancer — of the 
tongue, for instance. Reasoning on theoretical grounds, we 
might infer that an organ, so much differentiated as the uterus, 
would be as likely as any to have the disease limited for a 
definite period. As a matter of fact, in those cases where the 
after-results have been carefully noted, as in Fritsch's, Leopold's, 
Schroeder's, and Martin's, the per-centage of permanent cures 
is fully equal to that got after extirpation of cancer in other 
regions. No doubt recurrence has taken place more frequently 
and more rapidly than it ought to have done, because unsuitable 
cases have been submitted to operation. 

Partial or cervical amputation is sometimes compared with 
total amputation, to the disadvantage of the latter. No fair 
comparison is possible. As well might we compare excision of 
a small epitheliomatous ulcer of the tongue with removal of the 
whole organ. The operations are quite distinct. Where the 
one is proper, the other is improper: where the minor operation 
is likely to succeed, it would be wrong to perform the major. 
And in the case of cancer of the uterus, the minor operation is, 
in the large majority of cases, the proper one : my own experi- 
ence is, that for ten cases in which partial excision is the proper 
operation, total excision is called for only once. 

It should be noted that certain authorities maintain that 
total removal should be adopted for all cases of cancer of the 
uterus, even in those cases where the disease is confined to the 
cervix. Fritsch, in particular, has identified himself with this 
view ; and gives as reasons, besides the admitted ones of sub- 
sequent painful menstruation and hability to recurrence after 
the partial operation, the somewhat remarkable one that total 



r 

INDICATIONS AND CONTRA-INDICATIONS. 213 

extirpation is less difficult and less bloody than cervical ampu- 
tation. He would operate, however, only when operation is 
easy; that is to say, when the uterus can be easily drawn down. 
Fritsch's experience and his extraordinary success in the oper- 
ation give his opinion great weight. Additional strength has 
been given to Fritsch's position by Schuta of Prague,* who 
states that 70 per cent, of the patients submitted to total extir- 
pation remained free of the disease one year after operation; 
while only 50 per cent, remained free after the partial operation. 
After two years 100 per cent, of the survivors were free after the 
radical operation, while only 40 per cent, were free after the 
partial one. These statistics, however, require corroboration. 

I have no hesitation in expressing my belief that, in care- 
fully selected cases, the operation is both justifiable and proper. 
The immediate mortalitj^ does not forbid it. Recurrence is 
almost certainly not more rapid than in other operations for 
cancer, and permanent recovery is just as likely to be secured. 
And, finally, there seems to be an almost unanimous opinion 
that death after recurrence is not attended with so much suffer- 
ing ; that perforations of bladder and rectum are not so liable 
to take place after the uterus is removed ; and that existence is 
prolonged. 

CONDITIONS FOR WHICH OPERATION MAY BE PERFORMED. 
INDICATIONS AND CONTRA-INDICATIONS. 

The varieties of malignant disease for which excision of the 
uterus may be performed are : epithelioma, scirrhus, encepha- 
loid, and sarcoma. 

Epithelioma may be found attacking the vaginal portion of 
the cervix, the cavity of the cervix, or the interior of the body 
of the uterus. The varieties may be clinically spoken of as 
epithelioma of the os, the cervix, and the body. On the os the 
diagnosis is easy. The characteristic hard, nodular, friable 
and vascular granulations, and the proneness to haemorrhage on 
being touched, are, with the peculiar acrid watery discharges 
* Wien. Med. Presse, July 3rd, 1887. 



214 KOLPO-HYSTERECTOMY. 

and certain other well-known symptoms, sufficiently diagnostic. 
In epithelioma of the cervix, the development of the cauliflower 
excrescences is hindered by the encircling tissues. The new 
growth infiltrates the parenchyma as hard nodular masses, 
leaving softened intervals of uninvaded tissue. Granulations 
may protrude at the os, or they may grow inwards towards the 
uterine cavity. The epitheliomatous granulations soon break 
down, and the cervical cavity becomes a large, open, rounded 
channel, with irregular nodulated masses bulging into it. Can- 
cerous discharges are said to come on earlier, and to be more 
abundant, in this than in the previous form. 

Epithelioma of the body, as a primary disease, is not so rare 
as it is frequently supposed to be. Its behaviour is very similar 
to what is found when the disease attacks the cervical mucous 
membrane. There is greater enlargement of the fundus, less 
marked hardening of the cervix, and it is frequently associated 
with symptoms of uterine contraction or spasm. The diagnosis 
is made certain by dilatation of the cervix and introduction of 
the finger. 

In every case of doubtful diagnosis, a piece of the granu- 
lations should be removed and examined under the microscope. 

As to operative treatment. In every case of epithelioma 
confined to the vaginal portion of the cervix, amputation of the 
cervix alone is, in my opinion, called for. And as the majority 
of examples of epithelioma of the uterus are of this limited 
nature, the greater number of amputations will be partial. 

Cancer of the cervix may occupy the lower portion of the 
canal, or extend upwards through its whole length. The selec- 
tion of partial or total hysterectomy must depend on the extent 
of the disease. It is possible to remove the whole cervix and 
some part of the uterine body without entering the peritoneum, 
and in many cases it may be ascertained with a considerable 
degree of probability that such operation is well clear of the 
disease. But epithelioma in the cavity of the uterus burrows more 
extensively than on the os, and infiltration may have extended 
some distance beyond the limits of the superficial and palpable 
growth Such cases can be cured only by total hysterectomy. 



SARCOMA OF THE UTERUS. 215 

For epithelioma of the fundus and body of the uterus, total 
hysterectomy alone is permissible. 

Parenchymatous cancer of the cervix may be either scirrhus 
or encephaloid : diagnosis between the two is rarely possible 
till the disease is too advanced for operation. It is known by 
the increased tumefaction of the cervical tissue ; by its general 
density, marked at several points by masses of specially hard 
consistence ; by the dark-red, angry colour of the visible parts ; 
and by the tenderness on pressure. Scirrhus is harder than 
encephaloid, and is more liable to form multiple masses of 
induration. The progress in both is very rapid. 

Scirrhus or encephaloid may attack the fundus, and may 
develop towards the uterine cavity or towards the peritoneum. 
In the early stages it is exceedingly difficult to diagnose paren- 
chymatous disease of the body of the uterus from simple 
myoma. Undeniable evidence is afforded only when ulceration 
takes place. But much may be inferred from the urgency of 
the symptoms as to bleeding, pain, the rapidity of progress with 
attendant cachexia, and the nature of the discharges. 

Sarcoma of the uterus is a rare disease, and is not easily 
diagnosed. Haemorrhages, a watery discharge " like the wash- 
ings of meat " (Schroeder), moderate enlargement of the uterus, 
often markedly in one direction, and rapid increase of the 
growth, suggest the disease. There may not be much pain, 
and such pain as is found is usually intermittent and of the 
nature of uterine colic. The growth is soft, often semi-fluc- 
tuating, and it grows irregularly, while still continuing as one 
mass. In 1888 I removed, in the Bristol Royal Infirmary, 
a sarcoma of the uterus containing great quantities of blood- 
clot. The patient died within three weeks with secondary 
deposits in the lungs, and suppurative peritonitis. In the 
beginning of this year I performed a similar operation, removing 
a mass of sarcoma as large as the fist. The patient made an 
excellent recovery, and the uterus was reduced to its normal 
bulk. This was intended as a preliminary to total removal ; 



216 KOLPO-HYSTERECTOMY. 

but the patient, with the chances of recurrence fairly put before 
her, decided against the operation. 

In malignant disease of the uterus, where removal of the 
whole organ is contemplated, the grave nature of the operation 
demands that the indications and contra-indications should be 
peculiarly definite and unmistakable. They are in no way 
different from those in force with reference to malignant disease 
elsewhere ; but the risk to life from the primary operation 
is so great, that special weight must be given to any element 
which is likely to interfere with success. The liability to recur- 
rence in a given case of epithelioma of the lip may appear to be 
greater than in one of epithelioma of the cervix uteri after 
removal ; but the immediate danger after operation from the 
one is so much less than after the other, that the one operation 
might be surgically permissible when the other would not. 

Before proceeding to operation in any given case of malig- 
nant disease, the most careful and rigid scrutiny must be 
instituted, not only into the amount of local disease and its 
limits, but into the general condition of the patient. Marked 
anaemia, evident cachexia, or a faulty condition of any of the 
vital organs or viscera, at once forbids operation. The patient 
must be in fair health, with a prospect of average longevity 
from general soundness of organs apart from the malignant 
disease. 

Locally, a precise examination by vagina and rectum must 
reveal complete absence of extension of disease to any sur- 
rounding organ or gland, to peritoneum, broad ligament, bladder, 
or rectum. One finger in the rectum and another in the vagina 
may cause the cervix and the wall of the bowel to glide over 
each other ; and a sound in the empty bladder may, to a less 
extent, elicit the same symptom for that organ. Bimanual 
examination will detect thickening of the broad ligaments and 
enlargement of glands. The uterus must be freely movable in 
all directions, and the movements ought not to be associated 
with severe deep pelvic pains. Local extension of the growth 
to the vagina, of course, contra-indicates operation. 



CERVICAL AMPUTATION. 



217 



CERVICAL AMPUTATION. 

Although this operation for cervical cancer is not strictly 
within the limits of this work, and was omitted in the first 
edition, I now include it, because it is germane to what follows, 
and because it makes complete the account of the operative 
treatment of uterine cancer. I confine my description to a short 
account of the operation which I have performed for the past 
five years with uniform success. The cases are too few to 
draw conclusions from ; but, judging from the behaviour of 
patients submitted to the operation, I believe that one may go 

on operat- 
ing with a 
mortality 
under 2 per 
cent. 

The va- 
gina is dis- 
inf ec t ed 
thoroughly 
by irriga- 
tion before 
operation, 
and by 
swabbing 
at the time 
of opera- 
tion. The 
patient is 
placed in 
the litho- 
tomy posi- 
tion and 
kept there 
by means 

of Clover's crutch. (Fig. 33.) The cervix is caught in power- 
ful locking volsella, by means of which the uterus is forcibl}' 
dragged down : these are handed over to an assistant, who 




Fig. 33. 

Clover's Cni'.ch. One-eighth size. 



218 KOLPO-HYSTERECTOMY. 

directs the movements of the uterus according to the instruc- 
tion of the surgeon. The only instruments necessary are, two 
Spencer Wells's large compression forceps, a scissors curved 
on the flat, and a straight uterine probe. 

The mucous membrane surrounding the cervix, well clear of 
the disease, is divided circularly with the scissors. With the 
forefinger of the left hand, and the scissors in the right, the 
cervical mucous membrane is dissected or peeled off in an 
upward direction, in front and behind, but not at the sides, as 
high as possible. The dissection is made close to the uterus in 
front to avoid the bladder and ureters, and behind to avoid 
perforation of the peritoneum ; the dissection may be carried 
higher in front than behind. Practice on the cadaver will soon 
enable one to judge by touch when the upward limits of safety 
have been reached ; these are known by the increased resistance 
met with. At the sides, where the broad ligaments are inserted 
and the uterine arteries are met with, no dissection is made, but 
cellular tissue is stretched and peritoneum is pushed aside. The 
cervix is now cleared of mucous membrane up to the limits of 
undetachable peritoneum : it must be noted, however, that the 
peritoneum at the sides is less closely adherent than in front 
and behind ; and two pouches can be formed between the layers 
of the broad ligaments, higher up than the highest limits of the 
peritoneal reflexions from the uterus. The peritoneum is, in 
fact, stripped from the broad ligaments for some distance along 
the sides of the uterus ; and between the two layers of peri- 
toneum lies a stratum of cellular tissue containing the uterine 
vessels. This layer of undetached cellular tissue is caught 
between the fore and middle fingers of the left hand, and 
stretched laterally while the assistant drags the uterus in an 
opposite direction, thus clearing the lower sub -peritoneal 
portions of the broad ligament, which contain important 
vessels, for the application of the large compression forceps. 
The blades of the forceps are pushed as high up as possible in 
the tracks of the fingers and firmly locked, first on one side and 
then on the other. If there has been bleeding from the epithe- 
liomatous tissue, from compression or tearing by the volsella, 



KOLPO-HYSTERECTOMY. 219 

this bleeding at once stops when the forceps are appUed. 
Indeed, the continuation of the haemorrhage after the application 
of both pairs of forceps I should regard as indicating that they 
were not properly applied. 

The cellular tissue between the forceps and the side of the 
uterus is now divided by scissors. Such division nearly always 
permits the uterus to be dragged down lower. The uterine 
probe is now placed inside the cavity as a guide to the lines of 
division. The uterine tissue is divided obliquely upwards by 
the scissors, the division all round converging to the probe as a 
centre. The fingers of the left hand push the loose tissues out 
of the way of the scissors, while the assistant manipulates the 
uterus by volsella and probe, so as to assist the division. The 
cervix and a considerable portion of the body of the uterus may 
be removed in this way without any trouble from haemorrhage. 
The uterine mucous membrane may be removed in its whole 
length without much difficulty, if it is divided while it is gradually 
pulled down after the muscular tissue has been cut through. 

The gap in the uterus is swabbed out with an antiseptic 
lotion ; a pad of antiseptic wool closes the vagina and surrounds 
the handles of the forceps, which are left in situ. In twenty- 
four or thirty-six hours the forceps are removed. Daily irriga- 
tion of the vagina may be continued for a week or longer, and 
in a fortnight the patient may be permitted to get up. 

KOLPO-HYSTERECTOMY. 

An extraordinary amount of literature has accumulated 
around the description of Kolpo-hysterectomy. Much of it 
represents early crude and tentative proceedings which have 
been generally ignored or abandoned; but some of the described 
methods have survived the natural processes of selection and 
evolution, and have now crystallised into generally accepted 
plans of operation. Finality has not yet by any means been 
obtained, and permissible variations in each step of the opera- 
tion may be properly referred to. 

The operation may be conveniently described in successive 
stages. 



220 KOLPO-HYSTERECTOMY. 

Preparatory. — Two or three days must be devoted to 
thoroughly cleansing the whole of the parts concerned in, 
and contiguous to, the seat of operation. The external parts, 
the folds between the labia at the top of the thighs and around 
the clitoris and pubes, are washed at least once a day with soap 
(preferably with pure potash soap) and hot water. The vagina 
is irrigated twice daily with some trustworthy antiseptic, such 
as 1-30 carbolic acid or 1-1500 perchloride solution. After 
irrigation, iodoform powder is to be insufflated, and a plug of 
cotton wool, impregnated with antiseptic material (iodoform is 
suitable), is to be inserted, and removed for the next irrigation. 
Some writers recommend that the cavity of the uterus should 
be purified ; but, if the uterus has to be turned over, risk of 
infection may be avoided by placing a sponge between the 
cervix and the peritoneum ; while if it is not turned over, the 
proceeding is unnecessary. A few surgeons go so far as to 
recommend that the protruding and foul granulations should 
be removed some days before removing the whole organ. The 
objections to this plan are probably less strong than to the use 
of the curette at the time of operation, which prolongs the 
operation, and obscures the field by extravasation of blood, 
while the loss of blood may weaken the patient. When the 
patient is placed ready for operation, a final and thorough 
douching with a strong antiseptic lotion will be instituted. 
The bladder and the rectum are, of course, thoroughly 
emptied. 

The best position of the patient is that of perineal lithotomy ; 
and the posture is best maintained by Clover's crutch (Fig. 33), 
which keeps the knees apart, and maintains flexure of the thighs 
on the pelvis by means of a strap carried round the neck. 
Ordinary lithotomy straps, joining wrist and ankle, permit 
movements of the limbs, and require an assistant to keep them 
still. The table must be of convenient height, so as to bring 
the parts easily within the reach of manipulation and sight. 
A few surgeons prefer Sims's position. 

Fixation and Manipulation of the uterus;is managed by means 
of a powerful volsella, with three or four broad interlocking 



CLEARING THE CERVIX. 221 

teeth. Many surgeons recommend the use of a thick Hgature, 
carried through the cervical tissue. But a hgature, however 
thick, is more hable to tear the tissue than volsella of proper 
shape and dimensions ; and an assistant cannot move the uterus 
about in the vagina, as the operator directs him, with so much 
rapidity and precision by a thread as by a strong stiff instru- 
ment. Volsella need be in the way of the operator no more 
than a string. 

The surgeon pulls down the uterus as far as possible by 
means of the volsella, and then hands it over to an assistant. 
The next step is : 

Dissection of the vaginal nmcoiis membrane off the cervix. If the 
patient is stout, lateral retractors may be of advantage in giving 
more room and more light. In most cases the fingers of the left 
hand will be quite sufficient to expose the parts. In those cases 
where the cervix can be brought outside the vulva, retractors 
will not be necessary. 

A scissors, carved on the flat, is made to cut through the 
mucous membrane around the cervix, at a distance well clear of 
the disease. As a general rule, it will be wise to carry this line 
as high up as possible, short of the limits of danger to bladder 
or ureters in front, or rectum behind. When the uterus has 
been much dragged down, the normal relations to bladder and 
rectum are disturbed ; and if deep cuts are rashly made, these 
viscera may be wounded. (Fig. 34.) The finger moved over 
the cervix, and judging of the mobility of the mucous membrane 
covering it, will always be a reliable guide. 

The mucous membrane is now elevated from the cervix, 
connecting cellular tissue being divided by forefinger and 
scissors. A catch forceps placed on the anterior flap and 
handed to the assistant, who pulls it forward while he depresses 
the cervix with the volsella, will facilitate the dissection in 
front ; while a reversed manipulation will be of equal advantage 
behind. Laterally, no cutting must be made after the mucous 
membrane is divided. The cellular tissue must be pushed up 
as high as possible by the finger without tearing it ; frequently 
the upward limit wiU be defined by a feeling of pulsation in the 



222 



KOLPO-HYSTERECTOMY. 



uterine arteries. Under all circumstances, in the dissection, it 
is a wise plan to keep close to the uterus. 

A sound in the bladder is by many operators considered an 
assistance. If there is any doubt as to the] position of that 




Fig. 34. {After Savage.) 

To show Disturbed Relations of Parts when Uterus is forcibly 
pulled doivnwards by Volsella. 

B, Bladder ; U, Uterus ; R, Rectum ; P, Pubic Symphysis ; O, Ovary ; 

T, Fallopian Tube ; L, Round Ligament ; g, Overlying Ureter ; 

e, Volsella grasping Cervix. 

viscus, and any apprehension of its being injured, then the 
sound ought to be inserted. But if the rule to keep close 
to the uterus is followed, and if the finger has been made 
familiar with the feel of the parts by practice on the cadaver, 
the sound will rarely be wanted. A wound accidentally made 
in the bladder must be at once sutured. Schmidt, in one opera- 
tion, had the misfortune to cut away an inch of the ureter along 
with the uterus ; he at once performed nephrectomy, and the 
patient recovered. 

Opening the Peritoneum. — When the mucous membrane has 
been cleared from the cervix as high up as the peritoneum, 



DIVIDING THE BROAD LIGAMENTS. 223 

that membrane is perforated in front and behind, and the 
abdominal cavity is entered. The forefinger is the best 
perforator. Above the internal os, the peritoneum is closely 
adherent to the uterus anteriorly and posteriorly, and here the 
finger may be pushed through it by a little judicious manipu- 
lation. If it is more than ordinarily tough, and it seems to be 
yielding and stretching in front of the finger, a Lister's sinus 
forceps sharply pushed through it will, after separation of the 
blades, make an opening large enough to admit the finger. The 
opening is enlarged in front and behind by tearing with the 
finger on both sides as far as the broad ligament. Braithwaite 
makes a great point of leaving the peritoneum behind intact till 
that membrane in front has been fully opened, hoping in this 
way to prevent access of blood, cancerous or septic matters. 
Before making the posterior opening the parts are thoroughly 
cleansed. 

A soft sponge is now pushed through the opening into the 
posterior cul-de-sac, and left there. It serves to protect the 
bowels and keep them out of the way, while it absorbs any 
effused fluids and lies between the general cavity and any pos- 
sible infection from the cancerous uterus. 

Division of the Broad Ligaments. — The most difficult and deli- 
cate step in the whole proceeding is the separation of the uterus 
from the broad ligaments, and the securing of the vessels lying 
in them against bleeding. For this purpose an almost endless 
variety of plans has been devised. The ligaments have been 
secured in mass by ecraseur, wire, silk, and elastic ; they have 
been divided and seared by cautery ; and they have been secured 
in separate divisions by loops, chain ligatures, and continuous 
sutures. To facilitate manipulation, the uterus has been turned 
upside down in backward and in forward direction, and it has 
been completely bisected from fundus to os. Minor varieties of 
these varieties have been recommended and carried out ; as, for 
instance, the division after ligation of the lower portion of the 
broad ligaments; then turning the uterus upside down, and 
ligating and dividing the upper portions. One writer is of 



224 



KOLPO.HYSTERECTOMY . 



opinion that the Fallopian tube ought to have a catgut ligature 
of its own ; and special needles are accredited with special 
virtues for the placing of ligatures. 

The best results will be got from the selection of an efficient 
plan which is at the same time simple, and endeavouring to 
perfect it. The application of ligatures is alwaj's difficult ; in 
the most skilled hands it has sometimes failed to check 
bleeding. The simplest plan is undoubtedly that of temporary 
pressure by forceps or clamp, and it can 
undoubtedly be made efficient. Quite recently 
a good deal of evidence in favour of this plan 
has appeared in the journals. Richelot of 
Paris, in particular, has devoted attention to 
the method with conspicuous success. 
Miiiler and Landau strongly recommend 
the method, and many other operators 
speak favourably of it. I have for 
some time advocated this principle, 
and had devised a special clamp for 
the practical carrying of it out, some 
time before it was mentioned in the 
journals. 

The instrument (Fig. 35) is simply a 
straight clamp with long and powerful 
handles, and grooves on its lateral as- 
pect to guide a small knife which is 
intended to cut through the clamped 
ligaments. It is deeply slotted on its 
compressing aspect, to prevent slipping ; 
elsewhere it is smooth and rounded. 
Through the posterior opening the fore- 
finger is carried over the top of one 
broad ligament, hooking it down as 
far as possible. This manoeuvre may 

be facilitated by a blunt hook, handed over to an assistant. 
The posterior blade is now carried upwards along the finger, 
at a distance of about half an inch from the uterus, and the 




Fig. 35. 

The Authov's Clamp for 

Ko Ipo-Hysterectomy . 

One-third size. 



FORCI-PRESSURE TO BROAD LIGAMENTS. 225 

end hooked over the top of the ligament. Its handle is pressed 
backwards on the perineum. The anterior blade is intro- 
duced in front of the ligament, parallel to the posterior blade, 
and its end is locked by a simple mechanism into the end 
of the posterior blade. The clamp is then closed, and the 
handles screwed up tightly outside the vulva. A second clamp 
is similarly applied on the opposite ligament. When both 
clamps are applied, the knife is run up the grooves and the 
ligaments divided on the uterine side of the clamps, when the 
uterus is freed. Or scissors may be used for this division. The 
instruments may be easily removed at the end of one or two 
days, when the natural process of vascular closure will provide 
against the occurrence of haemorrhage. 

Mr. Knowsley Thornton has devised a modification of this 
clamp, in which the handles, attached by a bayonet joint, may 
be removed, and in which the grooves for the knife are done 
away with. The use of these instruments renders the operation 
a very simple one. It is possible, in the deadhouse, to remove 
the uterus by means of them in five minutes, and leave the parts 
in a condition anatomically and surgically satisfactory ; and on 
the operating table, the proceeding ought not to occupy more 
than half an hour. 

The use of strong compression forceps, to be removed after 
one, two, or three days, would secure the same result with 
somewhat less facility and greater cumbersomeness. Miiller * 
has advocated the use of two pairs of forceps, one pair to each 
broad ligament, and supports his recommendation by records of 
five cases, with one death. The disadvantages of the use of 
forceps are, that several pairs would have to be applied, and 
left in the vagina ; while both sides of the uterus could scarcely 
be secured against bleeding before the uterine connections were 
severed. 

A word of warning must be given as to the danger of leaving 

on pressure forceps or clamps too long. I lost a patient, from 

whom I had removed a sarcomatous uterus, through sloughing 

of the broad ligaments where they were compressed by 

* Ccntralbl.f. Gynak., 1887, No. 12. 

16 



226 KOLPO-HYSTERECTOMY. 

forceps. The operation was not a difficult or prolonged one — 
it occupied about half an hour, — but the patient was very 
much reduced. The power of forceps or clamp is enormous, 
and pressure exerted by them for a very short time may 
cause necrosis. If they might be safely removed at the end of 
ten or fifteen hours, as I believe they might, this risk would be 
minimised. As one gets more experience and skill in the opera- 
tion, one is inclined to trust solely to ligatures. For one who is 
not accustomed to perform operations of this sort, the use of 
clamp or pressure forceps is no doubt advisable. 

In some cases where the uterus is considerably enlarged, 
as in mahgnant disease of the fundus, or as in a case on which 
I operated where pregnancy co-existed, the tops of the broad 
ligament lie beyond the reach of the finger, and the whole 
structures are voluminous, the clamps are unsuitable, and 
either forci-pressure or deligation must be instituted. In the 
apphcation of either method, I believe that turning the uterus 
upside down will be found an advantage : and this I should 
select in preference to all other methods which have been 
recommended. Complete rotation of the uterus on its long 
axis materially shortens the depth of the broad ligaments, 
brings them more fully within the field of operation, and leaves 
the most important stage of the proceeding — division of the 
uterine arteries — to the last, when it is also rendered most easy. 
Against the plan of turning the uterus upside down it is 
urged that thereby a cancerous and perhaps foul mass is brought 
into contact with the peritoneum. To avoid this risk the super- 
added operation of excising the cervix has been recommended 
and performed. Now it is easy enough, by the use of germicides, 
to render the cervix not only aseptic but, if the fluid is strong 
enough, actively antiseptic. But all such risks may easily be 
avoided by the expedient, ordinary enough in abdominal surgery, 
•of placing a sponge between the possibly noxious substance and 
the peritoneum. 

It matters little whether the uterus is turned backwards or 
forwards. If rotation can be performed by the finger alone, it 
is most easily carried out in the backward direction, with the 



LIGATION OF BROAD LIGAMENTS. 227 

finger in the posterior opening and hooked over the fundus 
uteri. If the finger does not suffice, anterior rotation by means 
of forceps ma}^ be carried out. A firm hold of the anterior 
surface is taken with catch-forceps, and the uterus is pulled 
down as much as possible ; a second hold is secured higher up, 
and so on, one above the other, till the fundus is grasped, and 
the uterus pulled down and completely inverted. The fundus 
now lies in the vagina, and perhaps presents at the vulva, and 
the upper insertions of the broad ligaments are within sight 
and reach. 

Where it is possible to apply it properly, a satisfactory 
ligature is probably better than the best forci-pressure. With 
an inverted uterus, deligation of the broad ligaments presents 
no special difficulties. Firstly, a powerful Wells' forceps grasps 
as much as possible of one broad ligament, close to the uterus, 
and a strong silk ligature is carried round a corresponding depth 
of the ligament at a proper distance beyond. Braithwaite 
found that it was not necessary, in two successful cases, to place 
forceps on the uterine side of the divided tissues ; bleeding was 
checked by the forcible traction on the uterus. The intervening 
tissue is divided with scissors. Two or three successive pieces 
of ligament are so treated, and one side of the uterus is set free. 
The other side is similarly treated, and the whole uterus is then 
removed. The broad ligaments are thus secured by three or 
four ligatures on each side, which are cut off short. If there 
is any doubt as to the security of the deligation at any points, 
catch-forceps are placed on the visible vessels, and these are 
either ligatured subsequently, or the forceps are left hanging 
and removed next day or the day after. 

Ovaries and Fallopian tubes, if they are healthy, need not 
be removed. The only reason for removing the appendages 
would be the prevention of moliminal pains. In one patient on 
whom I operated, leaving ovaries and tubes, two years ago, 
backache at the menstrual period was very severe for some 
months. In another patient there was little or no trouble. 

When the uterus is pulled down, and particularly if it is 
inverted, the broad ligaments are stretched and tense. As soon 

16 * 



228 KOLPO-HYSTERECTOMY. 

as the uterus is cut off, the hgaments recoil, become flaccid, and 
retract, tending to cast hgatures loose. Therefore the ligatures 
should be tightly drawn, and they should have a considerable 
hold upon the tissues. These precautions ought to be specially 
observed in the lower portions of the ligaments, where the 
uterine arteries lie. And it must be remembered that it is here 
where the risk of wounding the ureters, or of including them in 
the ligatures, is greatest. These dangers are enhanced by 
inversion of the uterus. They are minimised by a thorough 
separation of surrounding cellular tissue in the early stages, 
and by keeping always as close to the uterus as possible. 

The Peritoneal and Vaginal Wounds do not require suture. No 
better results are got from, suture than from leaving them to fall 
into apposition, and unite as best they can. Some surgeons 
recommend that the peritoneum should be sutured to the 
vagina ; others, that the vagina alone should be sutured ; and 
others say that if the peritoneum is sutured, the vagina may be 
left to look after itself. But suturing of any sort has been 
proved to be unnecessary. A positive objection to the employ- 
ment of sutures, whereby flaps are kept in close apposition, is 
that the discharges which ooze from their surfaces are locked up 
and may become sources of septic infection. The parts fall 
naturally into apposition, and remain apposed. It is true that 
the best and quickest healing will be got if like tissue is 
apposed to like ; and advantage ought to be taken of the 
remarkable rapidity with which inflamed serous surfaces co- 
here. Further, it is advisable that all oozing from rawed 
surfaces should find its way into the vagina, rather than into 
the peritoneum. 

This end may be simply effected in the withdrawing of the 
sponge placed inside the abdomen through the opening. It pulls 
down the flap with it, and in so doing leaves serous surfaces in 
contact and rawed surfaces closed in, while it leaves the flaps so 
that discharges from them run into the vagina. The serous 
membranes first unite, and, as soon as they close, the peritoneal 
cavity is shut off". 



DRAINAGE. 229 

Drainage of some sort is advisable for the first day or two. 
If the clamps are used, they will act as drains. If not, a glass 
drainage-tube of ordinary size and shape is as good as any. It 
should be placed very carefully, without disturbing the relations 
of the serous and mucous flaps. A T-shaped tube has the 
advantage that it will not slip out of the abdomen ; but it has 
the disadvantage that it cannot be removed without breaking 
down recent adhesions. 

For the first twenty-four hours sero-sanguinolent fluid will be 
discharged through the tube ; thereafter for a day or two, serous 
or sero-purulent fluids, in diminishing amount. At the end of 
three or four days, if all goes well, the tube may be removed. 

In view of the fact that ail fluids lying in Douglas's pouch 
have a tendency to undergo decomposition, and that in hys- 
terectomy there may be actual entrance of air or vaginal 
secretions into the abdominal cavity, it will be a wise plan at 
stated intervals to irrigate through the drainage-tube. This 
may be easily done by passing a catheter attached to an 
irrigator along the drainage-tube to the abdominal cavity, and 
sending a stream of warm lotion through it. When the fluid 
returns clear, irrigation may be stopped. 

A roll of antiseptic gauze or cotton passed up the drainage- 
tube will act as an antiseptic plug, and as a capillary extractor 
of fluids. Pluggmg of the vagina is troublesome and un- 
necessary. If the tube is surrounded wuth antiseptic wool 
where it lies between the labia, and if the external parts are 
kept thoroughly clean and sweet, there is little danger of septic 
infection. Indeed, it is notorious that tampons m the genital 
passages have of themselves a strong tendency to become 
putrid. 

A good working method is to draw the urine through the 
catheter every five or six hours. When the bladder is emptied 
the wool surrounding the end of the drainage tube is with- 
drawn, and the cavity is irrigated. Then the external parts are 
thoroughly cleansed ; boro-glyceride is smeared all over them, 
and a new dressing is applied. 

It has been recommended that the patient's shoulders should 



230 KOLPO-HYSTERECTOMY. 

be raised, so as to permit of downward drainage. This is quite 
unnecessary ; and it may be harmful by encouraging the access 
of air. The extensive experience of drainage through the 
anterior parietes has proved that intra-abdominal pressure is 
quite sufficient to force free fluids upwards through a patent 
opening ; and to prevent the admission of air, it would be wiser 
to have the external end of the tube in the vagina on a higher 
level than the end in the abdominal cavity. But a plug of 
cotton wool, while encouraging the escape of fluid, will prevent 
the insufflation of air. 

The general treatment requires no special description. The 
histories of recorded cases seem to show that there is more 
than the ordinary tendency to tympanites. The use of the 
rectum tube, the exhibition of turpentine enemas, and the 
administration of saline purges, will most efficiently remove 
this condition. In all respects the general management is 
similar to that after other abdominal operations. 

Complications and Accidents. — Wounds of the bladder or ureter 
are much less frequent than might be expected. The bladder 
is most likely to be wounded during the early stages before the 
peritoneum is opened, and while the relations are disturbed by 
the uterus being dragged down. The best way to avoid the 
accident is to keep close to the uterus and push the bladder 
forwards out of the way. If the bladder is wounded, it ought 
to be at once sutured. 

Wound of the ureter is a more serious aff'air, and may 
demand extirpation of the kidney. It is most likely to suff"er 
injury at the end of the operation ; and more particularly is it 
liable to be included in the lower ligatures applied to the 
broad ligament. Keeping close to the uterus is here also 
the best mode of avoiding the risk. But the accident very 
rarely happens. 

Cases are recorded where intestinal fistula has been caused 
by pressure from the drainage-tube. 

Haemorrhage, either during or following the operation, is 



COMPLICATIONS. 231 

the chief risk. If the bleeding points cannot be included in 
ligatures, pressure-forceps are left attached. After the oper- 
ation, if haemorrhage takes place, a Ferguson's speculum must 
be passed and the source of the bleeding sought for. When 
discovered, the simplest method of checking it is to apply and 
leave on a powerful compression forceps. For general oozing, 
a stream of water heated to iio° Fah. may be safely and 
advantageously passed over the bleeding surface. 

The ordinary complications of operations in the pelvis may 
occur: such are — pelvi-peritonitis, phlebitis, lymphadenitis. 
They are to be treated on ordinary principles. 



Hysterectomy for Intractable Inversion. 

With the help of the admirable repositors of Aveling and 
others, it now rarely happens that an inverted uterus cannot be 
replaced. But it does sometimes happen that, in spite of the 
most skilled and patient trials, an inversion cannot be cured, 
while the resulting condition to the patient is so grave that 
a means of cure is urgently demanded. Under such circum- 
stances hysterectomy may be called for. 

History. — Paulus ^gineta speaks of the removal of a pro- 
lapsed uterus which had mortified as having been carried out 
with success. But this probably was merely the removal of a 
sloughing polypus. In 1678 Arnould excised an inverted uterus, 
with fatal result. Deleurye, Assilini, de Bardol, Beaufils, Faivre, 
Hunter, and others, have operated by ligature, mostly without 
success. At the end of the eighteenth century Baudelocque made 
an elaborate study of the treatment of uterine inversions, and 
formulated some very sensible conclusions. He clearly differen- 
tiated between an extruded polypus and an inverted uterus, and 
laid down definite rules for diagnosis and treatment. In recent 
times, Denuce* has been conspicuous in advancing our know- 
ledge of the subject. 

The diagnosis of complete uterine inversion is sufficiently 
easy. It can be mistaken only for a polypus. Conjoined 
manipulation, under anaesthesia if necessary, will show the 
presence of the uterus in its normal position in polypus, and 
its absence in inversion. The finger in the rectum may further 
detect the funnel-shaped depression into which the round liga- 
ments and Fallopian tubes pass, and in which occasionally the 
uterine appendages may be detected. Pulling down the uterus 
aids the diagnosis in those points. The absence of os uteri, 
the continuity of the tumour with the uterine cervix at every 
point, and occasionally the presence of the two small openings 
* Traite de VInversion Uterine. 



MODES OF OPERATING. 233 

at the cornua leading into the Fallopian tubes, will be deter- 
mined. Polypus may be associated with inversion : here extra 
care must be observed. 

THE OPERATION. 

A good many methods of removing the inverted uterus 

have been employed. They may be classified under three 

heads : 

(i) Immediate removal, at one sitting. 

(2) Gradual removal, by compression or cautery. 

(3) Excision and compression combined. 

Immediate removal has been performed by a simple cutting 
operation, by crushing with ecraseur, and by the actual 
cautery. Velpeau is credited with a success after excision. 
McClintock, Sims, Denuce, and others, have had successes 
with the ecraseur. Ligature, immediately followed by excision, 
and searing of the raw surface after excision, has also been 
employed more than once with success. 

But no method of immediate removal has had favourable 
results : according to Schroeder, a 57 per cent, mortality may 
be expected. The objection to this method is the very serious 
one, that it leaves the peritoneum exposed to infection from the 
traumatic and suppurative processes induced in the stump. 
Even if adhesions form after deligation or charring, they are 
too flimsy to act as an efficient barrier to the entrance of 
septic products. 

Gradual removal by sloughing, induced by compression or 
cautery, has had better results. Of all methods of gradual 
compression, the elastic ligature has been found most successful. 
Courty has had a few successes by the use of the galvano- 
cautery, applied slowly and at several sittings. The ecraseur 
and the wire serre-nceud have been used in this way also. 

But here also the mortahty has been high — 27 per cent. 
And gradual strangulation causes severe pain, and frequently 
begets serious nervous disturbance — sometimes even alarming 
collapse. The presence of a large sloughing mass in the vagina 
is neither agreeable nor free from danger. 



234 HYSTERECTOMY FOR INVERSION. 

Compression and excision combined have given the best results — 
17 per cent, mortahty. The principle of the proceeding is, to 
keep up compression for a few days, till strong adhesions have 
formed on and around the inner serous surfaces, and then to 
amputate the uterus below the site of constriction. This is the 
plan recommended by Schroeder, and successfully modified by 
Pouissot, Despres, and more recently by Schiilein. 

The constricting agent may be a simple ligature of silk or 
catgut ; or an elastic ligature, prevented from slipping by 
previously charring a circle of tissue with the galvanic cautery ; 
or an ecraseur, such as that of Cintrat or Koeberle. As 
simple and efficient as any is the application of a strong 
ligature of silk, and the superimposition of an elastic ligature in 
the groove so caused. The silk ligature, pulled verj^ tightly, 
fixes and steadies the underlying tissues ; the elastic keeps up a 
continuous pressure on the receding tissues after the silk liga- 
ture gets loose ; and, at the end of three or four days, closure of 
vessels and adhesion of peritoneal surfaces may be confidently 
expected. 

The uterus will have been well soaked in glycerine of carbolic 
acid, or some similar antiseptic that will penetrate its tissue. In 
spite of this, a gangrenous odour will usually appear in a few 
days. On the third day, or later according to the behaviour of 
the strangulated uterus, amputation may be performed. This 
operation must be carried out with as little disturbance of parts 
as possible. A series of cuts with scissors whose blades are at 
right angles to the handles, and whose movements are guided by 
a finger in the vagina, would fulfil this requisite. The section is 
to be made close to the ligature, so as to completely remove all 
tissue which is, or is likely to become, necrosed. A cylindrical 
speculum cautiously introduced into the vagina will afford a 
good view of the stump left. If it seems healthy and compact, 
the ligatures may be removed and the raw surface smeared with 
an antiseptic. The vagina is then thoroughly cleansed and kept 
clean, and the stump is left to its fate. 



Hysterectomy for Myoma. 

Perhaps " Removal of Uterine Myoma by Abdominal Sec- 
tion " would be a better name than the above for the operation 
to be described. In some cases, it is possible to remove the 
growth without removing any part of the uterus ; in others, 
a part of the uterus may be removed, while the uterine cavity is 
not entered ; while, in a third class, the uterine cavity is entered, 
and varying amounts of its structure removed, up to complete 
hysterectomy. But, as the operation is very generally known 
by the name given, it is here adopted. 

History. — Lizars in 1825, and Dieffenbach in 1826, encoun- 
tered uterine myoma on opening the abdomen ; but neither 
endeavoured to remove the growth. 

In 1837 Granville is said to have unsuccessfully removed a 
pedunculated uterine fibroid. In 1843 Heath operated unsuccess- 
fully, and in 1844 Clay of Manchester operated with like result. 
Burnham, an American, is credited with the first success, in 1853 ; 
and in 1855 Kimball, another American, had a success. Pean, 
Hegar, Billroth, Kaltenbach, and Schroeder, on the Continent, 
did much to advance the position of the operation ; in our own 
country, Keith, Bantock, Tait, Thornton, and others, have been 
conspicuous among operators and teachers. For magnitude of 
operations, perfection of methods, and brillianc}' of results, 
Keith holds a commanding position among all operators. 

Mortality and Appreciation. Indications to Operate. — It is im- 
possible so to present the statistics of hysterectomy for 
fibroids as to give a fair idea of the results which may 
be fairly expected to-day. Thus, Bigelow,* in a total of 573 
cases, gives 311 recoveries and 241 deaths — the results in 
some not being recorded. Vautrin,| in his valuable mono- 

* Amer. Joiirn. Obstet., Nov., 1883, et seq. 
\ Du Traitement Chirurgical des Myomes Utirines, Paris, 1886. 



236 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

graph, classifies operations for myoma as — myomectomies, or 
simple removal of a subserous myoma ; enucleations ; partial 
amputations of the uterus ; and complete supra-vaginal hyster- 
ectomies. He gives tabular descriptions of operations under 
each head. In 32 myomectomies there were 24 recoveries ; in 
23 enucleations there were only 9 recoveries ; in 36 partial 
amputations there were 26 recoveries ; and in 82 supra-vaginal 
amputations there were 44 recoveries. 

Gusserow's statistics, comprising 359 cases operated upon 
between the years 1878 and 1885, give 237 recoveries and 122 
deaths — a mortality of 33.9 per cent. If to these are added 180 
cases operated upon by Schroeder, Olshausen, Braun, and 
TaufFer, we got a total of 539 cases, with a 30 per cent, 
mortality. 

The general mortality in the last few years is nothing like so 
great as this ; and in the hands of a few operators it does not 
exceed 15 per cent. Keith's mortality, in most unpromising 
cases, is only 8 per cent. ; Tait's mortality, in his latest cases, is 
very low; and Bantock and Thornton are getting results equally 
good. On the Continent, half-a-dozen operators could be named 
whose mortality is under 15 per cent. Into the further details of 
the abundant statistics it is not necessary to go. It is clear that, 
in the hands of properly qualified operators, the proceeding, 
from the point of view of immediate mortality, is as justifiable as 
any other major operation. 

A further and more important consideration is whether, with 
a death-rate even of one in ten, the operation is ever justifiable. 
It is urged by several writers that uterine myoma is not a fatal 
disease ; that palliative treatment will always tide the patient 
over periods of danger, and often effect a cure ; that the life- 
history of the disease is limited ; and that a death-rate of even 
five per cent, absolutely forbids surgical operation. On the 
other hand, it is argued that myoma is often fatal ; that, in 
many cases, medicinal treatment is utterly futile ; that a con- 
siderable number of cases go on causing danger or serious 
trouble long after the usual period for menopause ; and that, in 
a selected series of cases, the operation is not only justifiable 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 237 

but necessary. It would be tedious and useless here to go over 
the often-repeated arguments for and against the operation. As 
usual, the safe course is the middle one. 

Of all operators, want of caution can with least justice be 
urged against Keith. The indications which he gives for 
operation are as follows : 

"I. In very large rapidly growing tumours of all kinds in 
young women. By a large tumour, I mean a tumour upwards 
of 20 lb. 

'* 2. In all cases of real fibrous cystic tumours, if they can 
be removed. Also in all cases of suppurating tumours. 

"3. In most of the cases of the soft oedematous tumours. 
These often grow to an enormous size — far larger, often, than 
any ovarian tumour. I have seen one that would not be less 
than 200 lb. in weight. Sometimes large quantities of red 
serum can be removed with much relief, and I have several 
times been able by this means to carry patients over the meno- 
pause, when the necessity for further puncturing ceases. These 
tumours seem to open up the broad ligaments more than the 
ordinary hard tumour, and some that I have removed have had 
very extensive pelvic attachments. These tumours are much 
reduced by free purgation. 

"4. In cases of large bleeding fibroids of any age, provided 
that the patients are not approaching fifty years of age, and 
provided that the lives are practically useless, and that further 
experience in the operation shall show that the mortaily of 
hysterectomy is likely to diminish. 

" 5. In certain cases of tumours surrounded by free fluid, the 
result of peritonitis, provided that the fluid shows a tendency 
to re-accumulate after two or three punctures. . . ." 

These are clear and distinct indications for the performance 
of hysterectomy, the operation being begun with the view of 
finishing it as such. Another indication may be given as fol- 
lows : An operation is begun with the view of removing the 
uterine appendages ; this is found impracticable, and an exami- 
nation reveals that myomectomy or hysterectomy may be per- 
formed without undue risk : in such a case the major operation 



238 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

may be proceeded with. Since Keith wrote the above, Apostoli's 
method of treating myoma has been introduced, and from the 
trial he has given it he beheves that it will be of value as rescuing 
many cases from operation. It is as yet too early to speak 
definitely and conclusively on the subject. 

Symptoms and Diagnosis of Uterine Myoma. — The well-known 
classification of uterine fibroids into interstitial, sub-mucous, 
and sub-peritoneal, sufficiently indicates the position which such 
growths may occupy with regard to the uterine walls. With 
regard to the region in which they lie, they are spoken of as 
fibroids of the fundus, the body, or the cervix. They are most 
frequently globular in shape, especially when they are not of 
large size ; but they may assume most irregular, even grotesque, 
forms. In size, they vary from that of a pea to dimensions as 
great as the capacity of the abdomen. They are of hard dense 
texture, cutting with a peculiar gritty sensation, and exhibit 
a dull white or glistening surface on section, which has been 
likened to mother-of-pearl. Frequently they contain cysts in 
their substance, and occasionally they are soft, oedematous, 
almost fluctuating. Often they are traversed by enormous 
vascular channels. 

A developed fibroma may be said to live outside the uterine 
fibre, even when it is encapsuled in its substance. Courty well 
describes it as parasitic ; sometimes its nutrition may be 
said to be carried on by imbibition. In such cases the fibroid is 
completely encapsuled, lying in a bed of loose cellular tissue, 
and may be enucleated like a foreign body. These tumours are 
liable to undergo changes in structure. After inflammation they 
may become very dense, being little else than a mass of fibrous 
tissue with scanty muscular elements ; and this fibrous tissue 
may undergo general or peripheric calcification. They may 
become fatty, and undergo liquefaction with the formation of 
cystic cavities. Occasionally they suppurate, or even become 
gangrenous. Finally they may undergo regressive involution, 
and completely disappear. It is generally observed that uterine 
fibroids increase in size during pregnancy. 



SIGNS OF MYOMA. 239 

The first sign is usually metrorrhagia. At first the excess of 
bleeding occurs only during the normal period ; then it comes 
on in the intervals as well ; and in the worst cases there is a 
continuous discharge of blood, in varying quantities, at all 
times. The blood is frequently discharged in clots of consider- 
ablejnagnitude. Pains of a down-bearing expulsive character, 
and shooting across the hips and down the thighs, with feelings 
of weight or pressure inside the pelvis, and dragging sensations 
in the loins, are frequently complained of. In the intervals of 
bleeding, a glairy semi-purulent fluid is discharged. Symptoms 
of mechanical pressure on the pelvic organs, such as d3'suria, 
excessive frequency of micturition, constipation, or diarrhoea, 
are frequently observed. 

The physical signs vary according to the size of the tumour, 
snd its situation in relation to the uterus and the abdominal 
cavity. Through the parietes a tumonr is felt arising out of 
the pelvis — hard and incompressible, in most instances ; occa- 
sionally soft or even fluctuating ; usually rounded and smooth 
all over, but not infrequently covered with bosses ; movable 
from side to side, if it does not fill the abdominal cavity, and 
moving in company with the uterus as felt through the vagina. 
Absolute continuity of uterus and tumour may be made out by 
vaginal and rectal palpation. The uterine sound will show 
enlargement of the cavity, with some deviation in its direction. 
From being a simple canal some two or three inches in length, 
the uterine cavity may be elongated and spread out into a flat 
fan-shaped space in which the sound can be freely moved from 
side to side. In some cases, where the growth lies on one side 
and is mainly extra-mural, the uterus is forcibly pushed over 
to the other side. This lateral version of the uterus is often 
described as being a valuable presumptive sign of myoma. In 
other cases the uterus is dragged upwards into the abdomen, or 
pushed downwards on the perineum, according to the direction 
in which the tumour grows from its seat of attachment. 

Interstitial fibroids cause general hypertrophy of the uterine 
walls, with vascular engorgement of the mucosa. Located in 
the fundus, they may, when small, cause marked version or 



240 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

flexion ; when large, they produce displacements — upward, 
downward, and lateral — of the most varied description. 

Sub-mucous fibroids may often be felt through a softened 
and dilated cervix. Their tendency to become polypoid and to 
be extruded by uterine action is well known. They set up great 
irritation of the uterine mucous membrane, causing much muco- 
purulent and sanguineous discharge. The uterine cavity is at 
the same time dilated and encroached upon ; the uterine wall 
on the side opposite the growth is spread over it and in close 
contact with it. These signs can be made out only with the 
help of the uterine sound. 

Sub-peritoneal fibroids tend, at an early stage, to rise 
upwards into the abdominal cavity. There may be little change 
in the uterus as regards either shape or position : there is 
usually, however, some uterine enlargement as well as displace- 
ment, which may be found to vary at different examinations. 
Sub-peritoneal growths, if multiple, are usually small; if single, 
they are rarely larger than a child's head. They are freely 
movable, and the associated movements of the uterus may be 
not more marked than in ovarian tumours. Sometimes their 
pedicles are as long as two or three inches ; and cases have 
been recorded where their connection with the uterus has been 
completely severed, and they have lived either through the 
vessels in adventitious adhesions or by imbibition from the 
peritoneum. Their symptoms are rarely urgent ; often, there 
is little beyond discomfort and metrorrhagia to complain of. 
Hardness is said to be a characteristic of sub -peritoneal 
fibroids. 

THE OPERATION. 

The nature of the operation for uterine myoma will vary 
according to the situation and attachments of the tumour. 
The varieties of operation have been classified by Vautrin* as 
follows : 

I. For the removal of sub-peritoneal, pedunculated myomata 
— simple myomectomy. 

* Du TvaiUment Chirurgical des Myomes Utdrines, Paris, 1886, p. 124. 



NATURE OF OPERATION. 241 

2. For the removal of certain tumours encapsuled in uterine 
tissue — enucleation. 

3. For the removal of tumours incorporated in the uterine 
tissue, in which it is impossible to remove the growth without 
opening the uterine cavity — partial amputation of the uterus. 

4. For the removal of tumours with extirpation of the uterus 
above the insertion of the vagina — supra-vaginal amputation of the 
uterus. 

5. For the removal of multiple myomata with enlargement 
of the uterus, in certain cases — complete extirpation of the uterus. 

This classification — simple, natural, and consistent with the 
pathology as it is — does not fully satisfy practical requirements. 
Thus, no distinct line can be drawn between partial and supra- 
vaginal amputation of the uterus. Complete extirpation — that 
is, removal of every particle of uterine tissue, leaving the vagina 
and the broad ligaments only as pedicle — is very rarely called 
for ; and when it is, the details of operation differ so little from 
partial amputation, or amputation through the cervix, that a 
separate description is not necessary. Indeed, from a practical 
point of view, a classification of operations depending on whether 
or not the growth extends between and opens up the layers of 
the broad ligament would probably be of more practical value 
than that of Vautrin. 

The operations for uterine myoma are here described as : 

1. Simple myomectomy or removal of the tumour without any 
of the uterine tissue, by excision or by enucleation, and without 
entering the uterine cavity. , 

2. Hysterectomy, total or partial ; or removal with the tumour 
of more or less, or all, of the uterine tissue proper — usually, 
with entrance of the cavity. 

This subdivision broadly corresponds to the all-important 
one of pedicle and no pedicle, and, still more broadly, to intra- 
peritoneal and extra-peritoneal completion of the operation. 

It may truly be said of the operation for myoma, that the 
exact mode of operating can never be decided upon till the 
abdomen is opened and the condition ascertained by digital 
examination. In cases of small growths which are not pedun- 

17 



242 , HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

culated, removal of the uterine appendages may be indicated ; 
then the major operation is not called for. In cases of simple 
pedunculated sub-peritoneal growth, ligation of the pedicle and 
removal of the growth may be sufficient. Again : other growths, 
encapsuled and lying near to the uterine surface, may be pro- 
perly treated by enucleation. But, in the majority of instances 
which call for removal of the tumour, a complicated operation, 
involving delicate and difficult proceedings to separate the mass 
from the bladder or to enucleate it from the broad ligaments, 
will be necessary. The operative details are schemed out after 
inspection ; they are finally determined upon after the tumour 
has been turned out, and are frequently modified as the opera- 
tion goes on. 



Myomectomy. 



The incision is made in the middle hne below the umbilicus, 
and is long enough to admit the whole hand. The lower end of 
the incision should not approach the pubes too closely, as the 
bladder in these cases is often elevated. It is usually found 
that the parietes are abnormally vascular in cases of uterine 
m5'oma. A complete examination of the mass is then made by 
the hand carried through the opening, and the advisability of 
removal is decided upon. The 
incision is prolonged upwards 
with scissors, guided by the fore- 
finger, as far as is necessary for 
delivering the tumour without 
bruising the edges of the wound. 
Tait's screw (Fig. 36) with broad 
blade is placed in the tumour, 
and used as a handle by which 
to pull it out and to manipulate 
it. In the case of large tumours, 
two such screws, placed at some 
distance apart, may be found of 
great assistance in the necessary 
manipulations. When the tumour 
is removed from the abdomen, 
large sponges are packed inside 
the cavity to keep the bowels in 
place and to absorb extravasated 
blood. 

Adhesions to the parietes must 
be separated before the tumour can be delivered. Adhesions 
to bowels or omentum may be divided after the tumour 
has been delivered, or during its delivery. As the tumour 
is being pulled out, great caution is necessary to make 
certain that adherent bowel is not torn ; and with this 

17 ^ 




Fig. 36. 

Tait's Screw for Myoma. 
Half size. 



244 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

object, the hand is placed inside the abdomen, under the 
tumour, to ascertain that undue traction is not being exerted 
on attached organs. Parietal adhesions may usually be severed 
by the fingers. Adhesions to bowel, omentum, or other organs, 
are divided between pairs of catch - forceps or double liga- 
tures. Vessels in the omentum sometimes attain to enormous 
dimensions, and require great care in their division and ligation. 
If their walls are very thin, seeming scarcely strong enough 
to carry a ligature, the vessels must be followed upwards 
till a sufficient bulk of omental tissue to form soft packing 
around the vessel is met with ; and here the vessel is tied along 
with some of the surrounding tissue. As Thornton points out, 
much blood may be lost by dividing vessels coming from solid 
vascular tumours ; such vessels do not contract on division, as 
they do in adhesions attached to an empty and contracted 
ovarian cyst-wall. 

Pedunculated sub-peritoneal growths are removed after 
securing the pedicle. The mode of treating the pedicle will 
depend on its thickness, length, and vascularity. In some cases 
a simple ligature will be sufficient. Kaltenbach, Olshausen, 
Billroth, and others, have related cases in which simple ligation 
en masse has proved efficient. I have successfully removed a 
sub-peritoneal myoma as large as a child's head in which the 
pedicle was secured by a simple silk ligature, gradually 
tightened while the tumour was being cut away. If the pedicle 
is short, this plan of coaxing tissue off the tumour by successive 
snips of a scissors while the ligature is tightened on the relaxed 
and isolated fibres is an excellent one ; certainly better than 
simple deligation, followed by amputation. The tissues may 
always be drawn together more closely after amputation than 
before ; and by this process of gradual constriction, combined 
with piecemeal amputation, all the vessels are caught in the 
ligature, and there is no likelihood of their recoiling afterwards. 

In other cases the pedicle is too large to be safely included in 
one ligature, and here it is necessary to transfix. A blunt needle 
which will not wound a vessel is used, and it is inserted at a 
convenient distance between uterus and tumour, not too close to 



TREATMENT OF THE PEDICLE. 245 

either. Thornton first ties in mass, and then transfixes and ties 
doubly beyond the single ligature. The Staffordshire knot may 
be used — supplemented, if necessary, by a second simple ligature. 
In fact, the mode of ligation must depend on the nature of the 
pedicle ; and many efficient modes are available. The use of 
strong crushing or clamp forceps to diminish the bulk of the 
pedicle has its disadvantages as well as its advantages. If the 
pedicle is a broad one, the outlying vessels may be torn through 
b}' the strong compressing blades, and escape from their grasp, 
while only the vessels in the centre are caught. Olshausen* 
has laid down directions as to the mode of ligation, depending 
on the thickness of the pedicle. But points of equal importance 
are — its length, its density, and its vascularity. A thick pedicle 
which is long and compressible may be efficiently secured in a 
single ligature, when a less thick one which is short and dense 
may require multiple deligation. No definite rules can be laid 
down : the surgeon must be guided by general principles. 

Gusserowf and others have been able to secure the vessels 
separately ; and where this can be done, it is undoubtedly the 
best plan. A separate ligature to each vessel produces a 
haemostasis which is independent of retraction of vessels or 
shrinking of uterine fibre. This plan can be adopted only 
where the pedicle is not large and where the vessels are not 
numerous. 

The elastic ligature is favoured by some surgeons, particularly 
of the French school. Its advantages are more conspicuous in 
cases where some considerable bulk of uterine fibre is included 
in the ligature ; that is to say, in cases where atrophy and 
shrinking of the pedicle are likely to follow operation. 

When the pedicle has been efficiently secured, its peritoneal 
margins may be drawn over the divided surface by means of a 
continuous suture. This diminishes the area of exposed raw 
surface, which is liable to become adherent to contiguous intes- 
tine, and so lessen the risk of danger from intestinal obstruction. 
Uterine stumps do not become quiescent so quickly as ovarian 

* Deutsche Zeitschr. f. Chir., Dec. 1881, p. 171. 
t Die Neiibildungen dcs Uieyiis, Stuttg., 18S6, p. 103. 



246 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

stumps : this is another reason for taking every pecaution 
against their begetting trouble. 

The pedicle, in myomectomy for sub-peritoneal growths, is 
dropped inside the abdomen, as in ovariotomy. In a few cases 
the extra-peritoneal method has been adopted j but such a 
course is justifiable only on the proved impossibility of treating 
the pedicle otherwise. Dragging on, with sloughing in the con- 
tiguity of, a uterus which is enlarged and sensitive from the 
presence of a myoma cannot be other than dangerous. The 
clamp and extra-peritoneal treatment of the pedicle in myomec- 
tomy for sub-peritoneal growths, is likely to be more disastrous 
even than in ovariotomy. 

Enucleation is available in certain cases of myoma where the 
growth lies near to the uterine surface, and is evidently encap- 
suled. Spiegelberg* is said to have first practised enucleation 
with suture of the uterine wound. Martin, Billroth, Hegar and 
Kaltenbach, and others, have used the method, with not very 
encouraging success. Schroederf identified himself with the 
practice of enucleation of fibroids, and obtained fair results ; 
but other surgeons have not been prone to follow his example. 

Before commencing enucleation, an elastic or rope tempo- 
rary ligature should be carried round the body of the uterus 
below the fibroid to be enucleated. Incisions are then made 
through its capsule, circular or V-shaped according to the 
degree of bulging, and arranged so as to leave flaps which, 
when approximated, will completely overlap the bed from 
which the growth is enucleated. If the flaps do not fit accu- 
rately, they are trimmed down. Rows of buried sutures are 
placed from the bottom of the wound upwards, in succession, 
completely approximating the sides of the wound ; finally the 
peritoneal surfaces are approximated by a row of superficial 
sutures. 

Theoretically, this operation of enucleation is admissible ; 
but practically, its mortality is high. In the hands of Schroeder 

* Archiv, f. Gyndh, Bd. iv., p. 340. 
t Krankheiten der Weibl. Sex. Org., Leipzig, 1884. 



ENUCLEATION. 247 

himself, its chief advocate, i8 operations were followed by ii 
deaths — chiefly from haemorrhage and peritonitis ; and the 
results of other surgeons are just as bad. The great risk is 
that, when the inevitable uterine contraction takes place, 
haemorrhage may set in; the almost equally great danger of 
peritonitis would seem to be favoured by the inclusion of dis- 
charges under pressure in the uterine wound. It may be taken 
as practically true, that it is not safe to leave a wound through 
hypertrophied uterine tissue with no more perfect guard against 
hEemorrhage than a non-contractile ligature, which constricts 
uterine fibre as well as vessels ; and even less safe to leave 
haemostasis to the mercy of mere compression by flaps sutured 
over the wound. 



Hysterectomy, total or partial, for Myoma. 



For the great majority of cases requiring operation, removal 
of some portion of the uterus is either necessary or expedient. 
And of this majority, the greater number result in exposure of 
the uterine cavity. The typical operation is removal of the 
tumour with the uterus at some convenient point above its 
attachment to the vagina. Complete supra-vaginal hysterec- 
tomy for myoma rarely means more than amputation through 
the cervix, low down. 

It is absolutely impossible to give a description of hysterec- 
tomy for myoma which shall be applicable to all cases. No 
two cases are alike ; and the variations are so numerous and so 
diverse, that a useful classification is scarcely feasible. 

Besides the ordinary cutting instruments, the surgeon ought 
to be provided with at least two trustworthy clamps, a tempo- 
rary elastic or rope ligature, two myoma screws, and the actual 

cautery. Koeberle's 

well - known serre- 

noeud (Fig. 37) is 

generally admitted 

to be the best in- 
strument to use as a 

clamp. It is simple 

and trustworthy. 

Tait has modified it 

in a manner which 

permits of more 

rapid and easy fixa- 

tion of the wire, 

without interfering 

with its simpli- 
city and efficiency. 

(Fig. 38.) In Tait's 

modification, the 





Fig. 37. 



Fig. 38. 



KoebevWs Serre-ncend. 
Half size. 



Tait's Modification 

of Koeberle's Serre-7tceud . 

Half size. 



CLAMPS. 



249 



wires are simply placed in recurved V-shaped claws, which bite 
the more firmly as traction is increased. In Koeberle's original 
instrument, one end of the wire is formed into a loop, which is 
placed over the button ; the other end is fixed by twisting or 
otherwise. Keith at first used Koeberle's 
Ulilllili I S"^ I instrument ; but this he gave up in favour 
of a very large thin clamp, which he finds 
causes less sloughing than a wire. 

Some form of in- 
strument for tempo- 
rary compression of 
the pedicle during 
manipulation, and be- 
fore placing the clamp 
in position, will be 
found of great assist- 
ance. Tait's tempo- 
rary rope -compressor 
(Fig. 39) seems to be 
the most convenient 
of these instruments. 
Pozzi's elastic tourni- 
quet (Fig. 40), with 
self-acting grip, is an 
excellent instrument 
for temporary com- 
pression : but its 
action is not so rapid 
nor so powerful as 
Tait's ; and it is open 
to the objection, which 
may be urged against all elastic ligatures, 
that it is liable to slip over the stump 
when the tumour is cut off. The rope 
texture in Tait's instrument is preventive against slipping. 
A few feet of strong soft wire should be held in reserve — 
piano-wire serves the purpose admirably ; and an abundance^of 




Fig. 39. 

Tail's Temporary 
Rope-Compressor. Half 

size. 



Fig. 40. 

Pozzi's Elastic Tourni- 
quet. 



250 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

the strongest Chinese silk ligatures should be at hand. Other 
instruments necessary are : strong handled needles with blunt 
points, for placing ligatures by transfixion ; powerful locking 
forceps, straight and bent ; and needles for transfixing and 
holding the pedicle outside the abdominal cavity. 

A four-inch incision, extending downwards from the um- 
bilicus, is first made, and the tumour examined as far as 
possible with the hand; we note the position of the broad 
ligaments, the ovaries, and the tubes, with the general relations 
of the growth to the uterus. It is important to determine the 
limits of the bladder, and with this view the operation should be 
begun with the bladder full. If it is found to be in the way, it 
may be emptied by an assistant through the catheter. The 
incision is prolonged upwards and downwards, as far as is 
necessary and proper, by means of scissors cutting over large 
flat sponges, and guided by the forefinger. Bleeding points are 
secured as they appear by catch-forceps. 

All adhesions to the parietes in front having been separated 
by tearing, or cutting and deligation, one or more screws are 
twisted into the tumour, and the mass lifted out of its bed. 
Considerable force may be necessary for this manoeuvre ; but 
the force should be guided and regulated by the hand on the 
under surface of the tumour, to make certain that no injury is 
being done to underlying and attached structures. Atmospheric 
pressure often accounts for much of the difficulty experienced 
in delivering such tumours ; and the mere insertion of the hand, 
by separating contiguous surfaces and permitting the entrance 
of air, may lessen this difficulty. Adhesions to omentum or 
bowel are ligatured, divided, and returned as they appear. 
Frequently the tumour comes out with portions of intestine 
adherent at several points on its under surface ; these adhesions 
are caught in forceps, divided, and ligatured afterwards. 
The tumour being completely delivered, several large flat 
sponges are placed in the cavity over the bowels. If the 
patient is sick or straining and the bowels tend to protrude, 
a few sutures may at once be inserted in the upper portion of 
the abdominal wound. 



FIXING THE CLAMP. 251 

A minute examination of the tumour and its connections 
is now mstituted. The position of the bladder is first ascer- 
tained. Keith has met with the bladder nearly as high as the 
umbilicus, so that it had to be dissected downwards : this 
happens more especially when the tumour dips deeply into the 
pelvis, and where the broad ligaments are much opened up. 
On the tumour aspect, the separation of the bladder is not 
often difficult. In every case, diagnosis of the position of the 
bladder, and separation of it from tumour and parietes, is much 
facilitated if the viscus be moderately distended. When it is 
sufficiently freed, it may be emptied through the catheter. If 
the dissection has to be carried down to the base of the 
bladder, especial care must be taken to avoid injury to the 
ureters. It need scarcely be said that all manipulations involv- 
ing the bladder must be carried out with great care. 

Supposing that the relations of the bladder to parietes and 
to uterus are normal, and that the tumour has not grown 
between the folds of the broad ligament, and does not lie deep 
in the pelvis ; and supposing, further, that the direction of the 
growth of the mass has been mainly towards the abdominal 
cavity, and that the neck and part of the body of the uterus are 
but little enlarged, we have to deal with the simplest of all 
varieties of hysterectomy for m3'oma. Irt«uch a case, the opera- 
tion may be at once completed by fixing the wire clamp at a 
suitable place around or near to the neck of the uterus, and the 
tumour cut away above it. The wire includes in its grasp 
round ligaments and broad ligaments, as well as uterus, and 
the ovaries and tubes are also included in the amputation. 
Enucleation is not called for ; the peritoneum, intact, surrounds 
the whole of the tissues included in the clamp. Two pedicle 
needles are passed through the stump, above the constricting 
wire, and their broad ends are made to rest at convenient points 
on the abdominal parietes. The stump is fixed in the bottom 
of the parietal wound, the abdominal cavity is cleansed, the 
wound is sutured, and the operation is finished. 

But few operations are of this simple nature. The pedicle 
must be manufactured or isolated, after a more or less difficult 



252 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

process of enucleation or dissection. In the worst cases this 
is a most tedious and delicate operation, severely testing the 
surgeon's practical knowledge and technical skill. A perusal of 
the detailed cases of our most experienced operators, such as 
those of Keith or Schroeder, while emphasizing the fact that no 
two operations are alike, can scarcely fail to convince the 
reader that the details are, after all, very similar. It seems 
to me that Schroeder's magnificent operations have suffered 
a little from the operator's desire to carry out a principle — 
enucleation with salvation of uterus and appendages. Keith, on 
the other hand, has evidently no preconceived principle whatever : 
relying on his own experience, he attacks off-hand every compli- 
cation as it arises, with the simple aim of curing his patient. 
And Keith is right. Every consideration whatsoever must give 
way in the face of the risks of life and death. Schroeder's 
work is valuable, as teaching us how to enucleate ; Keith's is 
still more valuable, by showing to what extent enucleation may, 
with best results to the parient, be carried. The result of their 
practice and of that of others has shown that, while enucleation 
from peritoneal and fibrous investments is often necessary and 
proper, enucleation from uterine tissue is rarely necessary, and 
still more rarely proper. 

Schroeder's work, though it is not antecedent to Keith's, is 
worthy of special description. His purpose was, to spare the 
uterus and its appendages as much as possible. His mode of 
operating may be given in his own words. ''^' A case is supposed 
in which "the uterus is found enlarged by an interstitial fibroid, 
dislocating upwards the appendages on both sides. In this case 
it is not possible to place the India-rubber ligature around the 
cervix : besides, there is no pedicle ; the first thing therefore, is 
to form one. For this purpose, I sever the appendages by first 
doubly ligaturing the infundibular pelvic ligament, with its 
spermatic vessels, and dividing between these ligatures ; then 
by repeating the same process with the round ligament, which 
generally is found to be in a hyperplastic state. After this has 
been executed on both sides, it is easy to separate the tumour 
* Brit. Med. Joiirn., 1883, ii., p. 714. 



SCHROEDER'S OPERATIONS. 253 

from the surrounding tissue without causing any considerable 
haemorrhage ; and now the India-rubber ligature is placed 
around its base. The tumour is then cut away with the 
uterus above this ligature. Care must always be taken to 
catch the stump in a vulsellum as soon as part of the tumour 
is divided ; for this prevents the rubber ligature from slipping 
off. After thus securing the stump, the remaining part of the 
tumour is cut away. Next, the cavity of the uterus or the 
cervical canal is cauterised with a ten per cent, solution of 
carbolic acid, in order to destroy any infectious germs that may 
be present. . . . The denuded surfaces of the stump are 
first united in the depth near to the mucous membrane of the 
uterus ; these sutures are covered up by several rows of other 
sutures, uniting the walls of the stump ; finally, the peritoneum 
is pulled over the stump, and attached to it and to the peri- 
toneum of the other side by a line of closely-placed stitches. 
On the sides of the stump at the spots on which the large 
blood-vessels have been divided, and on which the peritoneum 
covers the stump only loosely, the tissues are firmly fastened to 
the stump by a separate deep suture. After removal of the 
India-rubber ligature, the stump is seen with a smooth covering 
of the peritoneum united by a neat row of sutures. At each 
side of the stump, the divided, but not stitched, broad ligaments 
are visible ; in front we have the ligatured round ligament, and 
towards the pelvic wall, the ligatured spermatic artery, &c. 
There is no dragging on the tissue whatever around the stump, 
and the peritoneal covering is perfectly smooth. Any haemor- 
rhage occurring after removal of the India-rubber ligature is 
easily stopped by putting a few more stitches at the spots 
whence it comes. 

" The difficulties of the case become very numerous when we 
have to remove a fibroid developed at the lower part of the 
uterus and extending into the cellular tissue of the pelvis. The 
uterus is sometimes dragged upwards on one side so far that it 
is impossible to reach the os with the finger. In such cases 
I again ligature the appendages as explained above, and I then 
enucleate the tumour out of the pelvic cellular tissue. This 



254 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

latter manipulation is generally very easy. Tumours firmly 
located in the pelvis are thus made free from the surrounding 
tissue, and appear attached only to the cervix. The India- 
rubber ligature is then applied around the cervix, the tumour is 
cut off above it, and the stump stitched up, according to the 
principles described above. There remains, however, a cavity 
out of which the tumour has been enucleated. This can be 
treated in different ways. If I do not expect a very abundant 
secretion from it, I leave the walls of the cavity simply to close 
upon each other, and drop the whole into the abdomen. In 
other cases, I insert a drainage tube from the cavity into the 
vagina, and close the wound towards the abdominal cavity by 
stitching the peritoneum over it.'.' 

Schroeder then speaks of the occasional necessity of dis- 
secting the bladder from the tumour, and further describes an 
operation for removing a fibroid situated low down in the 
posterior lip. At the time of writing, Schroeder's mortality was 
30 per cent.; just before he died, it was said to have diminished 
to about 15 per cent. This death-rate is too high; and probably 
the exact following of Schroeder's method of operation has died 
with him. 

With Schroeder's description we may profitably compare the 
following description of operations by Keith.* 

The first case was that of an umarried woman aged 28. 
" The first incision measured twelve inches : it terminated four 
inches above the pubes, so as to avoid the bladder, which was 
known to be elevated on the tumour. On the right side, the 
broad ligament rose as high as the crest of the ilium. The left 
broad ligament was largely spread over the half of the tum6ur 
as high up as the ribs. The opening was then enlarged to 
22 inches, and, by dint of hard pushing and patience, the huge 
mass was slowly moved forwards as far as its connections on the 
left side would permit. The right ovary was easily seen. On 
searching for the left, it was found to be transformed into a long, 
tense, umbihcal-like cord, seven or eight inches in length. Here 

* Cases vii. and xxxvii. in Hysterectomy for Fibrous Tumours of the Uterus. 
Edinburgh, 1885. 



KEITH'S OPERATIONS. 255 

and there along this tense band were several small cysts. It 
was so embedded in the tumour that it could never have been 
removed. The right broad ligament was transfixed by soft iron 
wires, secured, and divided ; all bleeding from the tumour side 
was prevented by a series of strong locking forceps. The fibroid 
was now more easily dealt with. It was drawn forwards, so as 
to put on the stretch its enormous connection on the left side. 
About a dozen locking forceps, lo inches in length, were now 
applied to the broad ligament, before and behind. The whole 
was then cut downwards, and the mass enucleated as low as 
possible. A strong soft iron ligature embraced the base, which 
was of great thickness. The tumour was then cut away, the 
stump showing a section of the cervix in the centre. The forceps 
were removed one by one, and all the bleeding vessels separately 
tied. Some of these were large, and one threw blood over the 
assistant's head. There was much trouble in finding some 
bleeding points among the cellular tissue of the huge gap now 
left. The haemorrhage was mostly venous. All present could 
see that this condition was full of danger, and that secondary 
haemorrhage into this loose tissue was not one of the smallest 
risks of this operation. When all oozing seemed to have ceased, 
the stump (the thickness of the leg) and the end of the right 
broad ligament were secured, with much tension, outside ; a 
glass drainage tube was fixed in above the stump, and the 
wound closed by forty silk sutures. The operation lasted one 
hour and three-quarters. After much blood and serum had 
escaped from the tumour, its weight was 42 lbs." The patient 
recovered. 

The second case selected was that of an unmarried woman 
aged 34. *' The incision extended from five inches above the 
umbilicus to two inches above the pubes. When exposed, the 
tumour was deeply congested and very vascular. On intro- 
ducing the hand, the tumour was found to extend very high up. 
It was in contact with the liver, pushing both it and the 
diaphragm upwards, and there were extensive adhesions above 
everywhere. The slightest touch of the hand on the diaphragm, 
in making this examination, caused respiration invariably to 



256 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

stop at once. It was impossible to get out the tumour. The 
incision was then enlarged up as far as it would go. This 
exposed adherent omentum and some long broad adhesions 
coming from above, as well as some parietal adhesions. The 
tumour was fixed too high up under the sternum to be brought 
out in any way. It was then pulled out of the pelvis, and by 
placing several pairs of enormous locking forceps round the 
ligaments and base, the tumour was got out first from below. 
Then, by introducing two hands on either side the upper portion 
was suddenly dislodged, and it appeared with the whole of the 
stomach attached to its upper and back part. The omentum, 
containing enormous vessels, was spread over the upper third of 
the tumour all round, also a quantity of adherent mesentery and 
intestine. No one who had examined the case had the slightest 
idea of this mass ; at least one-third of the whole tumour was 
concealed by the ribs. All these adhesions were separately tied 
as quickly as possible, a very large number of ligatures being left 
in. The part of the tumour which had felt like a large kidney 
before operation was entirely covered by adherent ascending 
colon, and was shelled out of its cellular attachments. This 
adhesion gave the most trouble. The worst bleeding, however, 
came from above, partly from the vascular wall and partly from 
the long adhesions that came down from the diaphragm under 
the sternum. In the upper part of the incision there were so 
many vessels to tie, that many carbolised silk ligatures were 
used. The wound was closed by thirty-one deep sutures, besides 
superficial ones. The incision above the umbilicus was longer 
than below it. Operation lasted one hour and five minutes. A 
drainage tube was left in. The upper part of the tumour was 
broader than the lower. It weighed i6 lbs." The patient 
recovered. 

I venture to add one case from my own experience which 
has some points of special interest. 

The patient was an unmarried woman of forty. The opera- 
tion was in a sense exploratory, though on the whole the 
diagnosis was between ovarian cystoma and fibro-cyst of the 
uterus. It was a very soft fibroid, full of enormous vascular 



SPECIAL OPERATIONS. 257 

channels, which made the tumour fluctuate. I had decided to 
remove the appendages, although the growth was perhaps too 
large to promise full benefit from this operation. The left ovary 
was pulled up with some difficulty, and with it came enormous 
coils of dilated veins which looked as large as the small intestine. 
A forceps placed on the pedicle of the ovary included parts of 
the walls of more than one of these veins ; and they were so 
closely set that transfixion would have been impossible with- 
out wounding them. The right ovary could not be found ; and 
though the whole uterus was removed and carefully examined, it 
was never found. In the meantime blood came welling out of the 
pelvis, and was found to originate from the veins grasped in the 
blades of the forceps. Several large locking forceps were placed 
on those veins below the bleeding point ; but each grasp of the 
blades seemed to tear the friable tissue and cause more bleeding. 
The tumour was delivered, and the bleeding from the veins in 
the left broad ligament was more easily controlled when they were 
put on the stretch. Finally, a few ligatures were placed around 
them by an aneurism needle carefully pushed through the cellular 
tissue, and the broad ligament cut away from the uterus. The 
base of the bladder dipped down in a deep sulcus between the 
uterine body and a separate growth as large as the fist, and 
required to be carefully separated by dissection. The fibroid on 
the right side dipped down in a curious manner under the right 
ureter, and here enucleation had to be carried out with great care. 
This state of matters, combined with the absence of uterine 
appendages on the right side, suggested the possibility of there 
being some congenital malformation of the uterus — possibly it 
was unicorned. Below the overlapping fibroid was the only site 
suitable for applying the clamp, and this lay so low down that it 
seemed impossible to treat the pedicle extra-peritoneally. How- 
ever, a wire clamp was applied and tightened, and the tumour 
was cut away above it, exposing ine uterine cavity. As blood 
welled up rather freely from the pedicle, the clamp was tightened 
till considerable force was required to turn the screw. Still the 
blood flowed from the cut surface, and now the wire was 
crushing up the uterine fibres and deeply embedded. At the next 

18 



258 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

turn of the screw the clamp broke. (I purposely avoid naming 
the clamp used, as the fault lay with the instrument maker, and 
not with the inventor.) No forceps made could be of any use 
here. A very thick double silk ligature was rapidly cast round 
the pedicle, and tied as tightly as possible. Still bleeding went 
on. Then double transfixion ligatures were placed and tied ; then 
the actual cautery was used ; but still there was bleeding, though 
not so free. Finally, a silk ligature in three interlocking loops 
was carried through the whole pedicle and firmly tied ; this left 
only very slight oozing. A drainage tube was inserted, and the 
abdomen closed over the pedicle. The operation lasted a little 
over an hour. Nearly half a pint of blood was removed by 
suction through the tube in the first twenty-four hours ; at the 
end of a week, only a little bloody serum could be sucked out, 
and the tube was then removed. Three days later the tem- 
perature rose, and tympanites appeared. The abdomen was 
re-opened and washed out, and the drainage tube re-inserted. The 
pedicle sloughed and came away; and the patient recovered, with 
an opening between the vagina and the pubes through which mat- 
ter discharged. After four months the fistula closed. By vaginal 
examination not a particle of uterine tissue can be detected. 

The study of a few such cases as these— and many such have 
been recorded — is more instructive than much generalised de- 
scription. They show that the surgeon who begins to remove a 
large uterine fibroid must be prepared to treat off-hand compli- 
cations of the most difficult and even alarming character. 
Extensive adhesions may be found with any abdominal organ — 
even with the stomach and liver; they may even arise from 
the diaphragm. Enucleation may have to be made, not only 
from between the folds of the broad ligament, but from under 
the greater part of the pelvic and some portion of the abdominal 
peritoneum. Keith, in one case, left ver}' little peritoneum 
behind on the parietes ; the intestines in many places lay in 
contact with the bared muscles. And then the veins in the 
tumour capsule and in the broad ligaments may be so enormous 
and so thin-walled that ordinary surgical measures may be 
almost ineffectual to stop bleeding from them. The comfort of 



DETAILS OF OPERATION. 259 

a temporary elastic or rope compressor in these circumstances 
can scarcely be exaggerated. 

A few special points may be summarised : 

In cases where the growth of the tumour is mainly in the 
fundus and towards the abdominal cavity, and where the vessels- 
in the broad ligament are neither large nor thin-walled, the wire 
clamp may be at once placed around the cervix, and the tumour 
cut away. 

Where the whole uterus is enlarged and the uterine cornua, 
with the round ligaments, tubes, and ovaries, retain their normal 
relations, the broad ligaments being on the stretch between the 
pelvis and the tumour, it will be wise to divide the broad 
ligaments at some convenient point high up, and ligature them 
separately. This division frees the tumour and permits of its 
being drawn farther out of the abdominal cavity, so that the 
clamp may be placed lower down. Large or thin-walled vessels 
lying in the broad ligaments should be secured by ligature and 
not included in the wire of the serre-nceud. Haemorrhage, 
occurring during the separation of the pedicle, frequently starts 
from these vessels. This fact alone would make me, in every 
case where the broad ligaments can be isolated and ligatured, 
treat them by intra-peritoneal deligation, while the pedicle 
proper is treated extra-peritoneally. 

Where the tumour grows from the side or sides of the uterus, 
the folds of the broad ligament are opened up, the whole pelvic 
peritoneum may be elevated, and some portion of the abdominal 
peritoneum may be removed from the posterior wall. In such 
cases, extensive enucleation may be called for, and large raw 
surfaces, or rather cavities, may be left behind. The edges of 
the peritoneal wound need not be sutured — they will fall into^ 
apposition ; but drainage must be efficient. 

In every case where an adhesion is separated and tied,, 
a locking forceps should be placed on the site of its attachment 
to the tumour. No wound of the capsule should be made until 
a compressing ligature has been carried around the base of the 
tumour. Haemorrhage from the capsule of uterine myoma may 
be very free. 

18 * 



260 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 



TREATMENT OF THE PEDICLE IN HYSTERECTOMY. 

This, the most important detail in the operation, requires 
separate consideration. 

There are three methods of treating the pedicle; intra- 
peritoneal ; extra-peritoneal ; and mixed, or partly intra- 
peritoneal and partly extra-peritoneal. 

Intra-pcritoneal Treatment of the Pedicle. — All surgeons aim at 
complete intra-peritoneal treatment of the pedicle in hysterec- 
tomy for fibroids ; and there are few surgeons of experience in 
the operation who have not tried it. It may at once be said that 
very few of those who have tried the intra-peritoneal treatment 
are satisfied with it — at least, as at present performed. Some 
cases are more suitable for this plan than others ; in many, it is 
either impracticable or unsound. Excessive thickness of the 
parietes has, in one case, compelled me to adopt the intra- 
peritoneal method. 

The advantages of this mode of treating the pedicle are 
self-evident. The disadvantages are : the large size of the 
pedicle, its vascularity, its tendency to shrink, and its liability 
to undergo sloughing. 

In 1874 Kaltenbach proposed intra-peritoneal treatment for 
small pedicles, with suture of the edges of the wound in the 
uterus and of the broad ligaments. Hegar* about the same 
time employed this plan with success. In 1877 Kleebergf 
suggested the elastic ligature, and proved its harmlessness in 
the abdominal cavity by experiments. In 1878 Czernyj put 
the idea into practice by leaving the elastic ligature surrounding 
the pedicle inside the abdomen. Wells, Koeberle, Pean, and 
others about this time recorded cases of intra-peritoneal treat- 
ment of the pedicle chiefly by multiple ligatures, but with no 
very encouraging success. Olshausen, Fritsch, and Leopold 
had fair results with the elastic ligature ; but Martin, Tauffer, 
.and a few others somewhat discredited this method by showing 

* Operat. Gyniik., Stuttgart, 1880, t St. Petersburg med. Woch., 1877 and 1879. 
I Centralbl. f. Gyndk., 1879, p. 519. 



TREATMENT OF PEDICLE. 261 

that it sometimes caused sloughing of the pedicle, or suppu- 
ration and septicaemia. 

By far the most important systematic attempt to arrive at a 
trustworthy intra-peritoneal treatment of the pedicle was made 
by Schroeder.* Schroeder's plan, already described, is essentially 
multiple ligature of bleeding points, and deep and superficial 
suture of the wound in the uterus. He began by the application 
of a temporary elastic ligature near the neck of the uterus, then 
separately ligatured the vessels in the broad ligament which 
supply the uterus, and finally dealt with the uterine wound. 
Martin advocates Schroeder's plan, with the substitution of silk 
for catgut as material for ligature. To the mucous membrane 
of the exposed cavity carbolic acid, or corrosive sublimate, or 
the actual cautery, is applied to cause disinfection. Leopold, 
von Antal, Thiriar, Olshausen, Fischer, Marey, and many others, 
have introduced unimportant modifications. 

The outcome of the recorded experience of the intra- 
peritoneal treatment of the pedicle may be shortly summarised 
as follows. The elastic ligature overdoes compression, tending 
to cause suppuration, sloughing, or even septicaemia. All 
modes of ligation in mass with non-elastic material are unsafe, 
on account of the shrinkage of the uterine fibre. Multiple 
ligation, or ligation in detail of vessels in the broad ligaments 
and in the stump, is less dangerous, but still not satisfactory. 

This plan is made more safe by superadding deep and super- 
ficial suturing of the uterine wound. As additional precautions 
against haemorrhage, the stump has been seared with the actual 
cautery, and it has been soaked with powerful haemostatics ; but 
the results have even then not been fully satisfactory. 

Extra-peritoneal Treatjuent of the Pedicle. — This is the original 
plan of Kimball, Wells, and Koeberle ; and it still remains the 
best. Kimball used the actual cautery, with fixation in the 
inferior angle of the wound. Wells transfixed the pedicle with 
two strong needles ; below these he placed a ligature, and fixed 

* Zeitschr. f. Get. tind Gyncik., 1881, p. 213, and 1883, p. 204; and 
Brit. Med. Journ,, loc. cit. 



262 



HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 



the stump in the parietal wound. In 1864 Koeberle introduced 
his wire clamp for the treatment of the pedicle ; and this 
instrument, with unimportant modifications, and his plan, still 
continue in favour. Many other varieties of extra-peritoneal 
treatment have been invented, and many instruments have been 
introduced. In this connection the names of Pean and Cintrat 
deserve mention for their wire clamps ; and those of Baker Brown, 
Keith, Kiwisch, and Wells, for their special unyielding clamps. 
Avoiding detailed historical description, we may confine our 

attention to the three most im- 
portant modes of extra-peri- 
toneal treatment of the pedicle 
at present in vogue : by the 
clamp; by the elastic ligature; 
and by the wire constrictor. 

Keith, so far as I know, is 
the only highly successful 
operator who uses the clamp. 
It is a special instrument, 
made very large and thin. 
(Fig. 41.) He says: "I have 
not found sloughing take place 
to the extent that it does when 
a single wire merel}^ embraces 
the pedicle ; the parts are more 
spread out in the clamp, and 
there is not nearly the amount 
of puckering of the soft parts 
that there is when a wire is 
used. A mass, as thick as the 
wrist, can be squeezed into a 
loop an inch, or three-quarters 
of an inch, in diameter; 
whereas, with a large clamp there is no great pressure on 
any one part below. The pressure of the wire does not 
act simply on the constricted portion, but exerts its influence 
to some distance below the constriction. . . . Before 




Fig. 41. 

Keith's Clamp for Hysterectomy. 
One-third size. 



ELASTIC LIGATURE. 



263 



applying the clamp, it is better to draw all the parts gently 
together by a thick silk ligature or by a soft wire. This 
prevents a too great spreading out of the parts between the 
blades, which would render the closing of the wound around 
the clamp somewhat troublesome." Keith applies freely to the 
stump a saturated solution of perchloride of iron in glycerine, 
and then dries it off; after this, plenty of iodoform and salicylic 
wool. The cervical canal is scraped out and disinfected. 



Fig. 



42. 



(Hegar 

AND KaLTENBACH.) 

Needle for carrying:; 

elastic ligature through 

Pcdicli, 



The elastic hgatuve 
has many suppor- 
ters; Olshausen, 
Martin, Sanger, and 
Hegar, being among 
the chief. It may be 
applied either as an 
encircling ligature, 
around the whole ; 
or as a transfixing 
ligature, embracing 
the pedicle in halves; 
or as a double liga- 
ture, encircling and 
transfixing. For ap- 
plying the ligature 
around the pedicle, 
the ingenious in- 
strument of Pozzi 
(Fig. 40) will be 
found valuable. 
With it, any requi- 
site amount of ten- 
sion can readily and 
rapidly be applied, 
and the instrument 
automatically keeps 
up whatever tension 





Fig. 43. 

(Hegar and Kaltenbach.) 

To show closure of Abdominal 

Wound (a) ; 

and treatment of Pedicle by 

elastic ligature (b). 



264 



"'HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 



is put on. For carrying the ligature through the pedicle Hegar 
has invented a transfixing needle. (Fig. 42.) It is composed oi 
two parts — -a sharp conical piercing point, which screws off; 
and a hollow tubular portion split along the side, into which the 
ligature is drawn in a loop. The knot made in the elastic ligature 
is, if necessary, finally secured by surrounding it with a strong 
silk ligature. Terrillon and Trelat have quite recently introduced 
ingenious instruments for the application of the elastic ligature. 
Hegar lays particular stress on the mode of closing the abdo- 
minal wound b}^ peritoneal suture, and on the fixation of the ped- 
icle in its lower angle. (Fig. 43.) To prevent retraction where 
the pedicle is short, pedicle needles should be pushed through it. 
The elastic ligatures are cut away about the eighth or tenth day. 

The wire-constrictor remains the favour- 
ite instrument with most operators ; and 
Koeberle's simple instrument, or some mod- 
ification of it such as Tait's, is generally 
acknowledged to be the best. Its applica- 
tion is exceedingly simple. In most cases, 
the wire is placed below a temporary con- 
strictor of rope or elastic. With Tait's in- 
strument the two ends of the wire are simply 
pulled tightly around the pedicle, and hooked 
into the claws on the sliding screw. With 
Koeberle's original instrument, or rather with 
Bantock's modification of it, one end islooped 
on to a button on the screw, and the other is 
pulled over the same button and fixed there. 
The instrument, being left attached, is placed 
so that it lies fl.atly on the abdominal wall, 
pointing upwards and to one side. Koeberle 
himself uses two of his instruments, each 
encircling half the pedicle. Strong pedicle 
needles (Fig. 44) are pushed through the 

pedicle above the level of the wire, their ^'"^^' M Transfixing 

Pedicle 
broad ends restmg on the panetes. The in Hysterectomy. 

needles should always be inserted before Half siz'. 




Fig. 



44. 



TREATMENT OF THE PEDICLE 265 

the tumour is cut away, to prevent retraction of tissues after- 
wards. 

In those cases where the pedicles of the broad ligaments are 
left inside — and such will form the majority — it may be neces- 
sary to pull together around the pedicle the detached peri- 
toneum, so that the constricting wire shall at all points lie upon 
peritoneal membrane. In some cases it would be quite easy to 
apply the wire around the fibrous or tumour tissue alone, at the 
pedicle, without including the peritoneal investment at all ; the 
peritoneum might then be used as a funnel to shut off the 
sloughing" pedicle from the cavity, simply by fixing it to the 
parietal wound with a few stitches. But adhesions form so 
rapidly between parietal peritoneum and that covering the 
pedicle, that the cavity is usually completely shut off before 
sloughing has set in. 

The part of the pedicle beyond the wire or the ligature is 
removed by pressure necrosis. A sort of dry gangrene which 
is not actively putrefactive, and which does not set loose foul 
discharges, is sought to be produced by various means. Soaking 
with strong perchloride of iron, or with tannin or alum, is used 
for this purpose. Bantock has found that the simple applica- 
tion of dry absorbent wool mummifies the tissues, and renders 
them almost as hard as wood : and I have been able in my 
own practice to confirm his experience. The process of sepa- 
ration is accelerated by a few turns of the screw every second 
or third day, and complete separation usually takes place in 
from seven to fourteen days. Little pieces of dry absorbent lint 
are packed round the pedicle to absorb all discharge as it 
appears, and to prevent its burrowing along the line of incision 
or trickling into the abdomen. These are changed as often as 
necessary. The abdominal wound, if properly shut off, need not 
be looked at for a week, when it will probably be found healed. 

When the pedicle separates, a deep granulating hollow is left, 
which usually fills up and skins over at the end of two or three 
weeks. In a few cases the granulations are not perfectly covered 
with cuticle for months ; and in such cases an occasional discharge 
of blood, coincidently with the menstrual periods, is observed. 



266 HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

The combined intra- and extra-peritoneal method of treating 
the pedicle is usually one of necessity, and not of choice. 
It is used in cases where the pedicle cannot be pulled out- 
side the parietes without exerting dangerous tension on the 
parts. 

The simplest method of " mixed " treatment of the pedicle is 
where it is secured by ligatures, and the ends of these ligatures 
are fixed in the inferior angle of the wound. The same treat- 
ment may be carried out where serre-noeud or elastic ligature is 
used. The margins of the pedicle are stitched to the parietal 
wound, and the pedicle, with its constricting apparatus, is 
dragged some little way inside the abdomen. Additional 
security against the escape of discharges into the cavity is got 
by stitching the parietal peritoneum to the side of the pedicle 
below the point of constriction. Various devices* have been 
invented to shut off the pedicle from the general cavity. One 
of these is, to surround it with macintosh sheeting or gutta- 
percha tissue, as in a funnel. 

The mixed treatment, at its best, is suspension and inter- 
parietal fixation. Perfect drainage, frequent removal of dis- 
charges, and absolute rest may make it practically extra- 
peritoneal. 

According to Vautrin, in supra-vaginal amputations the 
general mortality, with intra-peritoneal treatment of the pedicle, 
is 56.2 per cent.; with extra-peritoneal, 33.3 per cent. Although 
this death-rate is far in excess of what may be termed the 
legitimate mortality — that is to say, the mortality in the hands 
of the best operators, — it is more than probable that the 
proportionate mortality is the same all round. In other 
words, the dangers of the intra-peritoneal treatment are 
nearly twice as great as the extra-peritoneal. At present, 
therefore, the extra-peritoneal treatment of the pedicle should 
be selected. No doubt the advancing surgery of the day will 
not rest till some intra-peritoneal method has been devised 

* A very full account of these may be found in Vautrin's book, already 

referred to. 



AFTER-TREATMENT. 267 

which will excel all others : in the meantime, our present 
knowledge and experience are in favour of the extra-peritoneal 
method. 

After-treatment. — The general after-treatment requires no 
special description, being, to all intents and purposes, the 
same as after ovariotomy. There is usually more pain ; and 
the bladder, having less room to expand, requires to be emptied 
more frequently than in ovariotomy. Pain is often relieved by 
emptying the bladder. 

The nurse must look sharply after the stump, to see that 
haemorrhage does not take place ; and she must be carefully 
instructed how to tighten the screw and check it. The tighter 
the wire is kept (short of cutting), the sooner the stump 
dries up. 

When the pedicle is converted into a hard dry mass the 
serre-noeud may be removed, but the needles should not be 
disturbed. I now usually remove the clamp on the third or 
fourth day, and do not tighten it up after operation. The 
pedicle usually sloughs for some distance behind the wire as 
well as in front of it ; and if the needles are removed before 
the slough separates, the whole is retracted inside the cavity 
and gives some trouble in its removal. If the needles are 
removed at all, it should be in order that they may be re- 
inserted lower down in the substance of the slough ; then all 
the tissue above them should be cut away, except sufficient to 
hold by. Stimulating lotions promote the formation of granu- 
lations, and thereby accelerate the separation of the slough. 
Dry strips of boracic lint or other absorbent dressing should be 
laid around the slough, and changed frequently, so as to keep 
the pus from burrowing downwards. 



Section V. 



OPERATIONS ON THE GRAVID UTERUS, 
AND FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 



To save life in cases where, from any cause, delivery cannot 
take place through the natural passages, at least five distinct 
operations have been recommended, besides a number of modi- 
fications of these. They are : Caesarean section ; Utero-ovarian 
amputation, or Porro's operation ; Laparo-elytrotomy ; Total 
extirpation of the uterus ; and Symphysiotomy. 

Two of these, the last, may be at once dismissed. Sym- 
physiotomy, or section of the pubic symphysis for increasing 
the space of the pelvic cavity, was proposed in 1768 by Sigault^ 
and successfully carried out by him nine years later. The 
operation has not, however, come into general use, most men 
believing that, in those cases where it is likely to be successful, 
other and less dangerous modes of delivery are possible. 



OPERATIONS ON THE GRAVID UTERUS. 269 

The allied operations of Pelviotomy (Galbiati) and Pubi- 
otomy (Stoltz) have also failed to secure the confidence of the 
profession. 

Total extirpation of the pregnant uterus has been performed 
only during the co-existence of cancer, and then the operation 
has been rather the extirpation of a cancerous organ which 
happened to contain a foetus, than one designed to save life 
endangered by obstruction to delivery. Bischoff* operated, in 
1879, on a patient with cancer of the cervix in the thirty-fourth 
week of pregnancy. The patient died in eleven hours ; and at 
the necropsy one ureter was found enclosed in the ligature. In 
1 881 Spencer Wells removed by abdominal section a cancerous 
uterus six months pregnant. The patient recovered from the 
operation ; but the disease recurred not long afterwards. 
A case in w^hich the writer removed a cancerous and 
pregnant uterus by the vagina during the second month 
of gestation can scarcely be included in this category. 
The patient recovered, and as yet, after a year and a half, 
continues well. 

Full consideration is given to three operations : 

Caesarean Section. 
Porro's Operation. 
Laparo-elytrotomy. 

And, further, it will be necessary to describe separately the 
surgical treatment of 

Rupture of the Uterus. 

Extra-uterine Pregnancy. 

Pregnancy in one horn of a Uterus bicornis. 

With reference to Caesarean section, Porro's operation, and 
Laparo-elytrotomy, the mortality, indications to operate, and 
appreciation, will be considered conjointly and, as far as 
possible, comparatively ; so that, if such a practice be pos- 
sible, there may be a selection of method according to the 
nature of the case. 

• Hegar und Kaltenbach. Openit. Gyndh., 2nd Ed., Stuttgart, 1S81, p. 414. 



270 OPERATIONS ON THE GRAVID UTERUS. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY OF THE GRAVID UTERUS. 

The elaborate studies of Polk* on the relational anatomy 
of the gravid uterus are of great value. I have been able 
to supplement and confirm Polk's observations by two dis- 
sections , specially made in view of surgical procedures. One 
was obtained from a patient in the ninth month of pregnancy, 
who died of acute chorea. The other, in which labour had 
advanced till the os uteri was dilated to the size of a crown- 
piece, was got from a patient who died from fracture of the 
spine, caused by a fall. Both dissections are now in the 
museum of the Bristol Infirmary. 

During pregnancy changes take place in the relations of the 
peritoneum, the uterine and ovarian arteries, the uterine liga- 
ments, and the ureters. 

As the uterus rises out of the pelvis, it carries the peritoneum 
with it. The elevation of the pelvic peritoneum, near the end 
of pregnancy, is so great that the reflection from the parietes to 
the uterus takes place somewhere near the level of Poupart's 
ligament. At the same time the cellular tissue becomes lax 
and distensile, and the attachment of the peritoneum is much 
loosened. This elevation of peritoneum and laxity of cellular 
tissue is so marked, that if an abdominal section is made trans- 
versely at the level of the internal ring, and the uterus is pushed 
to the opposite side, the true pelvis may be entered without 
encountering peritoneum at all. Even if it bulges into the 
incision, it can easily be pushed upwards. This change in the 
relation of the peritoneum renders the operation of Laparo- 
elytrotomy possible. 

The broad ligaments are lifted out of the pelvis altogether, 
and become triangular instead of being quadrangular. The 
inner border, descending from the cornu to the internal os, is 
much broadened : its layers are separated and loosely attached, 
especially the anterior layer passing over the front of the uterus. 
The superior border, running between cornu and pelvic brim, is 

New York Med. Journ., 1884. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 



271 



almost perpendicular. The lower border, partaking of the 
general elevation of the pelvic brim, now occupies the level of 
the upper border in the non-pregnant state, running straight 
across from pelvic brim to uterus. The outer border is obliter- 
ated. The uterus may, in fact, be considered as growing 
upwards between the folds of the broad ligaments, carrying 

these and the peritoneum 
continuous with it. 

The round ligaments, 
greatly enlarged and elon- 
gated, descend in the ante- 
rior folds of the broad 
ligaments in straight lines 
from their insertion at the 
cornua to the internal 
rings. Nowhere do they 
descend below the pelvic 
brim. They may be con- 
sidered as instrumental in 
raising the peritoneum from 
the iliac fossae. 

The arteries are much 
enlarged — the ovarian 
more, in proportion, than 
the uterine. The uterine 
artery is straightened, and 
is elevated so that it is, in 
part, removed from the 
pelvic wall. Its relations 
to the ureter are not much 
changed. The ovarian ar- 
tery, after it reaches the 
bifurcation of the iliac, runs upwards and forwards to the 
elevated cornu in the posterior border of the expanded upper 
portion of the broad ligament. 

The relations of the ureters are, in one of these operations, 
exceedingly important. They are, at full term, detached from 




Fig. 45. 

Outline draiving from dried preparation oj 

uterus near termination of first stage 
of labour. (Bristol Infirmary Museum.) 

ut., uterus; v., vagina; bl., bladder; r., 
rectum; d.p., Douglas' pouch; tir., ureter; 
dotted line at level of external os ; x, at line of 
incision through vagina in Laparo-Elytrotomy. 
Shading is placed on the areas closely invested 
by peritoneum. 



272 OPERATIONS ON THE GRAVID UTERUS. 

the pelvic wall and elevated along with the vagina and bladder. 
They lie very closely to the vagina on its antero-lateral aspects, 
and strike the bladder about three-quarters of an inch below 
the cervico-vaginal junction. These relations are not much 
changed during labour. As the head descends and fills the 
parturient canal, the ureters are pushed apart. They now lie 
in close contact with the vaginal and uterine walls, amongst 
the plexus of vessels. The relation of ureter to external os 
at the end of the first stage of labour — that is to say, at the 
most important surgical period — is shown in the accompanying 
diagram, made from a special dissection. (Fig. 45.) In a full 
lateral view, the ureter crosses the line of the os uteri obliquely 
near the junction of its anterior with its middle third. In other 
words, at the level of the external os the space between ureter 
and rectum is twice as great as that between ureter and bladder. 
The importance of these relations in laparo-elytrotomy will be 
seen presently. The ureter leaves the uterus behind out of the 
range of danger in Porro's operation, unless the pedicle is 
constricted very low down. 



Csesarean Section. Puerperal Hysterotomy. 

History. — The removal of a child from a mother who fails to 
deliver it is a very old operation. At first performed only when 
the mother was dead, the operation afterwards came into use 
while she was still alive. Whether or not we accept the inter- 
pretation given to the sentence in Pliny (" Auspicatius, enecata 
parente, gignuntur sicut Scipio Africanus prior natus, primusque 
Caesarum a caeso matris utero dictus"), there is no doubt that 
the name Caesarean was very earl}^ given to the operation ; 
and many historical personages — among others, Manilius, 
Edward VI. of England, and Sanctus, King of Navarre — have 
been called Caesars from their having been supposed to be cut 
out of their mother's womb. According to Heister,* the Greeks 
were acquainted with the operation of removing the child 
while the mother was alive, and named it " Hysterotomia." 
There is little doubt that it was practised among the Jews from 
very ancient times. In later times, the operation was done 
here and there ; but full and authentic records of it are wanting. 
The first case recorded with anything like circumstantial minute- 
ness is that done in 1500 by the Chatreur or sow-gelder of 
Seigerheusen, who operated on his own wife, as recorded by 
Caspar Bauhin in his appendix to Roussetus's great work. 
The woman had been in labour for some days, and had been 
attended by thirteen midwives and several lithotomists. These 
the sow-gelder sent about their business, and he extracted the 
infant with success to both mother and child. W. Simmons, 
surgeon to the Manchester Infirmary, who published a very 
able monograph on the subject in 1799, believes that this case 
was really one of extra-uterine foetation. Whether this was so 
we cannot now decide ; but the influence of this obscure oper- 
ator was not felt till after the pubHcation, in 1581, of the first 
elaborate work on the operation by Roussetus.f By a careful 

* System of Siirgeiy, 1750, vol. ii., p. 27. 

t Traiie nouveau de I'Hysterotomotokie ou enfantcment Cdsaykn, qui est extvaition 

de V enfant par incision laterale du ventre et matrice de la femvie, &c. 

19 



274 CESAREAN SECTION. 

record of seven cases, and an elaborate discussion of all the 
details of the operation, he sought to place it upon a scientific 
basis. Bauhin, in 1582, translated this work into Latin, and 
added an appendix. Guillemeau, Marchant (both Paris sur- 
geons), and others, having utterly failed in the practice of the 
operation, unhesitatingly condemned it ; to these Roussetus, in 
1590, replied,* placing the operation on a more secure basis. 
In 1604 Scipio Mercurius, a Roman surgeon, in his work on 
Midwifery, published in Venice, advises hysterotomy in suitable 
cases. Soon after this, Schenkius ; Roonhuisen, an Amsterdam 
surgeon; Sonnius, a physician of Bruges; Rudbeckius, a Swede ; 
Bartholini ; Renaud ; Saviare, and others practised and wrote 
upon the operation. In 1695 Valerusf published a treatise on 
the operation. Ruleau, a surgeon of Xaintes, seems to have 
had a successful case about the beginning of the eighteenth 
century; and Dionis]: — who, however, is strongly against the 
proceeding — by investigations made subsequently on the spot, 
satisfied himself as to the authenticity of this operation. 
Sennertus, Hildanus, and Scultetus, may be quoted as 
favouring the operation ; Pare, however, was distinctly 
against it. 

A notable contribution both to the history and the science 
of the subject was made by M. Simon in the first volume of 
the Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Surgery, in which also 
various cases are recorded, with not very encouraging success. 
A similar want of success seems to have followed operation 
everywhere. In Vienna, Godson tells us, the operation was 
done for a hundred years without a single success ; and in the 
Maternite, at Paris, a similar story was told. Chiara of Milan 
gathered 62 operations, with only three recoveries. In England 
an almost equally dismal record is given for the eighteenth and 
even part of the nineteenth centuries. Here and there a success 
is recorded — not always, however, by leaders in surgery, who, 
as a rule, were opposed to it. One such case is recorded by 

* In Dialogus pro Casareo partu, &c., Paris, 1590. 

t Dissert, de partu Cc^sareo, Viteberga, 1695. 

J A Course of Chiriirgical Operations, Eng. Trans., Lond., 1733. 



THE OPERATION. 275 

Mr. Duncan Stewart,* in which a midwife — who seems, how- 
ever, to have been a consultant among her class — operated 
successfully with a razor. Unlike most operators, she made 
her incision in the middle line ; she closed the wound with 
tailors' needles and silk, used like hare-lip pins. The patient 
was seen afterwards quite well, but with a ventral hernia. 

A good many examples of Csesarean section performed by 
the patient herself are on record. Among the most remarkable 
of these is that recorded by von Guggenberg,f where the woman 
succeeded in removing the child ; and all that was left for the 
surgeon to do was to close the openings. Another^ — in which 
the patient, two hours after operating on herself, walked a kilo- 
metre, breakfasted with a sister, and then walked about for some 
time, had protrusion of intestines, and (with medical assistance) 
recovered — is even more remarkable. 

The impetus recently given to abdominal surgery has spread 
to all operations for removing the foetus, and not least power- 
fully to Caesarean section. And, particularly within the last few 
years, the comparative want of success of Porro's operation in 
Germany and elsewhere has led to the devotion of increased 
attention to certain details in ordinary hysterotomy which place 
it in a position of rivalry with, if not of superiority to, hyster- 
ectomy. 

THE OPERATION OF CESAREAN SECTION. 

When it has been decided, in any given case, that puerperal 
hysterotomy is to be performed, the sooner it is carried out the 
better. The condition of the patient, already in all probability 
not very favourable, rapidly deteriorates ; and the local etTects 
of prolonged contraction of the uterine fibre, exhausting its 
vitality, are not conducive to subsequent healing. Therefore, 
though it is advisable to operate with a cleansed vagina, no 
time which delays operation is to be spent in doing this. 
Cleansing may be carried out after operation is over. The 
abdomen may be rapidly purified with carbolic or corrosive 

* Med. Essays and Observations, Edin. , vol. v., p. 361, 1752. 

t Lancet, 1886, i., p 90 { Lancet, May 22nc], 1S86. 

19 * 



276 CESAREAN SECTION. 

sublimate lotion, and particular attention must be paid to the 
umbilicus. Shaving adds to the security. The general arrange- 
ments for operation are the same as those already described for 
abdominal operations in general. 

I should always use antiseptics in their fullest details. The 
instruments required are very few and simple. A scalpel, a 
pair of scissors, and a dozen pairs of locking forceps, with the 
necessary complement of needles, sutures, ligatures, and sponges, 
are all that are wanted. Two long flat sponges will be found 
very useful. In every case we ought to be provided with a 
clamp and other instruments necessary for a possible hyster- 
ectomy. 

The Parietal Incision. — The abdominal opening, which used to 
be made to one side of the median line, is now always made 
along it, and in the same manner as for ovariotomy. But the 
primary incision is longer, and does not descend so low, while it 
rises higher. The elevation of the bladder renders it inadvisable 
to approach within a distance of two or two and a half inches 
from the pubes. Above this point an incision of five inches may 
be made. According to the size of the patient, the upper limit 
will reach to, or pass a varying distance beyond, the umbilicus. 
According to Sanger, a suitable incision will in most cases be 
one-third of its length above the umbilicus, and two-thirds below 
it. The cut may go straight through the umbilicus ; but, for 
reasons given elsewhere, I think it is better that it should pass 
to the left of it. If, as some surgeons recommend, the uterus 
is to be turned out of the wound before opening it, then the 
incision must be made considerably longer. More will be said 
on this proceeding. The intention, in the operation to be 
described, is to give sufficient space — firstl}', for removal of the 
child ; and secondly, for suturing the wound in the uterus. 

Opening the Uterus, Extraction af Foetus. — In making the wound 
in the uterine walls, we have to bear in mind avoidance of 
haemorrhage and the encouragement of subsequent union. If 
the incision is carried too low, the branches of the uterine artery 



THE UTERINE INCISION. 277 

are endangered. The anterior reflection of the peritoneum from 
the uterus is a good guide. Here the peritoneum is loosely 
attached and somewhat freely movable. The lower limit of the 
incision may enter this region. So far as bleeding is concerned, 
the upper limits of the incision are unimportant. The position 
of the placenta might be supposed to have an important influ- 
ence on the selection of the line for the uterine wound, but, 
practically, this would seem not to be so. Still, if it is possible 
to make out the site of the attachment of the placenta before 
incising the uterus (always difficult, often impossible according 
to most writers), the operation might be rendered easier by 
avoiding this area. No extraordinary trouble need be taken to 
avoid it, however. A vertical incision is recommended. 

The line of incision being fixed upon, two long flat sponges 
are placed, one on each side of it, between the uterus and the 
parietes. An assistant, standing on the left side of the patient, 
opposite to the surgeon, places a hand deepl}' in each flank 
behind the uterus, and makes the uterus bulge forward into the 
parietal opening, firmly holding it there. By this manoeuvre, 
and with the intervention of the flat sponges, the risks of 
escape of fluids into the abdomen are minimised. The uterus 
is so placed and fixed that the incision through its walls will 
correspond to the parietal incision. 

As to the best mode of making the uterine incision, many 
opinions are held. Some recommend tearing ; others, a com- 
bination of cutting and tearing ; others, pure cutting. Some 
recommend a dissection deliberately carried out, each vessel 
being caught in forceps as it bleeds. To prevent bleeding, the 
placing of a temporary ligature around the neck of the uterus 
has been used by several surgeons ; by others, equally trust- 
worthy, it has been neglected. As a matter of fact, the bleeding 
is rarely severe ; but should it chance to be alarming, a sponge 
may be packed into the wound to check it while the elastic 
ligature is slipped over the uterus to its neck and tightened. In 
the absence of a proper tourniquet, a simple knot may be cast 
and tightened ; while it can easily be prevented from becoming 
undone by placing a catch forceps upon it. In every case it is 



278 CESAREAN SECTION. 

best to do without the use of a constricting hgature, if that is 
possible ; every increase of traumatism adds to the danger. 

I am in favour of a clean-cut incision. At the upper end of 
the projected incision, where the uterus is least vascular, an 
opening an inch in length is rapidly made by the scalpel. The 
opening need not completely perforate the uterine walls, but 
may be completed by pushing the finger through it. If the 
membranes are intact, a condition which is considered favourable, 
they need not now be divided ; but it can matter little if they 
are divided by the finger. The incision is now rapidly completed 
downwards, by scissors cutting on the finger as a director. A 
few seconds suffice for this part of the proceeding. The scissors 
is now thrown aside, and the hand plunged through the opening 
catches the head of the child, the fingers clipping the neck. If 
the feet are conveniently near, the child may be extracted by 
grasping them ; but as the uterine opening may contract round 
the following neck, it is better to extract by the head. If, 
during extraction by the feet, the head is caught in the uterine 
opening, the incision should be prolonged upwards to prevent 
downward laceration of the uterine walls. 

Uterine action will have been going on all this time, and 
gushes of amniotic fluid will have escaped from the uterus and 
run over the macintosh plastered round the abdominal opening. 
The assistant, meanwhile, will have carefully kept the uterus 
pressed forward on to the abdominal walls : if he is skilled and 
attentive, no fluids will enter the abdomen. 

The umbilical cord is now divided between two pairs of 
locking forceps, and the child is handed over to an assistant. 
The surgeon then directs his attention to the detachment of the 
placenta, and the bleeding in the uterine wound. 

If the uterus is contracting well, bleeding from the uterine 
sinuses soon ceases, and the placenta becomes spontaneously 
detached. At least one surgeon seems to have been able to 
increase the vigour of uterine contraction by the application of 
electricity, and this hint is well worthy of attention. A hypo- 
dermic injection of ergotine is advisable at this stage. If the 
condition of the patient permits of it, it is always best to wait 



CLOSURE OF THE UTERINE WOUND. 279 

for spontaneous detachment of the placenta. During this 
period it is easy enough to control bleeding from the uterine 
sinuses b}^ compression b}^ sponges, or, if necessary, by forceps. 
If, after a timely delay, the placenta is not detached, we may 
encourage detachment with the fingers ; but if the uterus still 
refuses to contract, and if bleeding continues free from the 
uterine incision, then we ought to proceed to hysterectomy by 
Porro's method. The secret of success in simple hysterotomy 
is efficient contraction of the uterus ; if this fails us, the next 
best proceeding is hysterectomy. 

In the great majority of cases, operated upon sufficiently 
early, the uterus contracts, the placenta is spontaneously 
detached, and the haemorrhage from the uterine sinuses spon- 
taneously ceases, or becomes unimportant. Careful attention is 
bestowed on the complete and thorough removal of the secun- 
dines. When the uterus is empty, it may be advisable to push 
a drainage tube or probang through the cervix and vagina, and 
leave it there to act as a drain. In any case, permeability 
towards the vagina will have been ascertained before closure of 
the uterine wound is begun. There is little use in mopping out 
the uterine cavity ; it soon refills. Generally speaking, the less 
manipulation the better : the process of parturition physio- 
logically looks after itself; meddlesome interference means, in 
many cases, harmful traumatism. 

If the uterus has contracted well, and seems to be small 
enough easily to be pushed by the assistant through the 
parietal opening, there is no strong objection to this being done. 
It prevents the escape of blood into the cavity during the 
extraction of the placenta, and facilitates the insertion of 
sutures. Most surgeons would, however, dread the risks from 
additional traumatism thus induced. 

Closure of the Uterine Wound. — There is a very general con- 
sensus of opinion that on this detail, more than on any other, 
depends the success of Caesarean section. No doubt this is so. 
But many cases of recovery are on record in which no closure 
has been attempted ; the wound has been left to close by uterine 



280 CESAREAN SECTION. 

contraction. On the other hand, it would seem that if uterine 
contraction fails, mere suturing is not always sufficient. Accu- 
rate suturing", plus uterine contraction, give the best results. 

The problem is complicated. The natural involution of the 
uterus induces an atrophy of uterine fibres, which is degener- 
ative and attended with the free discharge of fluids. This 
process is, in wounds of uterine tissue proper, strongly preju- 
dicial to union by adhesive inflammation. Uterine contractions 
going on after delivery, mean that a condition of unrest exists 
in the uterine wound. This is another bar to union. And this 
unrest and the delayed union permit of the escape of intra- 
uterine fluids through the wound into the peritoneum — a con- 
tingency which is full of danger. 

The methods of suturing the uterine wound are very nu- 
merous. Lebas, in 1769, first introduced sutures. Polin of 
Kentucky in 1852 first introduced the silver suture ; and this 
has always been a favourite material. Hemp, catgut, silk, and 
other materials, have been used ; and the sutures have been 
placed in a great number of ways — deep, superficial, continuous, 
interrupted, singly, and in combinations. Wells, in a successful 
case, used a continuous silk suture, one end of which he carried 
through the vagina, subsequently removing it by traction. 
But the success after any method was not encouraging. 

Within the past few years special attention has been devoted 
by several German surgeons to the mode of suturing the uterine 
wound, and with a success which is remarkable and striking. 
The extraordinary capacity of serous surfaces to become quickly 
glued together by inflammatory adhesions had been fully proved 
in abdominal surgery. In gastrostomy, enterotomy, and enter- 
ectomy, it had been shown that apposition of serous surfaces, 
with fixation by suitable and numerous sutures, was followed 
by agglutination so intimate and strong that escape of fluids or 
gases was impossible. The danger in Caesarean section arose 
from gaping of the uterine wound, which took place from the 
natural shrinkage of the uterine fibre. As the fibres shrank the 
sutures became loose ; and they might even act as setons, 
encouraging the escape of uterine secretions. The principle of 



CLOSURE OF THE UTERINE WOUND. 281 

the new improvement was, to look to the peritoneum for the 
perfect closure of the uterine wound towards the abdomen. 

Though Van Aubel is said to have suggested this method in 
1862, Sanger, who published his ideas in 1882,* deserves the 
chief merit of having introduced it. Leopold was the first 
actually to carry it out. Beumer, Obermann, Miinster, Crede, 
and others soon followed; and the combined results of thest 
operators, in the short time during which they have been 
working, have already placed the improved mode of Caesarean 
section by the conservative Sanger or Sanger-Leopold method 
ahead of all others. 

Many variations in detail have been given. Sanger at 
first recommended resection of a wedge-shaped strip of mus- 
cular fibre under the peritoneal covering, so as to permit of the 
infolding of a greater amount of serous surface. This was 
found to be unnecessary, and sometimes even harmful. It is 
usually possible, without resection of muscular tissue, to fold 
inwards sufficient breadth of serous surface. It is unnecessary 
to recapitulate every variety of suture which has been employed ; 
I select one which seems the best. 

A double row of sutures is used, deep and superficial. 
(Fig. 46.) The peritoneal covering is detached from the 
muscular fibre for a little distance along the margins of the 
wound : in this way, it is possible to turn inwards a greater 
surface of peritoneum. Then the deep sutures are placed. 
They are made to enter at about half an inch from the edge of 
the wound, passed obliquely through uterine tissue, and made to 
emerge near to the bottom of the cut surface. No suture should 
enter the uterine cavity. These deep sutures should be placed 
about three-quarters of an inch apart ; and they should be 
carried, converging a little, beyond the ends of the incision. 

Then the superficial sutures are placed, two between each 
deep suture. The needle first pierces peritoneum and muscle, 
coming out a little below the lip of the wound ; then it picks up 
the free edge of the peritoneum on its own side, and finally 
pursues the same course in opposite direction with the other 
* Der Kaiseyschnitt, Sec, Leipzig, 1882. 



282 



CESAREAN SECTION. 



side. The diagram, after Sanger, shows this more clearly than 
any description. The sutures are placed with great care, 
and they are carried a little way beyond the extremities of 
the wound. 

The superficial sutures are first tied, bringing into accurate 
apposition two strips of peritoneum. Then the deep sutures 
are tied, causing still further incurvation of serous surfaces, and 
closing up and strengthening the whole. Finally, if apposition 

does not seem 
u to be perfect, 

a simple con- 
tinuous suture 
may be insert- 
ed over the 
whole. 

In every case 
where future 
pregnancies 
may take place 
this should be 
prevented by 
excising with 
scissors a small 
portion of each 
Fallopian tube. 

While the su- 
tures are being 
inserted, a few 
sponges placed 
in Douglas's 
pouch and 
around the uterus will absorb any fluids that may have escaped. 
These are now removed, and the whole cavity cleansed. 

The wound in the parietes is sutured in the ordinary manner. 

The question of drainage is not without importance. In 

most cases it will be useless ; but in some, by giving timely 

warning of the escape of uterine fluids, it may prove invaluable. 




Fig. 46. 

Diagrams to show the placing of Sutures in the Uterine 
Wound after Cesarean Section. 

P, Peritoneum ; F, Uterine Fibre ; M, Mucous or Decidual 
Layer; U, Deep Uterine Suture; S, Superficial Serous Suture. 



MODIFICA TIONS. 283 

At the worst it is harmless, and therefore I should always insert 
a drainage tube. It need not go deeply into the pelvis. A piece 
of rubber tubing, cut obliquely, laid over the uterine wound, 
and fixed by a stitch into the lower angle of the parietal in- 
cision, will suffice. At the end of a day or two it may be 
removed, should it not be required. 

If the patient survives the shock of the operation, the chief 
subsequent danger is from peritonitis. This is treated according 
to ordinary principles by turpentine enemas and saline purges. 
But such peritonitis will almost certainly have been produced 
by extravasation of uterine secretions, and for this the best 
treatment is free drainage and frequent irrigation. At the same 
time cleansing of the vagina and of the cavity of the uterus by 
warm antiseptic fluids must be instituted. If there is evidence 
of gaping of the uterine wound, the abdominal incision may be 
re-opened, and an attempt made to close it. If the patient 
will bear it, hysterectomy even might be contemplated as a 
last resource. 

Modifications. — A few of the most important modifications 
may be referred to. 

Kehrer of Heidelberg* recommends that the uterus be 
opened at the level of the internal os by a transverse 
incision. By this method he thinks that the wound- is less 
liable to gape, that the placenta is less likely to be in the way, 
that the head is more easily reached, and that the peritoneum, 
being here loosely attached to the uterus, is more easily sutured 
separately. He recommends vaginal as well as abdominal 
drainage. He lost three cases in seven operations, and his plan 
has not secured followers. Obvious objections are : danger of 
haemorrhage, the wound being in the region of large vessels ; 
difficulty in controlling it by temporary ligature, should it 
occur ; and risk of circular tearing in extracting the child. 

Cohnsteinf recommended that the whole uterus should be 
turned out of the abdominal wound, and that the opening 
should be made on its posterior aspect while the aorta is being 
* Archiv.f. Gyndk., bd. xix., heft. 2. t Centralbl.f. Gyndk., bd. v., heft. 12. 



284 CESAREAN SECTION. 

compressed. He advised drainage through Douglas's pouch, 
and complete closure of the abdominal wound. He rests the 
advantage of his plan on the facts, that the uterine tissue is 
thickest behind, and therefore less likely to gape ; and that the 
posterior opening and dependent drainage are the best safe- 
guards against septic peritonitis. His plan has not been 
adopted. 

Sanger* himself recommended the long abdominal incision, 
and delivery of the uterus before extracting the foetus. A few 
sutures are at once placed in the upper end of the incision, to 
prevent extrusion of bowels, while the abdominal cavity is shut 
off by placing a sheet of caoutchouc under the uterus over the 
abdominal wall. The evident disadvantages of this plan 
probably outweigh the advantages. 

Frank! has ingeniously suggested that the vesico- uterine 
pouch should be closed as far as possible by stitching the round 
ligaments together, and draining the hollow thus formed through 
the wound. The use of a short rubber tube in the manner I 
have suggested, secures this advantage by a simpler method. 

* Archivf. Gyndk., bd. xix., heft. 3, s. 397. 
t Centralbl. f. Gyndk., bd. v., heft. 25, s. 598. 



Porro's Operation. Puerperal Hysterectomy. 

History. — Removal of the uterus, as a sequel to Caesarean 
section, was first deliberately planned and carried out by Porro, 
in the Maternity Hospital of Pa via, in 1876. His patient was 
a woman deformed by rickets ; and, although puerperal fever 
was then prevalent in the hospital, an excellent recovery 
followed. The idea was suggested by the success of hyster- 
ectomy for fibroids, and was strengthened by the results of 
experiments upon animals. Since then the operation has been 
known by Porro's name. 

According to Godson,* the possibility of removing the gravid 
uterus from animals was first proved, in 1768, by Cavallini in 
Florence. In 1828 Blundell of Guy's Hospital performed the 
same operation on four bitches, with three successes, and 
suggested that hysterectomy might be a wise practice after 
Caesarean section, or when a patient is evidently sinking after 
rupture of the womb. Michaelis of Marbourg, in 1809, made 
a like suggestion ; and other workers added to the experimental 
proofs of the possibility of operating with success. 

The first case of actual removal of the gravid uterus in a 
woman was in the hands of Horatio Storer of Boston in i86g. 
He performed hysterectomy to avoid death from incontrollable 
haemorrhage in Caesarean section. The patient died in sixty- 
eight hours. After Porro's own operation, the next success was 
secured by Spath of Vienna, in 1877. Since then the operation 
has been performed more than 250 times, with a per-centage of 
women saved of something between 40 and 50. 



THE OPERATION. 

Porro's operation may be defined as Caesarean section, 
followed by removal of the uterus at the cervical junction, 
along with the ovaries and oviducts. It has been variously 
* Brit. Med. Journ., Jan. 2Cth, 1884. 



286 PORRO'S OPERATION. 

named — Csesarean hystero-oophorectomy, Caesarean hystero- 
ovariotomy, puerperal hysterectomy : Porro himself described 
it as " Utero-ovarian amputation, as a mode of completing the 
Caesarean section." A true Porro's operation is therefore always 
preceded by Caesarean section. In his proceeding also the foetus 
is supposed to be viable. But puerperal hysterectomy may be 
performed for ruptured uterus, and for abnormal conditions 
which exist before the end of pregnancy : it is necessary to 
separate these from true Porro operations. Godson, in his 
valuable paper, very properly tabulates the operations into : 

1. True Porro operations. 

2. Utero-ovarian amputations performed during pregnancy, 
but before the foetus was viable. 

3. Operations for removal of the foetus from the abdominal 
cavity by laparotomy, followed by amputation of ruptured 
uterus with ovaries. 

For each of these proceedings the operative details are, in 
their main features, identical. Some special remarks will, how- 
ever, be necessary in describing the operation for ruptured 
uterus. 

The Parietal Incision is the same as for simple Caesarean 
section. If anything, it ought to be lower, because the stump of 
the amputated uterus has to be brought out at its lower end. 
A modification introduced by Miiller in 1878, whereby the whole 
uterus is turned out of the abdomen before it is opened, neces- 
sitates a very long incision. The advantages claimed for this 
method are, that it avoids the risk of escape of uterine fluids 
into the abdomen (a real advantage if, as in his case, the foetus 
is putrid), and that it renders easy the application of a temporar}^ 
constrictor to prevent haemorrhage. The evident disadvantages 
are, however, so great that Miiller's modification has not re- 
ceived much support. 

The Uterine [Opening may be made by incision or by tearing, 
and may be directed transversely or longitudinally. As the 
uterus is to be amputated, and the uterine wound is not to be 



AMPUTATION OF UTERUS. 287 

closed, the mode of opening is not so important in Porro's 
operation as it is in true Caesarean section. The selection of 
a site for making the opening may, within certain limits, be 
guided by the position of the placenta. 

Godson favours a transverse opening low down, made by 
tearing. Most operators, however, prefer a vertical opening, 
made by cutting ; and this method seems, on the whole, to be 
the best. The incision may be rapidly made by scissors, in 
the manner recommended for Caesarean section. 

Other details as to the placing of sponges, pressing forwards 
the uterus and delivering the child, are the same as for that 
operation. The cord is divided between compression forceps, 
and the child handed over to an assistant. 

Management of the Placenta. — The placenta may or may not be 
removed before amputating the uterus. The only advantage of 
so removing it is, that the uterus is thereby diminished in size ; 
the disadvantages are, waste of time and risk of bleeding. 
Experience has proved that it is, at least, unnecessary ; practi- 
cally, therefore, it may be left attached. 

Control of Hemorrhage from the uterus may be effected by 
temporary constriction round the neck, by the hand inserted 
into the abdominal cavity, or by an elastic ligature, or by an 
instrument such as Tait's rope constrictor. Large T-shaped 
compression forceps applied to the edges of the uterine wound 
would quickly and efficiently serve the same purpose. But, with 
moderate uterine contraction and due rapidity of operation, 
bleeding from the uterine wound may be ignored — at least, till 
the uterus is turned out of the abdomen. 

The uterus is delivered by hooking the forefinger of each 
hand into the ends of the incision and dragging it forwards. 
The abdominal cavity is shut off by placing large sponges in 
the opening. 

Amputation of Uterus. Treatment of Pedicle. — Thus far experi- 
ence has declared strongly in favour of the extra-peritoneal 
treatment of the pedicle. According to Godson's tables, of 
fifteen cases treated by intra-peritoneal methods, eleven died. 



288 PORRO'S OPERATION. 

Though the verdict thus given cannot be regarded as final, 
it may be safely concluded that, with the practical methods 
at present in vogue, the likelihood of success is greater with 
the extra-peritoneal than with the intra-peritoneal method. 

Numerous methods of constricting the pedicle have been 
employed. Various forms of wire constrictors and chain 
ecraseurs ; the wire ligature, singly or in sections ; steel clamps ; 
and the elastic ligature, have been used. Constriction by a 
wire which can be tightened has been most favoured, and has 
given the best results. Cintrat's constrictor has most often been 
employed; but Koeberle's simpler and smaller instrument is 
gradually displacing it. Tait's recent modification of Koeberle's 
serre-noeud (Fig. 38) is as nearly perfect as such an instrument 
can be ; and this instrument I consider the most suitable for 
securing the pedicle in puerperal hysterectomy. 

The instruction generally given is, to place the wire round 
the neck of the uterus at the level of the internal os. But the 
position of the internal os will vary according to the stage of 
labour and the subsequent degree of uterine contraction. It 
will generally be safe to place the wire immediately below the 
bulge of the uterine walls, which marks the lowest descent of 
the foetus. In the later stages of labour this will be very near 
to the level of the external os. In cases necessitating opera- 
tion, there will be some obstruction to the descent of the foetus, 
and as the uterus contracts the os is of necessity dragged up 
over the foetus. The ureters can scarcely be endangered. If a 
temporary constrictor has been put on, the wire is placed below 
it, if this does not involve too low a situation ; but there is no 
strong reason why the wire should not be placed in the groove 
of the temporary constrictor, or even above it. The single wire 
is quite sufficient : extra ligatures of silk or other material are 
useless, and may act simply as traps for filth. The instrument 
is fixed so that the handle shall be at right angles to the wound, 
or turned a little upwards towards the umbilicus. In this posi- 
tion it is least in the way of catheterism, or dressing of wound 
or pedicle. 

To fix the pedicle in the wound, and to prevent its retraction. 



THE PEDICLE. 289 

one or two round steel pins are passed through it above the 
site of constriction. The pins are identical with those used in 
hysterectomy for fibroids, and their ends are protected in the 
same way. 

The uterus being cut off at a distance of about three-quarters 
of an inch above the wire, the pedicle is carefully placed in the 
bottom of the abdominal incision. Before doing so, the vesico- 
uterine cul-de-sac is cleansed with a sponge, and the peritoneum 
around the pedicle and covering Douglas's pouch is also cleansed. 
Some surgeons, with a view to getting as rapid and complete 
closure of the peritoneum around the pedicle as possible, recom- 
mend that the parietal peritoneum at the lower extremity of the 
wound should be fixed to the peritoneum surrounding the pedicle. 
If this is not done, it would certainly be worth while to pull the 
peritoneum on the abdominal wall outwards over the cut sur- 
faces, and fix it there by a suture just above the pedicle. How- 
ever observed, the golden rule of peritoneum to peritoneum 
ought never to be neglected. 

The lowest suture in the abdominal wound is so placed that 
it brings the cut edges in close apposition to the pedicle, but 
not with undue tension. Tension will cause suppuration around 
the suture, an event specially to be guarded against. The rest 
of the sutures are placed in the ordinary way. 

Except in very special cases, drainage is not called for. 

The pedicle is now finally trimmed and dresssd. With 
scissors any superfluous tissue is cut off, leaving a circular 
convex surface, even all round. The mucous membrane in the 
centre, being prone to decompose, is scraped out, and the cavity 
cleansed. To mummify the tissue destined to slough beyond the 
constricting wire, perchloride of iron is rubbed into the raw 
surface, either solid or in a concentrated solution in glycerine. 
While this is being done pieces of lint are carefull}' packed 
around its base, so that no discharges shall get inside the 
abdominal cavity. 

The dressing of the wound is most conveniently carried out 
in two parts. The upper part, the parietal wound, is dressed 
as if for primary union, with a dressing that need not be dis- 

20 



290 PORRO'S OPERATION. 

turbed for a week. The part in which the pedicle lies is so 
covered that a discharge of blood will be at once visible, and 
the screw of the clamp reached without disturbing the upper 
dressing. Further, the pedicle, undergoing decomposition, 
ought to be kept apart from the healing wound, and constantly 
under the influence of active antiseptics. - With the help of 
Listerism, it sometimes happens that from beginning to end the 
pedicle is kept sweet, even if it does not continue dry : this is 
an advantage that cannot always be counted upon, however. 
All around the root of the pedicle small pledgets of boracic lint 
or absorbent gauze are packed, and removed as often as may 
be necessary. 

The wire of the serre-nceud is tightened a little every day or 
every few days, as may seem expedient. At the end of a week 
or a fortnight, it will come away with the strangulated tissue 
above it. 

The after-treatment requires no special comment. Peritonitis, 
simple or septic, is the chief cause of death, accounting for half 
the mortality. To obviate this an empty state of the bowels is 
the best treatment. Turpentine enemas, and, as soon as the 
patient will bear it, a saline aperient, ought to be given. 
Marked symptoms of peritonitis ought to be promptly met by 
abdominal drainage and irrigation through the wound above 
the pedicle. Rectal alimentation and free stimulation will be 
necessary, particularly if there is sickness. 



Liapro- Ely trotomy . 

By this operation (XuTrdpa — flank ; eXvrpov — vagina) is meant 
removal of a foetus through incisions in the abdominal wall and 
in the vagina, without opening the peritoneum or wounding the 
uterus. It is also known as Gastro-elytrotomy and as Thomas's 
operation. 

History. — This operation is as much the property of Gaillard 
Thomas of New York, as is the operation just described of Porro. 
Like the latter operation, laparo-elytrotomy had been proposed 
and even carried out, after a fashion, years before Thomas 
re-introduced it. According to MangiagaUi,'" Joergf in 1806 
suggested the plausibility of reaching the uterus through an 
abdomino-vaginal incision ; but there is no evidence that he 
ever operated. In 1820, Ritgen, | on hearing of the plan of 
ligating the external iliac without entering the peritoneum, 
devised gastro-elytrotomy for removal of the foetus from the 
uterus. He operated in 1821 ; but the bleeding was so free that 
he had to conclude with an ordinary Csesarean section. The 
patient died of vaginal haemorrhage. Baudelocque (1823) 
seems to have devised no fewer than six methods, of which he 
tried two, both without success. Physick (1824) proposed a 
somewhat similar proceeding, reaching the uterus by a hori- 
zontal incision over the top of the bladder and under the 
peritoneum ; but he never put it into practice. Sir Charles Bell 
(1837) discussed the method of sub-peritoneal hysterotomy, and 
suggested digital laceration of the vagina to avoid haemorrhage ; 
but it is doubtful if his proposal was original. 

The operation owes its revival, and indeed its present exist- 
ence, to Thomas. His proceeding, that of Ritgen and Bell 
combined, was carried out by him in March, 1870, on a living, 
or rather a dying, woman. § The patient was at the end of the 

* " Le piu recenti Mod. del Taglio Cesareo," Ajit. Jouvn. Med. Sc, July, 1884. 

t Handbiuh der Gebitrtshulfe, 1807. Garrigues. 

\ Heidelberg Klinische Annalen, vol. i., 1825, p. 226, 

§ Am. Journ. Obstet., May, 1870. 

20 - 



292 LAPARO-ELYTROTOMY. 

seventh month of gestation, and was in articulo mortis from pneu- 
monia ; the operation was undertaken solely in the interests of 
the child. This case proved the feasibility of the operation. 
Dr. Skene* and others took it up, and have secured to it a 
promising degree of success. 



THE OPERATION. 

Dr. H. J. Garrigues, of New York, has devoted special 
study to the history and technique of the operation, and has 
minutely described the anatomy of the parts.! To him and to 
Harris of Philadelphia, as well as to Thomas himself, I am 
mainly indebted for the following description. 

Preliminary Steps. — The patient is prepared in the ordinary 
way by clearing the primae viae ; the parts are thoroughly 
cleansed, the pubes shaved, and the vagina and vulva purified. 
The pelvis is elevated by a hard cushion, and the thighs are 
extended as much as possible. The os uteri, if not fully dilated, 
is now dilated artificially by means of Barnes's bags, or, if 
necessary, by the fingers. 

As the vagina communicates with the wound, complete 
asepticism is impossible ; therefore, the antiseptic spray may 
be dispensed with. 

Assistance. — Four assistants are desirable. The operator 
stands on the right of the patient. One assistant is placed on 
the left side ; his duty is to pull the fundus backwards and 
towards the left, so tilting the lower end of the uterus forwards 
and towards the right, and making tense the skin in the right 
groin. A second assistant, standing on the right side and to 
the operator's left, keeps open the wound in the groin by 
pressing his hand into its upper edge, and drags the peritoneum 
and bowels upwards. A third assistant passes a catheter into 
the bladder, and manipulates it according to direction. The 

t New York Med. Journ., Oct. and Nov., 1878. 
* Am. Journ. Obstet., Oct., 1887. 



PARIETAL INCISION. 293 

fourth assistant helps in various ways, chiefly in pushing the 
vagina into the wound, and in manipulating the thermo-cautery 
should it be called for. 

The Parietal Incision is made in the right inguinal region, 
which has a slight advantage over the left in being more remote 
from the rectum. It is slightly curved, concavity upwards, and 
runs parallel with Poupart's ligament, about an inch above it. 
It begins an inch and three-quarters above and to the outside 
of the spine of the pubes, and ends an inch above the anterior 
superior spine of the ilium. The incision thus escapes the 
internal epigastric artery and the round ligament on the inside; 
it divides the external epigastric. The external oblique muscle 
is divided through its aponeurosis, except just above the iliac 
spine, where muscular fibres are met with. The fibres of the 
internal oblique being parallel to the incision, are simply sepa- 
rated ; the fibres of the transversalis descending a little, require 
division. The transversalis fascia is now reached and carefully 
divided, after being pinched up between forceps. The fingers 
now push upwards the peritoneum and sub-peritoneal fat, and 
slowly work downwards towards the vagina, which is mean- 
while tilted upwards and to the right by the assistant manipu- 
lating the fundus. ' The circumflex ihac is below the incision and 
cut of the way. The elevated and loosely attached peritoneum 
is easily pushed aside and kept out of the way by the assistant 
behind the operator, using the palms of his hands covered by 
linen rags wrung out of warm carbolic lotion. A straight silver 
catheter is now passed into the bladder by the third assistant, 
and its tip made to bulge at the vesico-vaginal junction on the 
right side, so as to mark the proximity of bladder and ureter. 

The Vaginal Opening. — At the end of pregnancy, in cases of 
narrowed diameter, the whole of the uterus will lie above the 
brim ; and during labour, as the head cannot descend, the 
vagina will be dragged upwards. Near the utero-vaginal junc- 
tion vessels are most abundant ; it is therefore advisable to 
make the opening in the vagina as low down as possible. The 



294 LAPARO-ELYTROTOMY. 

vaginal branch of the uterine artery at the side of the vagina, 
and the ureters and base of the bladder in front, leave the 
antero-lateral aspect of the vagina as the most eligible site for 
making the opening. The ureter and base of the bladder lie 
most dangerously near, almost in the field of operation. 
Roughly speaking, the ureter enters the bladder an inch below 
the level of the external os in the later stages of pregnancy ; and 
during labour in the normal state, shown in the dissection which 
I have made (Fig. 45), the relations are not much disturbed. 
From its entrance into the base of the bladder, a position which 
may be demonstrated by the catheter, the ureter crosses over 
the vagina obliquely upwards and backwards. The site of 
election ought to be at least an inch and a half below the level 
of the tip of the catheter, lower if possible, and a clear inch 
from the lateral margin of the bladder. 

The vagina may be pushed into the wound in various ways. 
Garrigues recommends for this puapose a blunt wooden instru- 
ment, something like the obturator of a cylindrical speculum ; 
and he directs that the incision should be made on this instru- 
ment as low down as possible, away from the uterus, and 
parallel to the catheter in the bladder. Thomas, in his first 
case, used a steel sound ; in his second case, the finger of an 
assistant pushed up the vagina. Skene used his own finger. 

The advantage of using the wooden obturator is, that the 
parts may be divided on it by the cautery ; the disadvantage is, 
that the division is made without the diagnostic aid of touch. 
Probably as good a plan as any would be that the operator 
should push the vagina into the wound by the first and second 
fingers of the right hand, and with the left hand push a Lister's 
sinus forceps through the vagina between them. Dilating the 
blades sufficiently to admit the two fingers of the right hand, 
the surgeon may enlarge the opening by tearing with the fingers 
inside and outside the vagina. The direction which the rent 
tends to pursue must be observed ; as far as possible, it is 
guided downwards and backwards, away from bladder and 
ureter. It is not, however, at this stage that these parts are in 
most danger ; but later, during the extraction of the child. 



DELIVERY OF THE CHILD. 259 

Delivery of the Child. — The catheter is withdrawn, and steps 
are now taken to extract the foetus. The finger is hooked into 
the OS uteri, pulling it towards the wound. If dilatation is not 
sufficiently advanced, this is artificially encouraged by the 
fingers. The membranes are ruptured ; the long axis of the 
uterus, by combined depression of the fundus and elevation of 
the cervix, is brought as far as possible in a line with the 
opening in the flank ; and the child is delivered by forceps, or 
turning, as seems at the time most suitable. The placenta is 
expelled by pressure. 

The child is handed to an assistant, and attention directed 
to the wound. Firstly, all bleeding must be checked. The 
edges of the vaginal rent are examined carefully, and ligatures 
placed on bleeding points. A large sponge placed high up in 
the vagina may be of service in pushing the parts into the 
wound. Thornton's T-shaped forceps may be found of value in 
checking oozing over considerable areas. Temporary forci- 
pressure may be found of conspicuous advantage. The applica- 
tion of the actual cautery through a vaginal speculum may be 
required. As a last resource, sponge packing from vagina and 
from wound with firm pressure by bandages may be used. 

Finall}^, the safety of bladder and ureter must be ascertained. 
If the ureter cannot be seen, it is probably intact. A rent in 
the bladder may easily be overlooked ; the best way to detect it 
is to inject coloured fluid through the urethra. 

Cleansing, Stcturing, and Dressing. — The wounds are thoroughly 
cleansed by irrigation and sponging ; iodoform powder is blown 
into the deep parts, and one or two large drainage tubes are 
passed through the vaginal opening into the wound in the loin, 
and out to the abdominal surface. 

The parietal wound is closed in the ordinary way. If the 
abdomen is compressed by a binder the peritoneum will fall 
down into its natural position, and the gaping wound will fall 
together. If necessary, irrigation may be carried out through 
the drainage tubes. 

The dressings over the flank may be of any antiseptic and 



296 LAPARO-ELYTROTOMY. 

absorbent material. On the vaginal aspect most scrupulous 
cleanliness must be observed. Packing the vagina with dress- 
ings is irritating to the patient, and liable to cause disturbance 
of parts. Dressings packed between the labia and around the 
external parts will be found efficient. The urine should be 
draAvn at each dressing, three or four times daily ; the external 
parts ought then to be cleansed most thoroughly, and smeared 
with an antiseptic material, such as boro-glyceride ; and a fresh 
dressing applied, and retained by a T bandage. A large drain- 
age tube in the vagina will facilitate the outflow of the dis- 
charges. 



Comparative Survey of the Csesarean, Porro's, and 
Thomas's Operations. 

It will be of advantage to consider in conjunction certain 
facts and theories which are common to these modes of operative 
delivery. Though I believe that, in some degree, each oper- 
ation has special indications, yet in most cases the choice, qua 
operation, is evenly balanced ; that is to say, a surgeon would 
be fully justified in selecting any one of them. 

INDICATIONS TO OPERATE. 

In a general way the indications to Caesarean section are the 
indications to Porro's and to Thomas's operations. 

The most frequent indication is deformity of the pelvis, 
with contraction of its diameters. The operation is said to 
be justifiable when the contraction is so great that we cannot 
expect to deliver the foetus per vias natiirales, with or without 
embryotomj^, and save the mother. The degree of contrac- 
tion is generally stated as ij inch and below. But cases in 
which much distortion exists may have an upward limit of 
2 inches. 

Tumours of various sorts may so block the pelvic outlet that 
delivery is impossible. Ovarian and uterine growths of all 
sorts — enchondromatous and other tumours springing from the 
pelvic bones, and even tumours springing from the abdominal 
organs, as the kidney or liver — may cause the obstruction. 

Malignant disease of the cervix, if far advanced, may be an 
indication for operation. Before the child is viable, removal of 
the whole uterus may be instituted ; but this proceeding comes 
under a different category. 

Impaction of the foetus transversely across the pelvic brim 
may, under special conditions, be considered an indication. 
According to Harris,* seven out of eleven cases of Caesarean 
section for impaction were saved. 

* Internat. Cyc. Surg., vol. vi., p. 762. 



2.98 THE OPERATIONS COMPARED. 



MORTALITY STATISTICS. 

Simple Casarean. — To get at trustworthy statistics of the results 
of the old Caesarean operation is impossible. Mayer's statistics 
of the results in England, Germany, France, Belgium, Italy, and 
America give 1605 operations, with 54 per cent, of recoveries. 
The infant recoveries are between 50 and 60 per cent. Radford's 
table of operations in Great Britain gives 131 cases, with only 
23 recoveries. In America, Harris gives 124 operations, with 53 
recoveries; and other writers give a per-centage of recoveries, in 
America, of about 42 per cent. Against these statistics we must 
place the authorised statements that in certain hospitals in Paris, 
Berlin, and Vienna, not a single success had been scored for 
many years. Too ready deductions have been made from such 
statements : the operation is not uniformly fatal ; or fatal in 
anything like 99 per cent, of all cases. The greatest success 
has always attended the operation in country districts. But on 
the other hand, it is certain that the general statistics of results 
are too favourable. A fair estimate would probably be between 
75 and 80 per cent, of deaths in all cases operated on by the 
old Caesarean method. 

The Improved Casarean. — The results of the new Caesarean 
operation are so favourable that it must replace the old. Up to 
the present, according to Harris,''' 153 Sanger-Leopold opera- 
tions have been performed in eleven countries, with a mortality 
of 29 per cent. Crede records 23 cases, with 4 deaths. Twenty 
operations in the Dresden Institution had only two deaths, and 
all the children were saved ; six at the Leipzig clinic were all 
successful. In Germany, the general mortality over 75 opera- 
tions is only 14.7 per cent. In 1886 there were 22 operations, 
with 4 deaths. In 1887-88, with 93 operations, the mortality 
has been 25 per cent. ; so that it has not improved so much in 
proportion as Porro's operation. 

Porro's Operation. — The most complete Porro-Caesarean sta- 
tistics are published in the American Journal of the Medical Sciences 
* Personal communication. 



MORTALITY. 299 

of April, 1885. They continue Godson's table, and include 
other cases. The total is, 164; Porro's method, unmodified, was 
employed in log of these, and 46 patients recovered. The 
Porro-Miiller modification was employed in 41 cases, with 21 
recoveries. Veit's intra-peritoneal method of treating the stump 
was followed in 14 cases, with 4 recoveries. Excluding mori- 
bund cases, and including only such as may be legitimately 
described as Porro-Caesarean, we have a total of 147 operations, 
with 65 recoveries — a per-centage of women saved of 44. In 
special institutions and in the hands of special operators better 
results are got. Braun in 12 cases had 8 recoveries. Fehling 
had I death in 4 cases ; he puts the general mortality of the 
Porro-Caesarean operation at 55.8 per cent. Harris's latest 
statistics* give 250 operations in fifteen countries, with a mor- 
tality of 46 per cent. In 1885-86-87-88 there have been 79 
operations, with a mortality of ig per cent. — a very decided 
improvement, if it is true. Curiously, the results of the im- 
proved Csesarean are best in Germany ; while Porro's operation 
has best results in England. I am inclined to believe that this 
may arise from earlier operation on the Continent than with us. 

Laparo-Elytrotomy. — So far as I can discover, only 14 of these 
operations have been performed, with 7 maternal recoveries. 
Of these, Skene of Brooklyn has had 4 cases, with 3 recoveries. 
From this small number no conclusions can be drawn. It should 
be noted, however, that nearly all the deaths were in very 
unfavourable cases. On the other hand, one of the successes 
was secured by Dr. McKim,f under circumstances almost as 
unfavourable as it is possible to conceive. 

In every case it must be remembered that delay in operation 
is one of the most potent factors in causing failure. Statistics 
show this very markedly. Operation at full term before labour 
has set in cannot fairly be compared with operation at the end 
of an exhausting labour, complicated perhaps with instrumental 
proceedings. 

* Personal communication. 
t N. Y. Med. Journ., Dec. loth, 1887. 



300 THE OPERATIONS COMPARED. 



PECULIARITIES AND RESULTS OF EACH OPERATION. 

In seeking to form a fair comparison of the relative values of 
these operations, many circumstances must be taken into con- 
sideration. Among these the most important are : the facility 
of the operation ; the nature of the immediate risks as to shock, 
bleeding, and peritonitis ; and the character of the remote 
effects. 

The Operation. — From the nature of the case, many operations 
have to be suddenly performed by practitioners not specially 
trained, with an inadequate supply of instruments, and at a 
distance from skilled assistance. In such cases the classical 
Csesarean operation will almost certainly be selected. In every 
case, however, the improved suturing of the uterine wound 
ought to be carried out. 

In other circumstances, where the full advantages of trained 
assistance, suitable instruments, and some experience, are avail- 
able, it is not easy to decide, from the operator's standpoint, 
which is the most promising. 

Of laparo-elytrotomy, all who have performed the operation 
say that it is easier than Caesarean section, that it presents no 
special difficulties, and requires no special instruments. From 
the fact that Skene was able to finish one operation in fifteen 
minutes, and another in ten, it is evident that the technique is 
not elaborate or difficult. The greatest risk is rupture of the 
bladder ; this happened in five of the cases, but the rent healed 
spontaneously in all. Bleeding has given little trouble. Pelvic 
cellulitis is to be apprehended from the extensive opening up of 
fibrous layers and bruising of parts ; and a somewhat prolonged 
suppuration is to be expected. The immediate dangers are 
over when the vaginal haemorrhage has been controlled. The 
bladder is liable to be abnormally placed in these cases ; and if 
its situation can be diagnosed before operation, the side opposite 
to that where its chief bulk lies should be selected for operation. 
It is of great assistance to have the os uteri fully dilated before 



SHOCK. 301 

operation. Indeed, a hard contracted os is a contra-indication 
if the patient's condition is so bad that time cannot be safely 
given to make dilatation. 

It may be true that laparo-elytrotomy is easier than Caesa- 
rean section ; but on the face of it this does not seem to be the 
case. The making of the wound in the groin seems a formid- 
able and somewhat difficult proceeding ; and the division of the 
vaginal wall looks delicate, if not difficult ; while the amount of 
laceration by the forthcoming child is uncertain and may be 
hazardous. It is more than likely that the difficulties are 
apparent rather than real ; it is certain that the appearance 
of difficulty has deterred many from operating by this method. 

In Csesarean section there is no real difficulty. Bleeding 
from the uterine wound may be momentarily alarming. 
Adroitness is necessary to prevent escape of uterine fluids 
into the peritoneum. Patience and delicacy are essential in 
closing the uterine wound. As compared with many abdominal 
operations, simple Caesarean section is easy and straightforward. 
The Sanger Csesarean demands care and forethought, but can 
scarcely be described as difficult. 

Porro's operation, as a piece of surgical work, is also easy. 
The difficulties are mainly In the management of the pedicle. 
A skilled surgeon may with perfect confidence dispense with 
temporary constriction, and will at the first attempt accurately 
place the wire of the serre-nceud. When this has been done, 
the other steps are simple enough. The case is not completed, 
however, till the constrictor has been removed, and accidents 
are to be apprehended while it remains attached. 

From the operative standpoint, therefore, there is little to 
weigh in favour of any one proceeding. 

Shock. — The condition of the patient at the time of operation 
is the main factor in influencing results. If the patient is ex- 
hausted by a prolonged and futile labour, an operation which 
of necessity is prolonged or is attended with great shock is 
forbidden. In respect of shock immediately produced, Porro's 
operation must come first ; so far as time spent over the opera- 



302 THE OPERATIONS COMPARED. 

tion can influence the result, Thomas's operation, in which it 
may be necessary to dilate a rigid os uteri, is worst. In average 
cases, the facts that Thomas's operation may be finished in ten 
minutes, that it does not expose the peritoneum, wounds only 
cutaneous or unimportant structures, and that the child is 
extracted from the womb in the natural way, tell strongly in 
its favour. As productive of collapse, the Porro-Miiller modifi- 
cation is most to be deprecated. Csesarean section would seem 
to hold a middle position. 

HcBinorvhage. — The danger from haemorrhage, both immediate 
and remote, is greatest in Porro's operation. In a good many 
cases, wire or chain constrictors have been found inefficient in 
checking bleeding from the pedicle, and other extraordinary 
means have had to be adopted. In ordinary Caesarean section, 
haemorrhage has not infrequently proved fatal ; one of the 
earliest hysterectomies had to be performed on account of bleed- 
ing. If the placenta is wounded, the danger is increased. If the 
uterus contracts well, bleeding is not likely to be dangerous ; if 
it does not contract, it would probably be wise to finish by 
hysterectomy. In Thomas's operation, the risks of bleeding are 
small ; the drawback is, if it does occur, that it may be difficult 
to control. The vaginal rent may be indefinitely increased by 
the withdrawing of the foetus, and bleeding may go on at the 
extreme ends of the tear. But the torn vessels are not of large 
size, and simple means will compress them. 

Peritonitis. — The large proportion of deaths from inflammations 
of the peritoneum, usually septic, following Caesarean section 
was one of the strongest reasons adduced by Porro for the intro- 
duction of hysterectomy. But his operation has not done away 
with this danger; in spite of all precautions, peritonitis kills i6 
per cent, of all cases operated on by Porro's method. In laparo- 
elytrotomy peritonitis has only once appeared among the causes 
of death, and with proper care its occurrence ought to be rare. 

Occurrence of future Pregnancies. — Too much has been made of 
the fact that in Porro's operation the possibility of future preg- 



SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS. 303 

nancies has been done away with. In the face of other and 
simpler means, it is a ridiculous overdoing of surgery to ampu- 
tate the whole uterus and ovaries to prevent the possibility of 
conception. In Caesarean section, it is a very simple matter to 
carry out the suggestion that Blundell made many years ago, to 
cut out two little pieces of the Fallopian tubes : this would put 
the Caesarean section, in that respect, on a level with Porro's 
operation. In Thomas's operation, the possibility of future 
pregnancies is in no way interfered with. 

The final word has yet to be spoken as to the relative values 
of these operations. It may here be said that the results of 
Porro's operation have not been up to expectation, but show 
signs of improvement ; that the improved Caesarean section 
has been successful beyond expectation ; and that Thomas's 
operation has made out for itself an extremely good position, 
warranting further trial. Beyond this, it may be permissible 
to go in the direction of pointing out special indications and 
centra-indications for each of the operations. 



SPECIAL INDICATIONS AND CONTRA-INDICATIONS. 

Laparo-elytrotoviy. — Garrigues has mentioned, as contra-indi- 
cations to this operation — 

(i) The impossibility of repeating the operation on the 
same side. 

(2) Impaction of the head in the pelvis. 

(3) The presence of a large tumour in the vagina. 

(4) An obstruction in the womb itself (as, malignant dis- 

ease of the cervix). 

(5) Atresia or considerable narrowing of the vagina. 

Stadfelt of Copenhagen has added another objection to the 
operation ; namely, a tumour arising from the anterior wall of 
the pelvis, and pushing the vagina backwards. 

It would be considered an unfavourable condition if the 
thighs were bent and anchylosed, or so distorted that they 
obstruct the site of operation in the groin." Cicatrices in the 



304 THE OPERATIONS COMPARED. 

groin or pelvis, indicating old or deep-seated suppuration, are 
unfavourable, but not strongly so. 

The indications may be considered favourable if, with an 
absence of the above conditions, there is present a fully dilated 
or readily dilatable os uteri ; if the vagina is capacious and free 
from heat or congestion, and has not been bruised or injured by 
previous manipulations ; and if the patient is in a fair condition 
of general health. Profound exhaustion from the labour is 
against Porro's operation, and, according to most writers, would 
tell less against laparo-elytrotomy than against the Caesarean 
section. 

Porro's Operation. — Hysterectomy is indicated in cases of 
uterine fibroid complicating labour. It is further specially indi- 
cated in cases where the Caesarean cannot be completed : such 
are, free bleeding from the uterine wound; inertia of the uterus, 
with bleeding from the site of the placenta ; difficulty in detach- 
ing the placenta; tendency to inversion of the uterus. In great 
and incurable atresia vaginae, Porro's operation is to be advised, 
because the uterine discharges after Caesarean section have not 
free exit. Putridity of the uterine contents is an indication for 
Porro's operation. 

It is contra-indicated in cases of great exhaustion, where the 
shock of hysterectomy would endanger the patient's life. In 
cancer of the uterus, Porro's operation ought, if possible, to be 
converted into complete hysterectomy ; otherwise, Caesarean 
section is perhaps preferable. 

Cesarean Section. — In all cases of tumour occupying the body 
of the uterus, Caesarean section is inadvisable. Otherwise, there 
is scarcely a condition in which operative delivery may be 
called for where this operation is not feasible. It has the 
widest primary applicability of the three. But during the 
progress of the operation certain conditions — as, uterine inertia, 
haemorrhage, abnormal adhesion of the placenta — may be met 
with which render it advisable to complete the operation by 
Porro's method. Other conditions discovered during operation 



GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS. 305 

— such, for instance, as disease of the uterine appendages — 
may suggest completion of the proceeding by hysterectomy. 
A wound in the uterus which does not promise to be easily 
or satisfactorily sutured is a contra-indication to the simple 
Caesarean conclusion. 

It is, in fact, one great advantage of operating by median 
abdominal section, that the surgeon can finish by the improved 
Caesarean method or by Porro's, as seems at the time most 
suitable. 



21 



Abdominal Section for Rupture of the Uterus. 
Puerperal Laparotomy. 



ANATOMICAL CONDITIONS. 

Rupture of the pregnant uterus may take place at any period 
of gestation from the third month onwards. It may arise 
spontaneously, or at least without apparent cause ; also after 
violent strains or falls, or exhausting occupation ; but in most 
cases rupture takes place at full term, and on the advent of 
labour. Here we need not discuss the somewhat unsettled 
question as to its exact etiology. 

Barnes''" gives the following classification of the varieties 
of rupture. 

*' I. Rupture or hivsting occurs when, under strong tension of 
the uterus upon its unyielding contents, its walls burst more or 
less suddenly in the body or cervix. 

" 2. Laceration or rent occurs when a breach begins at the 
edge of the os uteri, and extends. 

" 3. Grinding or crushing occurs when the uterus is subjected 
to long compression between the child's head and the pelvic 
,wall. 

"4. Perforation or boring through occurs when tissues give way 
from disease or long compression at one point, or from penetra- 
tion by a spike of bone or by instruments. 

"5. Avulsion. — The uterus has been torn away by manual 
force." 

In rapture or bursting at full term, either during labour or 
before labour has properly set in, we usually find that the 
whole ovum, membranes and all, is thrown bodily into the 
abdominal cavity. The os may be undilated. The rent rarely 
takes place through the body or fundus, but almost always near 
the cervix or in the lower segment. 

* Ohstet. Med. and Surg., vol. ii., p. 312. 



SYMPTOMS. 307 

Laceration in the great majority of cases is associated with 
some obstruction to labour. The Hquor amnii has usually 
escaped, and the uterus is closely contracted on the child. 
The uterine tissue may be torn away from its attachment to the 
cervix, and the laceration is then transverse. Complete annular 
divulsion of the cervix may, under these circumstances, be 
observed. Another mode of laceration is produced when the 
cervix will not dilate over the descending head, and is torn 
through longitudinally, the rent extending upwards into the 
uterine tissue. 

Grinding or crushing is found at that part of the uterus which 
lies in contact with the bony prominences, and is specially prone 
to occur when these prominences are unduly marked. Openings 
made in this way have jagged edges, much bruised, and perhaps 
broken into shreds ; their direction is transverse to the uterine 
axis. Pevfovation or boring through at a point of the uterus 
weakened by disease, or thinned and bruised by compression, is 
practically the same as crushing. 

Complete detachment of the uterus may take place by annular 
lacerations through the cervix, or the vagina ; and the organ 
may be bodily torn away from its attachments, after delivery by 
manual force. 

SYMPTOMS AND DIAGNOSIS. 

Surgical treatment is rarely called for until there are 
symptoms that the foetus has been extruded through the rent 
into the abdominal cavity. But in many cases it is possible to 
diagnose the condition with a fair degree of certainty before this 
catastrophe has taken place, and more particularly when the 
foetus has only partially escaped. 

The following description of the symptoms of rupture is from 
Barnes's pen :* " Sudden acute pain, with a sense of rending in 
the belly, sometimes attended with an audible snap, it is said ; 
quick collapse, marked by pallor, fainting, extinction of pulse ; 
vomiting; some hemorrhage externally, and the signs of ansemia 

* Op. Git., p. 342. 
21 * 



308 PUERPERAL LAPAROTOMY. 

from greater loss internally ; cessation of uterine contraction. 
If the child be thrust wholly or partly out of the womb, the 
abdomen flattens somewhat ; there is retreat of the presenting 
part of the child from the os uteri ; occasionally, prolapse of 
the intestine in the vagina, or beyond the vulva ; great pain, 
especially on palpation of the abdomen, where irregular hard 
projections are felt, which may be identified as parts of the 
foetus. If the effusion of blood be great, there is increased and 
distressing tension of the abdominal walls. Cramp-like or 
spasmodic pains follow. The flushed face becomes suddenly 
deadly pale ; the eyes lose their brilliancy ; the whole surface 
is covered with a clammy sweat ; trembling of the limbs or 
repeated faintings announce a profuse internal haemorrhage. 
Presently, when reaction comes, the patient complains of feeling 
a warm fluid pouring out in the neighbourhood of the groins 
and loins. She sometimes feels the movements of the child 
when it has escaped into the abdomen. But usually the child 
dies quickly. 

" It has, however, often been observed that the symptoms are 
not so strongly marked. Sometimes very little is complained of 
at the time when it was presumed that the injury took place. 
The collapse creeps on gradually. The woman may be even 
capable of walking about for some time. . . . 

" But, sooner or later, almost always within two or three 
hours, collapse becomes pronounced and pain is severe." In 
such case we may infer that the process of tearing has been 
gradual. 

In many cases the acute symptoms are preceded by signs 
of obstruction to delivery. Boring through of the uterine tissue 
may be going on, while the patient's symptoms are simply those 
of exhaustion or irritation under long-continued labour. The 
completion of the tearing is shown by the onset of the violent 
symptoms just described. 

When the foetus has been extruded into the abdominal 
cavity, the diagnosis is completed by passing the hand into 
the uterine cavity, and detecting the rent. Intestine may be 
felt passing into the uterine cavity, or even into the vagina. 



THE OPERATION. 309 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF RUPTURE OF THE UTERUS. 

The treatment recommended for all cases is abdominal 
section, removal of the foetus and its membranes, cleansing 
the cavity, and either suture of the rent or removal of the 
uterus. 

Not in all cases will it be advisable to suture the uterine 
tear. The wound will be, in all probability, an irregular one 
with ragged and bruised edges ; it will usually lie low down 
either behind, or in some position not conveniently situated for 
suturing ; and, most important of all, uterine contractions will 
probably be absent or very feeble. If the rare combination is 
met with of a moderately clean straight wound, a convenient 
situation, and a contracting uterus, simple closure of the wound 
may be had recourse to. But in the absence of this combination, 
it will be wise to finish by hysterectomy. 

The operation is begun exactly as for Caesarean section. 
The child and placenta are extracted ; blood-clots are removed, 
and the abdomen is thoroughly cleansed by irrigation and spong- 
ing. To discover the rent, it may be necessary to turn the 
uterus out of the wound. Cases are recorded where recovery 
has ensued when the rent has been left unclosed. But the 
chances of success are greatest with a perfectly closed uterine 
wound. The method of suturing recommended for ordinary 
Caesarean section is the best. If the edges of the rent are 
much bruised or lacerated, then hysterectomy is recommended. 
Drainage by the vagina, if the opening is on the posterior 
surface, may be used with advantage. 

The per-centage of recoveries after this operation has been 
variously placed at 68 (Jolly), 86 (Trask), and, in the United 
States, at 53 (Harris). It is certainl}' more favourable than 
might be expected — perhaps, than it ought to be. The worst 
cases are permitted to die : if more cases were operated on, 
more lives would be saved, but the statistics would not be 
so favourable. 

Puerperal hysterectomy for rupture of the uterus differs in no 



310 PUERPERAL LAPARATOMY. 

important particulars from the operation as performed for other 
reasons. The incision is made in the ordinary way. If the 
ovum is intact, an attempt may be made to remove it bodily ; 
but this cannot often succeed. Much time may be saved by 
removing as much of the amniotic fluid as possible by tapping 
before removing the ovum from the cavity. In every case the 
whole ovum — membranes, fcetus, and placenta — will be removed 
bodily, and as far as possible intact. No particle of tissue is to 
be left behind. 

If the foetus alone is extruded, and the placenta and mem- 
branes remain inside the uterus, the foetus is removed, and the 
cord divided and compressed or tied. Then the collapsed uterus 
is turned out through the wound, to be clamped and removed. 
If the foetus is only partially extruded, it is quickly pulled 
thorugh the rent ; and as soon as it is removed a temporary 
constrictor or the hand is passed round the uterus, as low down 
as possible, to prevent haemorrhage. 

The uterus being turned out on the abdomen, and the 
situation of the rupture having been ascertained, several large 
sponges are packed into the abdominal cavity. Before putting 
on the clamp, the finger should be passed to the inside of the 
uterus, to make sure that the whole of the torn tissue, inside as 
well as outside, is above the level fixed for applying the wire. 

The pedicle is then clamped, fixed in the wound, and treated 
exactly as in Porro's operation. 

Attention is now paid to cleansing of the abdomen, which 
must be as thorough as possible consistently with rapidity. The 
large sponges, soaked with blood and amniotic fluid, are removed. 
The cavity is thoroughly washed out with aseptic fluid, at 99° 
temperature, by means of an irrigator with a large tube, while 
the intestines are freely moved about by the fingers inside the 
cavity. When the fluid returns clear, fresh sponges are placed 
in the pelvis and in the hollows of the loins, to soak up what 
remains. Too much time must not be wasted in endeavouring 
to get the cavity perfectly dry. 

Drainage will be called for in a proportion of cases greater 
than in ordinary Porro's operations, because of the extravasation 



THE OPERATION. 311 

before operation. Indeed, the insertion of a drainage tube can 
scarcely ever, in this operation, be other than good practice. 

The further procedures as regards closure of wound, 
management of pedicle, and treatment of patient, are in no 
way different from those described under the head of Porro's 
operation. 



Operations for Ectopic Gestation. 

Under this head are discussed the operative proceedings 
which may be employed for extra-uterine pregnancy properly so 
called, and for those cases of misplaced uterine pregnancy in 
which spontaneous delivery cannot take place. The latter 
condition has its type in cases of pregnancy in one horn of 
a uterus bicornis, and is often, from its most marked clinical 
feature, spoken of as " missed labour." This name is, how- 
ever, occasionally applicable to all forms of ectopic gestation. 

History. — Heister,* in naming the indications for abdominal 
section, places first this one — "when the foetus is contained in 
the Fallopian tube, the ovary, or the cavity of the abdomen." 
Simon, t in his elaborate review of the Caesarean operation, 
speaks of abdominal gestation as an indication for operation. 
In reviewing the history of actual operations, it is difficult to 
decide as to their real nature. The earliest operations were 
probably performed after a suppurating sac had shown signs of 
bursting, and were little more than the opening of an abscess. 
Christopher Bain's case, in 1540, was little more than the 
opening of an abscess. The well-known cases of Noierus in 
1 59 1, and of Cyprian in 1694, were almost certainly of this 
nature. The first genuine laparotomy for extra-uterine fcetation 
was probably that of Primerose in 1594, who successfully oper- 
ated on Noierus's patient when she again became pregnant. 
Several other successes were about this time reported from the 
Continent. In 1764 Mr. John Bard, a New York surgeon, first 
operated in America ; he was followed by Baynham, Mc Knight, 
Wishart, Stevens, and others (nearly all country practitioners), 
and a considerable number of successes were registered. These 
operations extend to about 1850, the beginning of the era of 
ovariotomy. Up to the end of 1875, Dr. Parry, for his classical 
work on Extra-uterine Pregnancy, had collected a list of 62 

* Op. cit., vol. ii., p. 28. t Mem. de I'Acad, de Chirurg, Paris, vol. ii. 



ANATOMY. 31S 

operations for the removal of extra-uterine children, with the 
encouraging result of 30 successes and 32 failures. 

But as anatomical and clinical knowledge extended, so did 
the sphere of operation. For rupture of the sac in the early- 
stages, little or nothing was done till recent times. In 1849 
Dr. Harbert, an American surgeon, first suggested operative 
treatment for this terrible accident ; but little attention was paid 
to his proposal till 1866 and 1867, when Dr. Stephen Rogers of 
New York wrote and urged operation.* Moreau,! curiously 
enough, while strongly urging abdominal section for rupture of 
the sac during spurious labour, condemns it for rupture in the 
early stages. The operation made no headway till Tait, in 
recent years, took it up, and, by a remarkable series of suc- 
cesses, placed it in the front of major life-saving operations. 
Up to Oct. 26th, 1887,1 Tait had operated for early ruptured 
pregnancy 35 times, with 2 deaths. 



PATHOLOGICAL ANATOMY. 

The actual origin of extra-uterine fcetation ought to include 
a consideration of its causation. Of this little is known. Suffice 
it to say that it specially occurs in women who have shown an 
"inaptitude for conception," who have for abnormally long 
periods been sterile ; and in women who have some malforma- 
tion of the uterus, congenital or acquired. More definitel}'-, 
catarrh of the Fallopian tube has been laid down as a cause. 
When the ciliated epithelium is shed in any part of the tube, 
the ovum cannot be passed along it ; it rests in the denuded 
space. Here the spermatozoa, endowed with independent 
powers of motion, reach it and impregnate it ; and here it 
develops. Obstructive catarrh of the Fallopian tube, blocking 
the canal sufficiently to prevent passage of the large ovum, but 
not enough to prevent the passage of the small spermatozoa ; 
adhesions on the outside ; simple derangement of the phj-sio- 

* New Yoi'h Med, Rec, 1867, vol. ii., p. 22. 

j Traitt Pratique des Accouchements, ii., 367; Paris, 1841. 

J Brit. Med. Journ., Nov. 12th, 1887. 



314 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

logical functions of the tube — spasm, or paralysis, or irregular 
action — have all been assigned as causes. 

The elaborate classification of the varieties of misplaced 
conception, as given by the earlier writers (Dezemeris gives ten 
varieties), has now been reduced to one or two. Parry limits 
the species to three — Tubal, Ovarian, and Abdominal ; these he 
subdivides into eight varieties. The simple theory of Tait, 
held by Gaillard Thomas and other prominent gynaecologists, 
explains all varieties. He holds that all extra-uterine con- 
ceptions are at first tubal, and that all further varieties are pro- 
duced after rupture of the primary tubal sac and escape of the 
ovum. Interstitial pregnancy is simply a variety of tubal, where 
the tube enters the uterus ; ovarian pregnancy is tubal among 
the fimbriae. If the rupture takes place on the under surface of 
the tube where it is embraced by the broad ligaments, the ovum 
may develop in the enclosed cellular tissue, and be extra- 
peritoneal. If the rupture takes place on the free surface of the 
tube, the ovum escapes into the abdominal cavity, and may 
develop there. 

The dismissal of ovarian pregnancy cannot, however, be 
made in a word. It is just conceivable that the ovum may not 
escape from a ruptured follicle, and that spermatozoa may enter 
the follicle and fertilise it. Putting aside the older cases, we can- 
not utterly ignore the accurately recorded cases of Kammerer* 
and Porter. f Lusk, Spiegelberg, Werth, and other competent 
modern authorities admit the validity of the evidence in favour 
of the possibility of this variety. Most cases of so-called ovarian 
pregnancy are undoubtedly instances where the sac has de- 
veloped among the fimbriae of the tube, and become intimately 
adherent to the ovary; and it is just possible that all are to be 
so explained. 

Interstitial pregnancy is simply development of the ovum in 
that part of the tube which passes into the uterine cornu ; and 
not in the uterine tissue, as Breschet, Meyer, and others, 
supposed. 

The possibility of primary abdominal pregnancy cannot be 
* Neiv York Med. Journ., 1865, P- i4i- t Ainei'. Journ. of Med. So., Jan., 1853. 



ANATOMY. 315 

denied, in the face of such evidence as is afforded by cases of 
impregnation through abnormal orifices in the uterus. Two 
such are recorded b}^ Lecluj^se* and by Koeberlef — one through 
an opening unclosed after Caesarean section, the other through 
the canal left after hysterectomy for myoma. Some doubt has 
recently been thrown on the reality of Koeberle's case. A case 
of Kellar's is noted by Spiegelberg, in which abdominal preg- 
nancy occurred two years after an almost complete hysterectomy. 
As a pathological curiosity, we may note the occurrence of 
pregnancy in tubo-ovarian cysts. Paltauf| has minutely 
described such a case ; and refers to two other similar cases, 
though with some doubt as to their reality. 

Practically, we may admit the general, if not the absolute, 
truth of the following propositions : 

(i) Every extra-uterine pregnancy is at first tubal. Occur- 
ring where the tube is close to or passing through the uterine 
tissue, it may be called Interstitial ; where it is broken up into 
fimbriae at the infundibulum, it has been called Tubo-ovarian ; 
elsewhere in the tube, it is simply named Fallopian. 

(2) When rupture of the sac takes place, the ovum may 
escape into the abdominal cavity or into the cellular tissue 
between the layers of the broad ligament. The former is known 
as intra-peritoneal, and is at once the most common and the 
most dangerous ; the latter is less dangerous, naturally, and 
more easily dealt with practically. 

The state of parts varies according to the duration and 
position and behaviour of the pregnancy. 

In the early stages, while the foetal sac lies unruptured in 

the tube, few opportunities of examination have been afforded. 

We may expect to find increased vascularity of the tube and its 

annexa, general thickening and perhaps tortuosity of the whole 

duct, with a boggy, cystic, and vascular tumour in one part of 

it. In the described cases, the mucous membrane has been 

found enormously thickened ; in fact, the normal decidua would 

seem to have formed in the tube. 

* Bull, de V Acad, de MM. de Belgique, 1869. 

t Related by Keller, Des Grossesses Extra-utcrines, Paris, 1872. 

J Arch, f, Gyndk., 1887, xxx., iii. ; Lond. Med. Rec, July 15th, 1887. 



316 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

After rupture of the sac in the early stages, opportunities of 
examination are far too frequent. It would seem that rupture 
takes place, as a rule, through the seat of the placenta, which 
might be expected to be the weakest part. In such cases death 
is usually produced by haemorrhage, which, considering the size 
of the rent, is often enormous in amount. As much as two 
gallons of blood have been found in the abdomen after death 
from rupture, and two or three pints is not an unusual quantity. 
The amount of blood lost has no relation to the size of the tear 
in the sac. 

The ovum, with its placenta, may escape entire through the 
rent ; or the ovum and its membranes may escape, while the 
placenta remains attached ; or the whole ovum may remain 
undetached. In the mass of blood-clot, the escaped ovum may 
easily be missed ; in most cases, even if the foetus cannot be 
found, the placenta, or the cord, or parts of the membranes, 
are found in or near the tubal sac. 

The structure of the walls of the sac will depend on the 
position of the ovum. In the middle of the tube, they will 
consist simply of its mucous, muscular, and serous la3^ers. If 
the sac lies in the uterine portion of the tube, it will be sur- 
rounded by a capsule of proper uterine muscle, varying in 
thickness and amount according to the depth at which it is 
placed. At the fimbriated extremity, the sac may be only 
partially covered by tubal structure, and the chorionic villi may 
protrude into the abdominal cavity. There is no true decidua 
into which the villi of the chorion are inserted ; but decidual 
membranes are formed inside the uterus, as if there were a 
normal pregnancy. 

Kussmaul holds that many cases of so-called tubal fcetation 
are really instances of gestation in the rudimentary horn of a 
bicorned uterus. He collected thirteen cases of this sort, all of 
which died of rupture between the fourth and six months. 
Parry and others consider that Kussmaul overestimates the 
frequency of cornual gestation ; and even if it were more com- 
mon than is generally supposed, it need not result in rupture. 
Missed labour is a more frequent result of such pregnancies. 



ANATOMY. 317 

If rupture of the sac do not prove fatal before the fourth 
month, the pregnancy in most cases goes on to full term. If 
the ovum remains in the tube, the tubal walls are greatly 
thickened, and the muscular layers much hypertrophied. This 
muscular envelopment is much greater if the ovum lies partly 
inside the uterus. In some cases a part of the ovum may be 
within the uterine cavity : thus, the placenta has been found 
inside the uterus, while the foetus lay in the tube ; or part of the 
child may be intra-uterine and part intra-tubal ; or the placenta 
may be wholly situated in the tube, while the child is inside the 
uterus. 

Should the placenta, after rupture of the cyst and escape of 
the foetus, retain its attachment, we may have the foetus covered 
with its envelopes developing in the abdominal cavity, while the 
placenta in the tube supplies it with nourishment. The enve- 
lopes may be wanting, and the foetus is then surrounded by an 
adventitious cyst composed of organised inflammatory material. 
. Should the placenta be extruded with the foetus, it may adhere 
to any contiguous organ : omentum, stomach, large and small 
intestine, abdominal wall, and an infinite variety of combinations 
of these, have been found serving as placental sites. The 
sigmoid flexure of the colon is, as might be expected, a favourite 
situation. In a general way we may expect the ovum to fall 
somewhere into Douglas's pouch, matting together whatever 
structures may be encountered there. Thus it happens that the 
posterior surface of the uterus is frequently involved. As the 
ovum grows, the uterus is usually elevated and pushed forwards ; 
it is always enlarged, generally to a size corresponding to the 
third or fourth month of gestation, and may or may not contain 
decidua. 

As regards the extra-peritoneal variet}', where the foetus 
grows between the layers of the broad ligament, a most im- 
portant study has recently been made by Berry Hart and J. T. 
Carter of Edinburgh,* from frozen sections of two specimens. 
One of the specimens was a four and half months' gestation 
in situ in the bony pelvis ; the other an entire cadaver with 
Edin. Med. Journ., Oct. 1887. 



318 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

advanced abdominal gestation. The latter showed a Fallopian 
pregnancy developing to an extraordinary extent between the 
layers of the broad ligament, continuing this mode of growth 
till it had stripped off the peritoneum from the uterus, bladder, 
and pelvic floor, until it became in great part surrounded by 
a peritoneal capsule derived from these organs. The growth 
was, in fact, entirely extra-peritoneal ; the extra-peritoneal 
tissue, with its blood-vessels, was practically the material part of 
the placenta. The authors hold that the following varieties of 
extra - uterine gestation, or rather development, have been 
demonstrated : Tubal ; Tubo-ovarian ; Sub-peritoneo-pelvic ; 
Sub-peritoneo-abdominal. The last two varieties may be later 
developments of the first. 

If the mother survives the death of the child at term, certain 
changes take place in the retained foetus which vitally influence 
the progress of the case. In the first place, the child may remain 
quiescent in its envelope, the liquor amnii being absorbed, and 
the cyst-wall contracted around it. Certain atrophic or hetero- 
morphic changes may now take place. The whole ovum may 
become cartilaginous, or it may become infiltrated with cal- 
careous matter (when it is known as a lithopaedion) ; or it may 
undergo transformation into the peculiar material known as 
adipocere. In any of these conditions it may remain for long 
periods, sometimes for many years. This is the most favourable 
termination. 

On the other hand, decomposition may take place, and sup- 
puration is set up in the sac. Here the termination is the 
ordinary one for all abscesses — rupture. The rupture rarely 
takes place into the abdominal cavity ; but usually, after for- 
mation of adhesions, into one or other of the contiguous hollow 
viscera, bowel or bladder, or through the abdominal wall. 



SYMPTOMS AND DIAGNOSIS. 

Following Parry, we may best study the symptoms in three 
stages : the first, up to the period of probable rupture of the sac 
— that is, to the end of the fourth month; the second, to the 



SYMPTOMS. 319 

period of spurious labour ; the third, from the end of the labour 
and the death of the child onwards. 

During the first month or six weeks the symptoms may be 
those of ordinary pregnancy, but more than usually variable 
and indefinite. At the end of this time signs, often urgent and 
unmistakable, appear to warn the patient that all is not right. 
A sudden attack of violent colicky pain in the hypogastrium, 
accompanied by profound prostration or even syncope, is 
usually the first sign of evil import ; this may last for a 
few hours or even days. The pain disappears as suddenly as 
it came on, and the patient regains her usual health. In a 
few days or weeks, however, similar symptoms recur, and 
they continue intermittently till the third or fourth month. 

Such attacks usually come on after severe exertion, and are 
probably due to contractions in the wall of the sac, or to its 
straining against over-distension. Peritonitis is curiously absent, 
as proved by the rapidity with which recovery takes place. 

During this stage a frequent occurrence is the discharge of 
dark clotted blood from the uterus. This takes place at irreg- 
ular intervals, lasts for uncertain periods, and disappears as 
capriciously as it comes. Sometimes pieces of the decidua are 
found in the discharge. 

A vaginal examination at this period reveals some enlarge- 
ment of the uterus, with displacement, usually forwards, and 
great tenderness in the pelvis. The enlargement is not so great 
as we should expect in a normal gestation of the same standing ; 
but this sign is not trustworthy, because it is so difficult to 
decide as to the duration of extra-uterine pregnancy. In the 
region of the greatest tenderness, usually behind the uterus, 
we may expect to find the tumour. To make a satisfac- 
tory examination, an anaesthetic is usually necessary. A 
rounded, soft, boggy or fluctuating mass, of size corre- 
sponding to the period of gestation, is usually all tliat can be 
made out. In this stage the sign of ballottement cannot be 
elicited. 

When quickening has taken place, the symptoms undergo a 
marked change. The attacks of colic diminish or disappear. 



320 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

Metrorrhagia either disappears or becomes unimportant. Foetal 
movements are now detected, often exaggerated and usually on 
one side. The abdomen perceptibly enlarges, more on one side 
than the other. The uterine displacement becomes more marked, 
and is attended with elevation and fixation. Often the fundus 
uteri can be felt through the abdominal wall, over the pubes 
and to one side. 

Through the vagina the tumour will now readily be felt, 
rounded, fluctuating, and containing a hard body in the midst 
of its fluid. Frequently the cyst-wall is so thin that the out- 
lines of the foetus can be made out with great accuracy. Pass- 
ing the catheter, by telling the position of the bladder, may be 
of assistance : the uterine sound is not to be used, except in 
cases of urgency. Symptoms of irritation of the bladder are 
frequently present. Irritation of the rectum is more common, 
because the sac is often adherent to its walls ; physical obstruc- 
tion to the passage of faeces may be caused by the bulk of the 
tumour. 

The end of this period is signalised, at the full term, by a 
spurious labour. The pains are almost identical with those 
characteristic of the first stage of normal parturition, and may 
deceive physician as well as patient. They differ from those of 
natural labour in that they do not steadily increase in severity, 
but have irregular aggravations, with remissions and inter- 
missions. Finally they pass off altogether, after continuing over 
many hours or even days. 

Concomitantly with the fruitless labour there goes on a dis- 
charge of blood from the vagina. If the decidual membranes 
have not previously been expelled, they are expelled now. 
When the sanguineous discharge ceases, another comes on which 
is analogous to the lochia. 

It would seem that the uterus is mainly to be credited with 
the causation of these pains. Only tubal sacs have muscular 
fibres ; but labour comes on all the same if the gestation is 
ventral. Mr. Scott,*' during laparotomy in a case, found the 
uterus contracting strongly and regularly, as in normal labour. 
Lond, Obsiet. Soc. Trans., 1873, vol. xiv. , p. 370. 



SYMPTOMS. 321 

The false labour also seems to have little influence on the sac ; 
at least, it rarely ruptures or becomes inflamed. A few cases of 
rupture, with escape of the child into abdomen, rectum, or 
vagina, are recorded. 

A curious sequence to this labour is death of the child. Just 
before it dies it frequently struggles violently for some time, 
causing great distress to the mother. When the child dies the 
abdomen diminishes in size, from absorption of the amniotic fluid. 
If the child is to remain quiescent, or undergoes atrophic 
changes, the diminution remains, and becomes more marked ; if 
decomposition takes place, the sac refills, and its distension is 
accompanied with signs of internal suppuration, often of a very 
acute nature. Special symptoms may be referred to special 
organs through which the abscess is preparing to discharge its 
contents. In the rectum, tenesmus, with a feeling of weight 
and diarrhoea ; in the bladder, irritability, with frequent 
micturition and signs of catarrh; in the vagina, fulness, pain^ 
heat, and a leucorrhceal discharge, indicate the site of election 
for bursting. One case, at least, has burst into the stomach. 
Sometimes the opening is double — as, for instance, through 
rectum and abdominal wall. 

Signs of Rupture of the Cyst. — In about one-half of the cases 
rupture of the sac takes place before completion of the full 
term. This is attended with symptoms of a most serious and 
alarming nature. Premonitory attacks of griping pain in the 
lower abdomen are followed b}^ a sudden seizure of agonising 
pain, often with a sense as of something having given way ; and 
this is rapidly followed by prostration and collapse. During 
this period of "abdominal collapse" one fainting fit follows 
another ; and the patient either dies very soon, or slowly rallies 
to an attack of peritonitis. Frequently, considerable quantities 
of blood are effused ; in these cases, the peritonitis is late in 
coming on, and is not very acute. 

The special symptoms of pregnane}^ in a hernial sac, and of 
twin foetation — one inside the uterus and one outside, or both 
outside, — being simply cumulative of individual symptoms, need 
not be discussed. 

22 



322 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 



INDICATIONS TO OPERATE. 

Extra-uterine pregnancy may be regarded as among the 
most deadly of diseases. Nearly three-fourths of all cases 
die ; and more than one half of these deaths is from rup- 
-ture of the cyst. Parry writes : " Recovery is so rare after 
rupture, that the physician has no right to allow the fact 
that it may occur to influence him in deciding upon a plan of 
treatment." 

For such a disease, therefore, no half-hearted or tentative 
measures are to be tolerated. In some of its aspects it is as 
dangerous as haemorrhage from an artery of the second magni- 
tude ; in others, it may rank with strangulated hernia ; while 
under its most favourable conditions, it is fraught with an 
insecurity which at any moment may develop into acute 
danger. 

Parry's statistics of 500 cases of extra-uterine foetation 
give a mortality of 67.2 per cent. In 336 cases the causes of 



death were mentioned. The most 

Rupture of Sac 

Exhaustion 

Peritonitis 

Pregnancy ... ... 

Intestinal obstruction 



important are : 

... 174 

54 
24 

16 



To these Lusk** has added 103 cases, occurring between 
1875 and 1886, excluding cases of rupture in the early stages. 
Of 29 cases of abdominal pregnancy terminating in fistulous 
openings, 9 died. These, it must be remembered, are often 
regarded as examples of spontaneous cure ; and if to the actual 
high mortality is added the probable continued impairment of 
health or comfort, it will be evident that spontaneous discharge 
of the foetus is not a termination to be hopefully anticipated. 
Eight cases died before fistula had formed, at periods varying 
from 8 months to i|- year. Of 52 cases of laparotomy per- 
formed at varying periods after death of the fcetus, 37 recovered 
* Brit. Med. Joiirn., Dec. 4th, 18S6. 



EVACUATION OF LIQUOR AMNII. 323 

and 15 died. Of the fatal cases, only three — all cases of free 
haemorrhage — could be attributed to the operation. In all the 
others, the cases were almost hopeless at the time of operation ; 
as Lusk remarks, "the resources of surgery are rarely successful 
when practiced on the dying," 

Harris of Philadelphia has investigated the mortality of 
primary laparotomy in cases of extra-uterine pregnancy. 
Primary operations he reckons as those performed, not only 
while the foetus is living, but after it has reached a viable period 
of gestation — thus adopting the ordinarily accepted meaning 
of the term "primary." Of 25 cases collected, 23 mothers died 
and 18 children: 12 mothers died of haemorrhage; and this 
haemorrhage may occur during the separation of the placenta, as 
late as a fortnight after, as in Joseph Price's case. It is clear 
that if this class of operation is to be performed, some extra- 
ordinary means of controlling haemorrhage must be adopted. 
Harris* recommends ligature of the vessels supplying the 
placenta, and its removal with the cyst if possible : if this is 
impossible, he recommends careful antiseptic treatment of the 
placenta, to prevent its decomposition. 

Before setting down the indications for the major operation, 
it will be necessary shortly to estimate the value of certain 
minor proceedings. 

Evacuation of the Liquor Amnii. — Sir James Simpson,! in 
1864, treated a case by puncturing the cyst through the vagina. 
The child was not killed, and the mother died in three days. 
Braxton Hicks,.| in 1865, by a similar method succeeded in 
killing the child, but the mother died of haemorrhage. Two 
years later, and quite independently, Greenhalgh§ was able to 
record a success. Dr. James of Philadelphia in 1867 had a 
success, which was near being a failure. A few successes and 
more failures have since then been recorded, and the plan has 
now been practically abandoned. 

* Annals 0/ Sui'geyy, ]u\y, 1887. f Ed. Med. Journ., March, 1864, p. S65. 

\ Lond. Obstet. Soc. Trans., 1866, vol. vii., p. 95. 

§ Lancet, March 23rd, 1867. 

22 * 



324 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

Injection of Lethal Substances into the Fcetus and surrotcnding 
Fluids. — Joulin, in 1863, is credited with the invention of this 
plan; but Friedrich, in 1864, was the first to put it into 
practice. Morphia was used, and the case was successful : 
but it is doubtful if it was one of ectopic gestation at all. 
Koeberle followed with a success, and others are recorded. 
Matthews Duncan has combined the plan with electricity ; but, 
in spite of most persevering, skilful, and painstaking efforts, 
without success. At best this plan is uncertain, and it is 
dangerous. 

Elytrotomy. — A good many cases have been recorded of opera- 
tion by the vagina. Parry records 15 such operations, with six 
recoveries. King of Georgia, in 1817, was probably the first to 
remove an extra-uterine foetus by vaginal incision. Bandl, in 
1874, operated in the same way, but without success. Gaillard 
Thomas used the galvano-cautery for division of the tissues, 
and the patient narrowly escaped with her life. Herman* 
collected 33 cases of operation by vagina, and from his consider- 
ation of these drew certain conclusions which are worthy of 
being quoted: i. The operation of opening an extra-uterine 
gestation sac by the vagina early in pregnancy, before rupture 
has taken place, by the cautery knife or otherwise, is a dangerous 
and unscientific proceeding. Abdominal section ought always 
to be preferred to this. 2. Soon after rupture has taken place, 
when interference is called for to arrest haemorrhage, abdominal 
section is more likel}^ to succeed than vaginal. 3. When rupture 
has taken place, and the effusion of blood is followed by pyrexia, 
the indications for incision of the vagina are the same as those 
in haematocele from any other cause. 4. At, or soon after full 
term, before suppuration has taken place, there might be con- 
ditions which indicate delivery by the vagina as preferable to 
abdominal section. These are : {a) When the foetus is pre- 
senting with the head, breech, or feet, so that it can be extracted 
without altering its position ; [b) when it is quite certain, from 
the thinness of the structures separating the presenting part 
from the vaginal canal, that the placenta is not implanted on 
* Brit. Med. Journ., Dec. 3rd, 1887. 



THE ELECTRIC CURRENT. 325 

this part of the sac, and it is not certain that the placenta is not 
implanted on the anterior abdominal wall. 5. If the child can- 
not be delivered by the vagina without being turned, abdominal 
section should be performed. 6. No attempt should be made to 
remove the placenta ; the sac should frequently be washed out. 

Broadly speaking, vaginal section may properly be performed 
under the above conditions when the state of parts — a thin sac 
and a presenting foetus — invites the proceeding; or when nature 
is showing a disposition to make an opening through the 
vagina. 

Robertson* of Oldham has successfully operated by dividing 
the perineum, and separating the walls of the vagina and 
rectum. 

The Application of the Electric Current. — Voillemier is said to 
have first suggested electricity ; Cazeaux, after him, certainly 
did so. Bachetti of Pisa, in 1853, was the first actually to 
use electricity to kill the foetus, and he was successful. Braxton 
Hicks in 1 866,1 Allen of Philadelphia,! and others, by various 
methods of discharge, sought the same end. Gaillard Thomas, 
in particular, has paid much attention to this plan of killing the 
ovum, and has done much to improve and to simplify its appli- 
cation. He records several striking cases of success. Dr. 
Blackwood of Philadelphia, § who has paid a good deal of 
attention to this subject, strongly recommends Faradism, 
because it is controllable and acts with greater energy on 
the embryo. Believing that it acts by " tetanization " of the 
whole mass of the embryo, he would give the maximum dose 
at one sitting, prolonged for an hour or more. Galvano- 
puncture he considers waste of time. As now employed, 
electricity is usually applied by means of an induction 
apparatus ; one electrode being placed on the most pro- 
minent part of the swelling in the vagina, and the other 
on the opposite side of the tumour over the parietes. Several 
appliances are usually necessary. 

* Brit. Med. Journ., Feb. 13th, 1886. 

t Loud. Obstet. Soc. Trans., vol. vii., p. 96. \ Amer. Journ. Obstct., May, 1872. 

§ Phila. Med. and Surg. Rep., Sept. 3rd, 1887. 



326 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

Brothers* has collected 43 cases treated by electricity with 
two deaths. In four cases there were alarming symptoms, but the 
patients recovered. In two cases the fcetus was not killed ; and 
in two suppuration of the sac with septicaemia occurred, the 
patients recovering after discharge of the fcetus, in each case 
through the vagina. In three of the cases contractions of the 
muscular layer of the Fallopian tube is said to have resulted in 
expulsion of the fcetus into the vagina. In some of the cases 
more accurate records might strengthen a belief in their authen- 
ticity ; and among those that are well recorded, serious doubts 
must arise in the mind of the critic as to the validity of the 
diagnosis in several. 

The position that electricit}' at present holds as a plan of 
treatment in extra-uterine fcetation is, that it is suitable only 
in the early stages, where it is not very dangerous and is followed 
by an encouraging degree of success. It must be noted, that in 
these early stages diagnosis is uncertain ; that the stimulation 
of an electric discharge may induce rupture ; and that danger 
is not over when the foetus is killed. It may not destroy the 
vitality of the placenta. Leopold's experimentsf with the 
fcetus in pregnant rabbits would seem to show that the presence 
of a dead embryo in the abdominal cavity is a condition by no 
means free from danger; and actual results in the human female 
show the same thing. 

Electricity is the best of all minor plans of operation ; but 
it is not quite free from danger, it is not always successful, and 
in its limited application it enters into competition with lapar- 
otomy in the same field where laparotomy is most successful 
in primary results, and has also secondary results which are 
absolutely perfect. 

A dispassionate consideration of the natural terminations of 
the disease, and of the effects of minor modes of treatment, 
almost drives one to the conclusion that, at all stages and under 
all circumstances (excluding the exceptional cases wherein ely- 
trotomy is permissible), abdominal section is the best treatment. 

* Amer. Journ. of Obstet., xxi., May, 1888. 
t Archiv. fur Gyn. and Med. Times and Gaz., 1S82, vol. i., p. 41. 



ABDOMINAL SECTION. 327 

In the early stages and before rupture, abdominal section ought 
to be a very simple and successful proceeding. Veit, according 
to Harris,* has had seven operations, all successful. This has 
been called the "primitive" operation. Even during the 
alarming state produced by rupture, one surgeon (Tait) can 
show a record of 35 operations with two deaths. Between the 
fourth and ninth months the dangers to the patient are least : 
the next period of danger comes on at term. But if the risk 
to the patient during those five months is stationary, tli^ danger 
of operation is weekly added to. The size of the foetus increases 
the magnitude of the operation : if, as is likely, operation will 
be called for at the end of nine months, why wait for that time, 
when the dangers are so much greater ? As a result of oper- 
ation, a living mother and a living child can be credited only to 
five surgeons — Jessop of Leeds, A. Martin of Berlin, Eastman 
of Philadelphia, t Breisky, I and Lawson Tait. The wise 
practice is, that the less important life shall give way to the 
more important ; that where sacrifice is called for, the child 
must give way to the mother. It happens that the period 
which is least dangerous to the mother is most dangerous for 
operation — speaking of the whole period as one. But there is 
great difference in risk between an operation performed in the 
fifth month, and one in the ninth. To the latter operation, 
where the child is living and viable, the name " Primary" has 
been given; the operation after full term, when the child is 
dead, has been called "Secondary." This nomenclature is 
misleading. 

A Primary operation is performed at the worst possible 
period, as regards the safety of the mother. The results, so 
far, have been 31 operations with 25 deaths. Of the children, 
16 lived ; but the mortality among them during the first few 
months has been, as might be expected, high. In only five cases 
were both mother and child saved, § Indeed, if the child is 
viable, or even if the case has passed the sixth month, it is 

* Amey. Journ. Med,. Sc, Sept, 1888. 

t Amer. Joiirn. Obstet., Oct., 1888. J Wien. Med. Presse, xlviii., 1887. 

§ Harris, Amey. Journ. Med. Sc, Sept., i888. 



328 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

very doubtful whether it would not be botter practice to wait 
till the period of false labour has passed by, and operate when 
the child is dead and the placental circulation has ceased. Of 
course, the case must be carefully watched, and any indication 
of change promptly met. 

I would summarise the indications for operation by abdom- 
inal section, in extra-uterine foetation, as follows : 

I. In all cases before the period of expected tubal rupture 
(25- to 3|- months), in fact, as soon as the condition has been 
discovered, should electricity fail to kill the ovum. 

II. In all cases of tubal rupture, as soon as possible after 
the condition has been diagnosed. 

III. In all cases up to the fourth month in which the foetus 
continues to live. Between the fourth month and the period of 
false labour, operation is not advisable. 

IV. In all cases after false labour when the child is dead 
and the amnion absorbed. If suppuration takes place, operation 
is imperative ; if the foetus is quiescent, operation, though 
advisable in the view of preventing further trouble, is not 
urgent. Absorption of amnion is waited for, because this 
indicates cessation of circulation in the placenta. 

V. In all cases where the condition endangers the life of the 
mother. 

Speaking broadly, operation ought not to be left as a last 
resort : it ought to be ranked as a mode of treatment. The 
natural course of the gestation being intelligently foreseen, the 
best treatment ought to be available at all times, and not only 
when a catastrophe has taken place. The following case*' 
points its own moral : " In October, 1875, three prominent 
Philadelphia obstetricians met daily in consultation for sixteen 
days over the case of a lady who was suffering the pains of 
false labour. ... As they could not promise the husband 
that an operation would probably save the life of his wife, they 
waited for the time to come when they could do this ; but, 
while doing so, and when the lady appeared to be getting 
better, she was suddenly seized with agonising pains, followed 
at once by a state of collapse, and died in thirty minutes." 
* Harris, Intevnat, Cyclop. Surg., vol, vi., p. 784. 



OPERATIVE METHODS. 329 



THE OPERATION. 

Laparotomy for ectopic gestation may be conveniently 
described as five varieties of procedure : 

I. Removal of the sac in the early months. 
II. Operation on account of haemorrhage from tubal 
rupture. 
III. Operation while the child is alive, between the fourth 

month and the full term. 
IV. Operation for rupture of the sac after false labour. 
V. Operation with a dead or decomposing foetus. 

Removal of the Sac before the Fourth Month. — This operation — 
" Laparo-cystectomy," as it has been called — is of the simplest 
possible nature. It is essentially half the operation of Removal 
of the Uterine Appendages — or even less than this, for the 
ovary need not necessarily be removed. 

The abdomen being opened, the situation and connections of 
the cyst are made out by two fingers passed into the cavity. 
The tumour is gently, and without unduly compressing it, drawn 
to the surface. A suitable site for a pedicle is selected, with or 
without the ovary included, according to the situation of that 
organ ; ligatures are placed around it, and the tumour is cut 
away. In most cases the Staffordshire knot will be found per- 
fectly efficient. If the pedicle is very broad, two Staffordshire 
knots, or a chain ligature, may be substituted. 

Operation for Hismorrhage from Rupture of Tubal Gestation. — The 
primary object of operation here is, to check haemorrhage : with 
this we associate removal of extravasated blood from the ab- 
dominal cavity, extraction of the ovum, and also removal of the 
gestation-sac. The operation is performed while the patient is 
suffering from acute anaemia, possibly from profound collapse. 

When the abdomen is opened, there will probably be an 
escape of blood, and the pelvis will be found more or less com- 
pletely filled with blood-clot. Through the clot the fingers are 



330 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

pushed to the fundus uteri, and passed along each broad liga- 
ment embracing the Fallopian tubes. The site of gestation will 
be made out as a soft boggy enlargement of varying size and 
consistency, according as the ovum remains in situ or not. This 
is brought to the surface, and examined for a rent. A pedicle 
is fixed upon, ligatures are placed and tied in a suitable manner, 
and the whole sac is cut away. It is a better as well as a 
speedier plan to cut away the whole sac, than to endeavour to 
stem bleeding from the rent. Rarely does the complete ovum 
remain in the sac. Sometimes the placenta is found, while the 
foetus has escaped ; and frequently the entire ovum is extruded, 
and lies amidst the blood-clots. 

The extravasated blood is removed, at first, by the fingers or 
hand; then, by irrigation with a hot aseptic fluid; and finally, 
by sponging. These manipulations may demand prolongation 
of the parietal incision. When the cavity is dry, the wound is 
closed in the ordinary manner. 

In many cases the indication to operate is simply an alarm- 
ing pelvic haemorrhage, and the diagnosis is frequently made 
only after operation. This is of no consequence in respect of 
treatment. The first indication of extra-uterine pregnancy may 
be this alarming haemorrhage, following rupture of the sac : an 
intra-peritoneal haemorrhage is most frequently of this nature, 
and we must promptly act on this presumption. No patient 
should be permitted to die while we wait for the evolution of 
diagnostic signs. 

Operation between the Fourth Month and the full Term, while the 
Child is Alive. — Although the operative details are essentially the 
same between the end of the fourth and the end of the ninth 
month, the operative results, so far as the mother is concerned, 
are very different. Apart from the shock of the operation, which 
is naturally greater after removal of a large foetus than of a small 
one, the chief danger — haemorrhage — is increased with the age, 
and consequently the size, of the placenta. As already re- 
marked, the primary operation, so called, for delivery of a viable 
foetus is not to be recommended, unless urgent symptoms on the 



OPERATION WITH CHILD ALIVE. 331 

mother's part call for it. And, generally speaking, the condition 
of the mother, before the child is viable, is the call to operate. 
Diarrhoea ; rectal or vesical tenesmus, irritation or inflammation ; 
repeated attacks of pain ; increasing weakness and such symp- 
toms, will usually be present in patients submitted to the 
operation here described. 

The leading features of the operation are : incision of the 
sac (if there is one), removal of the foetus, cleansing the cavity 
of the sac, stitching its edges to the abdominal opening, and 
leaving the placenta to be separated b}' natural processes. But 
an endless variety in detail may be expected, demanding the 
exhibition of skill, dexterity, and tact on the part of the 
surgeon. 

Thus, intestine may be found closely adherent to the sac at 
the site where it is most desirable to lay it open. Or, the 
placenta may be placed so that it is impossible to enter the sac 
from the front without passing through its substance. The 
surgeon must do his best to aim at a minimum of traumatic 
disturbance, with efficient technical completion of the steps of 
the operation. 

Supposing, as in Jessop's case, that there is no sac, the 
operation is of the simplest nature. The foetus is removed, the 
cord is divided and tied, a drainage tube is placed with its 
extremity near to the attachment of the placenta, and the end 
of the cord is left hanging out of the wound. The subsequent 
treatment is most important. The abdomen is kept dry by 
repeatedly sucking out extravasated fluids through the tube ; 
and, if necessary, abdominal irrigation is employed. The pla- 
cental debris are thus removed : should the placenta, or portions 
of it, slough, it may be wise to enlarge the abdominal opening, 
to permit of its removal or facilitate its escape. 

Should it seem feasible to remove the placenta without 
greatly adding to the risk, this may be done. Martin, in his 
successful case, did so. But in most cases, and particularly if 
the sac can be shut off" from the general cavity, this is not 
advisable. If there is no sac, to remove the placenta will rarely 
be possible, and still more rarely proper. 



332 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

Intestine adherent to the sac at the point elected for opening 
must be separated with great care and dehcacy. This is best 
done by peeHng it off with sponges ; if a cutting instrument 
must be used, and it is difficult to follow the line of attachment, 
it is wiser to borrow extra tissue from the sac than from the 
bowel. Indeed, it may be a good plan to cut out the adherent 
portion of sac and leave it attached to the bowel, using the 
opening so made for delivery- of the foetus. 

" The golden rule for the operation is," says Tait, " to avoid 
touching the placenta." The site of placental attachment is 
not usually obscure in these cases. Dark coloration of the sac- 
wall, with the ordinary signs of abundant vascularisation, and, 
not infrequently, intimate adhesions to contiguous structures, 
mark the placental site. Every legitimate effort must be made 
to avoid it ; but if it cannot be avoided, it must be cut through. 
As soon as it is cut, its edges must be grasped in large T-shaped 
compressing forceps ; and haemorrhage may be permanently 
checked by carrying a shoemaker's or chain suture around the 
opening, and including both placenta and sac. When the ends 
are pulled tight, this form of suture will cause puckering of the 
gap to any extent desired, when its edges may be conveniently 
fixed in the wound. 

If there is much fluid in the sac, this may be removed, by 
tapping or aspiration, before the incision is made, so as to save 
future sponging. The incision in the sac is made preferably in 
the direction of the abdominal wound. But if avoidance of 
placenta or adherent intestine is gained by making the incision 
in another direction, this direction may be followed. When the 
foetus is extracted the sac collapses, and there is no difficulty in 
bringing its cut margins to the surface. 

During extraction of the foetus the edges of the opening in 
the sac are pulled forwards by forceps, so as to guide the fluids 
over the parietes. The cavity is cleansed and mopped out, and 
the cord is left hanging out of the wound. The edges of the 
opening in the sac are carefully stitched to the skin at the 
bottom of the wound, leaving an opening large enough to admit 
the largest size of drainage tube, and along side of it the um- 



OPERATION FOR RUPTURE. 333 

bilical cord. It would be good practice to surround the cord 
with a roll of gutta-percha tissue. The abdominal incision is 
finally closed down to the attachment of the sac. 

Sponging and sponge-packing will have been employed at 
every step where necessary, to soak up fluid or protect ab- 
dominal organs. 

Supposing the sac is covered by peritoneum — that is, sup- 
posing the ovum has developed between the la3^ers of the broad 
ligament — we may expect to find the whole pelvic peritoneum 
elevated, thickened, and vascular. Instead of the thin fibrous 
tissue, traversed by large vascular trunks, met with in adven- 
titious sacs, we here have to deal with thick, succulent, cellular 
tissue, abundantly supplied with minute vessels. Haemorrhage 
is therefore likely to be troublesome, on making the incision ; 
but it may be controlled in the way recommended. In such 
cases, delivery by vagina may be substituted with least dis- 
advantage. 

Free drainage, combined with irrigation, and, if necessary, 
dilatation of the opening, to permit escape of the separated 
placenta, include the subsequent details of treatment. 

Rarely is it advisable to attempt complete removal of the 
sac. In the early stages of ventral gestation, while the sac is 
small and its connections either intimate or numerous, it may 
be possible to shell the whole out. In such proceedings, how- 
ever, bleeding may be difficult to control, either because its 
source lies deeply in the pelvis, or because it arises from 
numerous points of adhesion to intestine or other important 
viscus. 

Operation for Rupture during Spurious Labour . — Here the plan of 
operation is decided for us. The foetus being removed, and the 
extravasated blood and other fluids having been mopped up, 
the rent in the sac is examined for bleeding points. Locking 
forceps are placed on these, and left attached. A deliberate 
examination of the state of parts is now instituted. If the rent 
is in front, the operation is concluded as if it had been inten- 
tionally made there, by suturing its edge to the parietal wound. 



334 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

If it is behind, or so situated that its hps cannot be brought to 
the surface, a variety of methods are possible. It is inadvisable 
to permit the discharges from the sac to escape into the ab- 
dominal cavity ; therefore, the rent should, if possible, be closed, 
and an opening made in front, below the parietal wound. This 
opening need not be so large as if the foetus had to be delivered 
through it ; sufficient space to admit the drainage tube and the 
umbilical cord is all that is wanted. Through this opening 
measures may be adopted to close the rent, either temporarily 
by T-shaped pressure forceps, or permanently by a continuous 
suture through the infolded edges. The sac is then treated as if 
it had not been ruptured. It will always be advisable to place 
a drainage tube in the abdominal cavity, and retain it there for 
a day or two, until there is evidence that there is no leakage 
from the rent. 

Operation with a Dead or Decomposing Foetus. — This proceeding 
is usually called for after the period of false labour, when symp- 
toms arise which indicate danger to the mother. The conditions 
which give rise to these symptoms are very varied, and the 
details of the operation will be similarly varied. In fact, to 
describe the average course of one operation, in the midst of 
the endless varieties met with, would be impossible. From 
removal of a gangrenous sac' containing a putrid ovum, with 
perhaps resection of bowel, down to simple opening and 
drainage of an abscess, we must be prepared for almost any 
contingency. 

Thornton" succeeded, after much difficulty, in removing 
the whole gestation-sac as well as foetus. The cyst-wall was 
rotten, and, during the manipulation necessary for separating 
the abundant intestinal adhesions, rupture took place, and 
clotted blood, followed by a withered foetus, escaped. 

Nottat records a case on which M. Boilly operated, and in 
which intestinal obstruction was present. The foetus had been 
carried for eight years, and the cyst was very intimately adherent. 

* Obstet. Trans., vol. xxiv. , 1882, p. 81. 
t Prog. Mdd., 1884, xii., p. 196. 



OPERATION WITH DEAD FCETUS. 335 

A loop of intestine was found strangulated, and the constriction 
was divided. The patient died ; and after death a second 
strangulation was found. A preparation in the Bristol Infir- 
mary museum shows strangulation of a double loop of bowel 
by adhesions around a gestation-sac. 

In Galabin's^' case of extra -uterine and intra -uterine 
gestation combined, the sac was so friable that it could not 
be stitched to the abdominal wall ; and death was probably 
caused by the uterus, in the premature expulsion of its own 
foetus, contracting away from the extra-uterine placenta which 
was attached to its surface, and so causing haemorrhage. 

Breudelf operated successfully on a case where there was 
absolute constipation for four weeks. In this case the foetus 
was not decomposed, the placenta was almost separated, and 
the operation presented no serious difficulties. 

Spanton | operated successfully on a case in which symptoms 
of peritonitis had existed for two months. A macerated foetus 
and putrid purulent fluid were found in the sac, and very exten- 
sive intestinal adhesions were present. Drainage of the abdomen 
as well as of the sac, and daily irrigation, were employed. 

One of the most remarkable of these cases was operated 
upon with success by the late Dr. Angus Macdonald,§ The 
woman at the end of the sixth month was seized with dysuria 
and pain in the lower abdomen ; three weeks later a sanious 
vaginal discharge appeared, with oedema of the left leg. Hectic 
supervened, and the patient was brought to a very low ebb. 
At the operation it was found that the cyst had opened into the 
intestine ; and the foetus la}^ surrounded with faeculent fluids, in 
a sac, part of whose wall was formed by intestine. Resection 
of the semi-gangrenous gut was at once carried out, and the 
abdomen closed after being thoroughly cleansed. The patient 
made an excellent recovery. 

In 1887 I had to operate on a patient in the Bristol Infir- 
mary, with an extra-uterine foetation, about five months after 

* Obstet. Trans., 1882, vol. xxiv., p. 8r. 

t Centralbl. f. Gyn., Oct. 13th, 1883, p. 649. 

\ Brit. Med. jfourii., Jan. 12th, 1884. § Ed. Med. Journ., Feb., 1884, p. 697. 



336 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

the period of spurious labour. The foetus lay in its membranes 
quite free in the abdominal cavity ; but adherent to bowel, 
intestines, and parietes. The adhesions were broken down 
with great ease, not a vessel had to be tied,' and the operation 
was concluded without any difficulty whatever. The mem- 
branes were quite intact, lying closely over the limbs and trunk 
of the child. The head was putrefying. The placenta was 
firmly attached over the fundus of the bladder and was not 
disturbed. There was not a trace of foetal sac. The foetus 
appeared to be one of about the seventh month. The patient 
made an excellent recovery, the umbilical cord being removed 
with the help of daily rotations. 

No two cases are alike, and no general rules can be laid 
down for their treatment. Litzmann has collected 33 cases, 
24 occurring between 1870 and 1880; there were 19 recoveries. 

Before laying open a sac which may contain very putrid 
material, the aspirating needle should be used, to draw off 
sufficient fluid to cause relaxation of the sac-walls, and to 
permit of the site elected for opening being drawn to the 
surface by forceps. Sponge -packing around the sac should 
always be employed ; and thorough cleansing of the abdominal 
cavity ought to be carried out. When the sac is empty, the 
fingers should be carried around it everywhere, to make certain 
that there is no strangulation of intestine. The placenta, unless 
it is loose or partially detached, ought not to be disturbed. 

If there is a suspicion of general peritonitis, or if any of the 
fluids have escaped ftom the sac, abdominal drainage ought to 
be used, as well as drainage of the sac. Irrigation of the sac 
with antiseptic fluids is useful, both as helping to remove 
placental debris, and as protecting from septic absorption. 

It is a great advantage in these cases to find that the 
placental circulation has ceased, because then that body can be 
removed without risk of causing haemorrhage or laying open the 
maternal sinuses to the danger of septic infection. Unfortunately 
there are no means of ascertaining beforehand when the placental 
circulation has ceased. Experience is no guide ; for, while 
Schroeder in one case found obliteration of the vessels three 



MISSED LABOUR. 337 

weeks after the death of the foetus, Depaul, in another case in 
which foetal death had occurred four months previously, found 
the placental circulation still going on, and lost his patient from 
haemorrhage. After the child is dead, if there is no urgency we 
may wait ; every week that passes adds to the probability that 
obliteration of the placental vessels has taken place. On the 
earliest appearance of troublesome symptoms, operation should 
be performed. 

These operations, properly conducted, are not so fatal as 
might be expected. Thus, Gaillard Thomas saved four cases 
on which he operated ; Tait has lost only one out of seven ; and 
individual examples of most difficult and unpromising operations 
conducted to success are daily becoming more numerous. 



OPERATION FOR " MISSED LABOUR." PREGNANCY IN ONE HORN 
OF A BICORNED UTERUS. 

Only a very few examples of this condition have been 
recorded, and still fewer operations. Some of the cases might 
be read as so-called interstitial pregnancies ; that is to say, as 
pregnancies in that part of the tube which passes through the 
uterus. Others might have been true extra-uterine pregnancies, 
which had forced their way by ulceration into some part of the 
genital tract. But a sufficient number of cases have been 
recorded by competent observers to prove beyond a doubt that 
pregnancy may proceed to full term in one horn of a bicorned 
uterus, and that when labour comes on at term it may not result 
in discharge of the foetus. Angus Macdonald held that all 
examples of " missed labour " are probably cases of uni-cornual 
pregnancy. Whether this be so or not, it is certain that the 
anatomical and physiological peculiarities of pregnancy in one 
horn of a bicorned uterus will explain most cases of missed 
labour. If this is not a proved fact, it is certainly a good 
working hypothesis. 

Anatomical Conditions. — In the cases of uni-cornual pregnancy 
which have resulted in missed labour, there has always been 

23 



338 OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

found either complete absence of communication with the 
general cavity, or only a small opening incapable of being 
dilated. The pregnancy takes place in an offshoot or diverticu- 
lum of the uterine cavity, so to speak ; the ovum is completely 
surrounded by uterine muscular fibre ; at no part is there tissue 
like the cervix, which will soften and dilate, and uterine con- 
tractions simply result in compression of the ovum. The fibres 
around the opening contract as much as the fibres at the fundus ; 
and their contractions effectually bar the way against delivery. 
In fact, the balance of muscular force is away from the genital 
canal ; for the sac is usually thickest below, the reverse of what 
exists in normal gestation. In two of the published cases no 
communication was discovered with the general cavity. 

The shape, attachment, and relations of the tumour are 
easily understood. It is not completely globular, but bluntly 
conical. Somewhere on the side opposite its uterine attach- 
ment, and elevated as in normal pregnancy, are the uterine 
appendages — ovary, and Fallopian tube ; and the round ligament 
may also be observed, elevated and thickened. The uterine 
appendages of the opposite side are found low down, attached to 
the unaffected cornu. The tumour does not lie symmetrically, 
but towards the side from which it originates. 

The contents of the sac are — the dead, and perhaps macerated, 
foetus ; and fluids of varying character, according as to whether 
decomposition has advanced. 

Diagnosis. — The history of a pregnancy advancing to full 
term ; a fruitless labour, followed by symptoms of death of the 
child ; an obliquely-placed abdominal tumour, rounded, smooth, 
and movable, with a uterine cavity little or not all increased in 
depth, ought to suggest uni-cornual pregnancy with missed 
labour. Occasionally there is a discharge of decidua from the 
unimpregnated horn at term, and menstruation may occur 
regularly from the time of labour. 

A physical examination reveals a normal cervix ; a uterus of 
normal depth, closely attached to the tumour, and pushed to 
the opposite side; and a tumour with the characters just de- 
scribed. The presence of a foetus is to be looked for by the 



OPERATION IN MISSED LABOUR. 339 

ordinary means. In Litzmann's case, the foetal head was found 
resting on the pelvic brim. Finally, the uterus may be dilated, 
and an opening looked for in its interior. In Litzmann's case, 
putrid fluid flowed continuously from a very small opening. 

Operative Treatment. — In all cases the only treatment is by 
operation; and the best operation is laparotomy, with complete 
removal of the sac and its contents. I know of only five cases 
of operation, the operators being Salin of Stockholm, Litzmann, 
Sanger, Wiener, and Macdonald. The last operator has given 
a particularly clear and full account of his case ; *•' and has, at 
the same time, summarised and reviewed other cases. The 
operation was practically identical in each case, and four of the 
five cases recovered. Wiener's caset occurred in the end of 
1884, and was not known to Macdonald. He treated the stump 
by the intra-peritoneal method, and got a favourable result. 
Prof. Schultze of Jena I has amputated one half of a bicorned 
uterus in which the placenta was retained. The child was born at 
the seventh month. The midwife had torn away the cord in her 
efforts to remove the adherent placenta. The patient recovered. 

The operation is of the simplest possible nature. The tumour 
is delivered through the incision, clamped by a wire serre-nceud 
at its neck, and cut away. The pedicle is trimmed and dressed 
exactly as in Porro's operation. 

As the fluids in the cyst may be putrid, the tumour should, 
if possible, be delivered without being tapped. But if the cyst 
is very large, there is no objection to the removal of fluid by 
tapping, provided the site of puncture is carefully guarded. In 
every case, to prevent the sudden emptying of the sac over the 
abdomen as it is cut off above the clamp, a second clamp should 
be placed above the first, and the pedicle divided between them. 

* Ed. Med. Joxmi., April, 1885. t Anhiv. f. Gyndh., bd. xxxvi., heft. 2. 
+ Deutsche med. Woch., Nov. 4th, 1886. 



23 



Section VI. 



OPERATIONS ON THE STOMACH, 



A CONSIDERABLE number of operations are now performed on the 
digestive organs. Most of these are undertaken on account of 
some obstruction to the passage of ahment or excrement ; and 
are chiefly of the nature of resections of new growths, removal 
of various causes of obstruction or strangulation, and the 
establishment of fistulae above constrictions which prevent the 
discharge of excrement. 

For the performance of these operations, the surgeon must 
be familiar with a number of special technical manipulations, 
some of them of great delicacy. It is essential also that he 
should have an acquaintance with the topography of the viscera, 
not only anatomical, such as may be acquired in dissecting- 
rooms, but also practical, such as may be picked up in the 
deadhouse. The fingers, inserted through openings made in the 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 341 

parietes, are made to explore the cavity in all directions, giving 
a practical and tactile acquaintance with the position of the 
viscera, as well as with their consistency, shape, distance from 
the surface, and many other peculiarities. I would strongly 
urge the importance of this post-mortem study of the abdominal 
viscera by touch. There is no substitute for it but great 
practice in operating ; and the experience so gained is liable to 
be costly to the patients. Every operation ought first to be 
performed on the cadaver. 

I believe it is not generally appreciated how much of the 
abdominal cavity may be explored by a single finger inserted 
through an opening an inch in length. In a subject of average 
size, through an opening midway between the pubes and 
the umbilicus we may examine the whole of the true pelvis, 
and the abdominal cavity as high as the kidneys laterally, and 
the greater curvature of the stomach in the middle line. With 
two fingers a greater distance may be reached. The topography 
of the abdomen, from a surgical point of view, is best learnt in 
this way. Anatomical knowledge tells us where to make an 
incision in order to reach a certain organ ; but the educated 
fingers inserted through this incision must recognise the organ, 
and bring it within reach of the operator. The hollow viscera 
are not always to be found in their anatomical positions. Indeed, 
when there is occasion to operate on any part of the intestinal 
tract, the disease which necessitates operation will usually be 
found to have been a cause of displacement. This is another 
reason for the cultivation of diagnosis by touch. 

The characters of the tissues themselves are peculiar and 
unique, from a surgical point of view. To deal with any part 
of some twenty odd feet of hollow tube containing septic ma- 
terial, and lying in a closed cavity which is perfectly aseptic but 
peculiarly amenable to septic influences, is a problem in practical 
surgery which it is not easy to solve. And in dealing with the 
walls of this tube, the material we have to work upon is not 
the most satisfactory for surgical manipulations. 

In every operation involving a solution of continuity of the 
digestive apparatus, special precautions have to be taken to 



342 OPERATIONS ON THE STOMACH. 

prevent the escape of their contents into the peritoneal cavity. 
Its blood-supply is conveyed in a delicate meshvvork which is 
easil}' torn across, and gangrene of portions of the bowel may be 
induced by injury to mesentery or omentum and, in certain situ- 
ations, even to parietal peritoneum. Lastly, in the closure of 
wounds, we have to deal, on the one hand, with the thin serous 
and muscular coats, which are readily torn through by needles 
or sutures ; and, on the other, with mucous membrane which 
secretes fluids inimical to the vitality of the uniting media. 

Topographical and Surgical Anatomy of the Stomach. — The position 
of the stomach as ordinarily described in text-books is not con- 
sistent with that laid down by the accurate researches of Luschka, 
Braune, Warner, Lesshaft, and others. Nor are these more recent 
descriptions perfectly harmonious on all points. The stomach 
is a movable organ, varying its position within considerable and 
not very definite limits; and these changes of position are usually 
most marked under circumstances such as demand operation. 

It is only when the stomach is empty that its surfaces are 
directed forv/ards and backwards, and its borders upwards and 
downwards. Leuf describes the stomach, when fully contract- 
ed, as being "tubular.'' Its external measurement is then no 
larger than a moderately distended jejunum ; the mucous mem- 
brane is corrugated into deep folds, and the muscular coat 
greatly thickened. In this empty state of the stomach the 
pylorus is frequently found open, so that water poured into it may 
at once run into the duodenum. As it fills, the lower border not 
only descends in the abdomen, but also rotates forward around 
the long axis of the viscus, thus bringing the anterior surface 
superior, and the posterior surface inferior. In some cases this 
rotation may be so considerable as to bring the lower border 
fully to the front, while the upper border is behind. 

About five-sixths of the stomach lie on the left of the middle 
line, one-sixth or less being on the right. During distension the 
cardiac extremity rises upwards under the diaphragm, increasing 
the size of the pouch, but causing little increase of the pro- 
jection towards the left. The bulk of the organ lies directly 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 343 

behind the cartilages of the fifth and sixth ribs ; the rest, with 
the pylorus, is situated in the epigastrium. Most observers 
place the pylorus exactly in the middle line ; sometimes it lies 
a little to the right. 

The anterior surface of the stomach is in relation with the 
diaphragm, with the under aspect of the left lobe of the liver, 
with the internal surfaces of the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, 
and ninth left ribs and their cartilages, and with the anterior 
abdominal wall. It is accessible on the anterior surface, where 
it is in contact with the parietes. The accessible area is in a 
triangular space bounded by the ribs, the edge of the liver, and 
a line, nearly transverse, which moves upwards or downwards 
according as the stomach is empty or full. When moderately 
distended, the lower limits of the stomach may be on a level 
with the tip of the tenth rib-cartilage; when empty, the stomach 
may disappear from this triangular area, and be completely 
retracted behind the bony margins of the upper abdomen. 
Tillaux points out that the tip of the ninth rib -cartilage is 
prominent and movable, being attached to the eighth cartilage 
by a short ligament. It is known by its prominence, and by a 
sense of grating which it gives when it is rubbed on the upper 
cartilage. He would make the tip of the ninth rib a landmark 
for making out the lower limit of the stomach, and recommends 
it as a fixed point to reckon from in gastric surgery. 

In many cases of distension of the stomach, the limits of the 
organ may be accurately mapped out by percussion; and other 
modes of assisting diagnosis, by artificially distending the cavity 
with gas or fluid, are employed. 

The connections and vascularisation of the stomach are of 
surgical importance. The gastro- splenic ligament has more 
bearing on the surgery of the spleen than of the stomach. The 
lesser omentum, passing between the upper border of the 
stomach and the under surface of the liver, requires fuller 
notice. It contains in its folds the gastric artery, which is the 
chief source of blood-supply to the stomach ; and the hepatic 
artery, coursing along the front border of the foramen of Winslow, 
which gives off the important pyloric, gastro-duodenal, and right 



344 OPERATIONS ON THE STOMACH. 

gastro-epiploic branches. The importance of these, both as sup- 
plying blood to the stomach, and as being in the region of certain 
surgical operations on the pylorus, is self-evident. The portal 
vein and the common bile duct also lie in the lesser omentum. 

The neighbourhood to the pylorus of the vena portae, the 
pancreas, the splenic vein, and the neck of the gall-bladder, 
must be borne in mind during surgical manipulations. 

The attachment of the great omentum to the greater curva- 
ture of the stomach is also of surgical importance. It requires 
division in circular resections of parts of the stomach, and in 
such operations as may be performed on the posterior surface of 
that organ. The transverse meso-colon itself is not beyond the 
reach of danger in operations on the pylorus ; and as it contains 
between its layers the vessels which supply the transverse colon, 
any wound of it is fraught with risk to the vitality of that bowel. 
This, however, is not likely to take place unless adhesions exist, 
binding the parts together, and the pylorus is displaced down- 
wards. In no fewer than five cases has gangrene of the colon 
resulted from injury to the meso-colon. 

The vascular anastomosis around the stomach is so free that 
gangrene of portions of its walls need not be counted among 
the risks of operation. It may be as well, where a choice is 
given, to make an incision along the course of the chief 
branches — that is, transversely to the long axis ; but this is not 
of great importance. 

The operations performed on the stomach are the folloAving: — 
Gastrostomy, or the artificial formation of a fistula for the intro- 
duction of food ; Gastrotomy, incision of the walls of the stomach 
for the removal of foreign bodies or tumours ; Gastrorraphy, or 
operative closure of a fistula, or ulcer, or wound ; and Pylo- 
rectomy, partial gastrectomy, or excision of portions of the 
stomach for new growth. Besides these, various operations 
are performed for pyloric obstruction ; such as, operative 
dilatation of the pylorus, and the formation of fistulae between 
stomach and intestines, and between intestines and the 
parietes : and these will here be considered. 



Gastrostomy. 

Gastrostomy {^/aaTijp — stomach, and (TTo'/ta — mouth) is the 
establishment, by operation, of a fistula through the ab- 
dominal and gastric walls for the purpose of introducing 
nourishment. 

History. — In 1837 Egebert (or Egeberg), a surgeon in the 
Norwegian military service, read a paper before a medical 
society in Christiania in which he strongly recommended the 
practice of this operation for stricture of the oesophagus. He 
based his recommendation on the frequently successful results 
of the treatment of wounds in the stomach, and on the proved 
compatibility of gastric fistula with healthy existence. He 
described the operation with great minuteness, and with a 
scientific foreknowledge which leaves little to be added to the 
modern descriptions of it. He even advised preliminary sutur- 
ing of the stomach to the abdominal wall (since called Howse's 
method), so that adhesions might form before the opening was 
made. This, however, was then a recognised procedure in the 
opening of cysts of the liver and other organs. Egebert's paper 
was not published till 1841.''' 

About this time Blondlot, in his investigations on the pro- 
cess of digestion, had succeeded in forming gastric fistulae in 
the lower animals. A little later, Watson, reasoning on the 
same lines as Egebert, sought to justify gastrostomy in insuper- 
able contractions of the oesophagus. All this was speculation : 
no one had as yet performed the operation. 

To Sedillot, who, in 1846, came forward in strong advocacy 
of the procedure, is due the merit of having first performed the 
operation on a human being. He gave it the name "gastros- 
tomy." His writings exhibit the practical knowledge of the 
trained surgeon and anatomist, and they are brimful of earnest 
enthusiasm. The indications for operation he considered to be 
* Norsk Magdzin for Lagevidcnskahen. 



346 GASTROSTOMY 

SO straightforward and so favourable, that he expressed surprise 
that no one before him had suggested it. Apparent!)^, therefore, 
Sedillot was ignorant of Egebert's proposal. In his indications 
for operation he includes a wide range of diseases. Besides 
stricture, he includes congenital absence of the cesophagus ; 
tumours in the neighbourhood of the cesophagus and pressing 
upon it ; tumours of its walls ; and even wounds, ulcers, and 
inflammatory softenings, where the result to be attained was 
merely temporary rest. In one of his papers he records, in 
support of the operation, successful experiments upon animals. 
Individual surgeons, and on one occasion the united opinion of 
a whole societ}^, were, however, against him. In 1839 he had 
performed his first operation on a man far gone with cancerous 
stricture, with a fatal result in twenty-five hours. In 1853 he 
again operated with fatal result after ten days. A third case, 
also fatal, is recorded in his work on Operative Surgery. In spite 
of these failures and of much opposition, Sedillot maintained 
the propriety of the operation. 

Streubel, while objecting to the operation for cancerous 
stricture, considered that it might be justifiable in cicatricial 
contraction; but he did not operate. In 1853 Fenger, quite 
originally, and after careful preparation, operated with fatal 
result after fifty-eight hours. Nelaton, in his work on Surgical 
Pathology, speaking of the operation, advises that it should be 
performed in two stages, and that it should be limited to cases 
of uncomplicated cicatricial contraction of the oesophagus in 
young subjects. 

The operation continued to languish. In 1858 Cooper 
Forster of Guy's Hospital operated for the first time in England, 
but without success. In 1859 he again operated, with like 
result ; and one or two isolated cases occurred in the next few 
years. Among those who favoured the operation, the opinion 
was very generally held, that it ought to be restricted to cases 
of cicatricial contraction. Giinther and Gross, in particular, 
identified themselves with this view. In 1866 Bryant and 
Curling operated, both without success. Indeed, with the 
exception of a partial success by Kiister of Berlin, no satisfactory 



THE AIM OF THE OPERATION. 347 

result was achieved till 1874, when Sydney Jones of St. Thomas's 
Hospital performed his third operation. 

From this time the operation rapidly advanced in success 
and repute. The improved results arose partly, no doubt, from 
earlier operation ; but chiefly from a better understanding of the 
technics of abdominal surgery. What influence the general 
modern practice of operating in two stages, as originally 
suggested by Egebert, advised by Nelaton, and independently 
re-introduced by Howse, may have had upon the operation, it is 
difficult to say. Zesas,"'-' whose monograph on Gastrostomy is 
one of the most important which has yet appeared, is not 
in favour of the operation in two stages. He considers that it 
interferes with success, by unnecessarily prolonging the starvation 
and weakening the patient : the improved results he attributes 
to antiseptics. However performed, there is no doubt that the 
operation has now an assured foothold among legitimate 
measures of surgical relief. 



THE AIM OF THE OPERATION. 

The immediate purpose of gastrostomy is, to establish a 
fistula, which traverses the walls of the stomach and the 
abdomen, between the cavity of the stomach and the outer air. 
The remote and permanent purpose is, to carry nourishment into 
the stomach through this fistula. The reason for the operation 
exists in some insuperable obstruction in the digestive tract 
above the stomach which prevents the introduction of food, or 
in some condition of the tract which renders the introduction of 
food dangerous to life. The whole motive is, therefore, to 
prevent death by starvation. In some cases the prevention of 
death may be nothing more than a prolonging of life, as in those 
cases where life is already doomed on account of malignant 
disease. In other cases, the operation may have results 
synonymous with permanent cure. 

* "Die Gastrostomie und ihre Resultate." Archiv. f. Klin. Chiv., 1885, 
bd. xxxii. ; heft. i. 



348 GASTROSTOMY. 

Conditions for which the Operation may be Performed. — The actual 
conditions for which the operation may be performed are the 
following : 

1. Cancerous stricture of the oesophagus. 

2. Cicatricial contraction of the oesophagus. 

3. Obstruction by the pressure of growths outside the 
oesophagus. 

4- Malignant disease in the pharynx or the mouth. 

5. Ulcerative, chemical, or traumatic destruction of the 
walls of the oesophagus. 

6. Congenital closure of the oesophagus. 

Cancerous Stricture of the oesophagus is nearly always of the 
epitheliomatous variety. Of 57 cases collected by Butlin, 53 
were epitheliomatous, 2 were scirrhous, i was encephaloid, and i 
was colloid. It is most common in males after middle life. It 
would appear (though this has been disputed) that it is most 
frequently situated in the lower half of the tube. Out of 
20 cases, it was found in the lower and middle portions of the 
gullet in 14, in the middle in 4, and in the upper third in 2. 
Professor Harrison Allen,* from an analysis of a considerable 
number of cases, concludes that the parts most liable to stenosis 
lie behind the cricoid cartilage and the left bronchus. Morell 
Mackenzie found, out of 100 cases, that in 44 the disease lay in 
the upper third, f Butlin j says that while the disease is unusual 
in the middle portion, it occurs with almost equal frequency in 
the upper and lower halves. Scirrhus may extend into the 
oesophagus from the stomach. 

The narrowing is caused partly by the ingrowth of the 
epitheliomatous nodules, but it is more of the nature of a want of 
distensibility than of actual constriction. The new growth infil- 
trates the tissues as they lie normally undilated, and prevents 
their becoming dilated by the passing food. Spasmodic con- 
traction, with hypertrophy of the muscular tissue, increases the 
difficulty. The growth of the tumour is so irregular that the 

* Agnew's Surgery, vol. ii. , p. 1019. t Dis. of Throat and Nose, vol. ii., p. 88. 
I Operat. Surg, of Malig. Dis. , p. 207. 



STRICTURE OF THE GULLET. 349 

open passage is usually very devious. At parts there is ulcera- 
tion, extending sometimes completely through the tube and 
causing perforation. Indeed, perforation is one natural termi- 
nation of the disease ; though starvation and haemorrhage, 
perhaps, are more frequently the immediate causes of death. 
Not a few cases have died from perforation produced by the 
passage of bougies ; the aorta, the left bronchus, and the 
pleura, have in this way been entered. 

Fibrous ov Organic Stricture, also known as cicatricial contrac- 
tion, is usually a sequence of ulceration caused by the swallowing 
of caustic fluids or very hot water. It may follow other forms 
of ulceration, particularly the syphilitic. Constant traumatic 
irritation or injury, as in sword-swallowing, may also produce 
non-malignant stricture. 

The stricture following the swallowing of caustic substances 
usually begins high up in the gullet, and extends a considerable 
way downwards. It is very rarely annular. The mucous 
membrane is replaced by a grey or bluish-grey tissue of a 
peculiarly hard and resisting nature. The muscular layer is 
rarely involved. Stenosis after syphilitic ulceration is usually 
high up, and presents characters very similar to those following 
traumatism. 

The passage through the stricture is devious, but not to such 
an extent as in epithelioma. Before stenosis is extreme, a bougie 
passes down it with increasing difficulty as more of its length is 
engaged. Sacculation in this, as in the previous form, is often 
found in the gullet above the constriction. 

Tumours outside the Gullet may press upon it to such an extent 
as to cause almost insuperable obstruction to deglutition. Such 
are : growths in the neck or thorax, aneurisms of the aorta or 
the innominate artery, and some diseases of the larynx. Dislo- 
cation backwards of the sternal end of the clavicle is said by Sir 
Astley Cooper to have been a cause of extreme dysphagia ; and 
I have seen a mahgnant growth, apparently springing from the 
sterno-clavicular articulation, produce great difficulty in swal- 
lowing. Most of these and similar cases are, however, usually 
amenable to other forms of treatment than gastrostomy. 



350 GASTROSTOMY. 

Tumours in the walls of the oesophagus, other than cancer, 
are extremely rare. Fibroma, sarcoma, and lipoma are found 
both sessile and pedunculated. Polypoid growths are most 
common. A foreign body, becoming impacted and surrounded 
by inflammatory adhesions, may cause obstruction, but is best 
treated by other means. 

Malignant Disease in the Pharynx or the Mouth is very rarely an 
obstruction to swallowing. Mr. Whitehead of Manchester has 
performed successfully the operation of gastrostomy for cancer 
recurring in the mouth and pharynx after removal of the tongue ; 
and a few operations have been performed for primary malignant 
disease in the mouth and pharynx. 

Ulceration of the (Esophagus which refuses to heal in spite of 
prolonged treatment may justify the operation, on the ground 
of setting the parts at rest. An extensive destruction of the 
mucous membrane, as a consequence of swallowing corroding 
fluids, may do away with the power of deglutition, or may 
render the performance of the act dangerous to life. In such a 
case, if the patient suffers from inanition in spite of rectal 
alimentation, operation may be indicated. In syphilitic and 
other forms of ulceration the operation may, on similar grounds, 
be called for. 

Congenital Absence or Closure of the CEsophagus is sometimes 
described as an indication to operation. The condition is, how- 
ever, so rare, and the chances of its being discovered in time 
are so remote, that, for this end, the operation is not likely to 
be frequently performed. 

DIAGNOSIS OF CESOPHAGEAL OBSTRUCTION. 

The subjective signs of stricture of the gullet are chiefly 
those of difficulty of swallowing. At first, with solid food, 
there is a sense of some impediment to deglutition, with un- 
easiness referred to the neck or chest. It is gradually found 
that comfort is attained only by swallowing small morsels. 
Soon discomfort merges into difficulty, and difficulty advances 
to impossibility as far as solid foods are concerned. Then 



DIAGNOSIS OF (ESOPHAGEAL OBSTRUCTION. 351 

liquid foods only can be swallowed. With these also difficulties 
arise. They are swallowed only in small amount, and quan- 
tities are returned after repeated and prolonged attempts at 
deglutition. A feeling of nausea, sometimes culminating in 
vomiting, is often present. At times there is considerable 
suffering, perhaps amounting to a sort of anguish, with palpi- 
tation and a sense of suffocation. All these S3'mptoms go on 
increasing till absolute inability to swallow food of an}' sort is 
produced, and death from inanition stares the patient in the 
face. 

Pain in the part affected, and radiating towards the stomach 
and the mouth, is frequently complained of. The pain is in- 
creased by spasmodic contraction of the parts during the 
attempts at swallowing. Tenderness on pressure may be 
present ; and this tenderness is usually more marked if there 
is thickening of the outlying tissues. 

In the intervals there is a regurgitation of mucus, mixed in 
some cases with pus or blood. Such discharges are frequently 
most offensive : in advanced cases the foetor is simply horrible. 
Signs of digestive disturbance, such as flatulence, colic, con- 
stipation, or diarrhoea, are alwa5^s present. 

With the progress of the disease, the patient rapidlj^ and 
surely loses ground. He becomes thin, wan, and anxious ; his 
strength leaves him, so that he cannot make the slightest 
exertion without feeling exhausted ; his limbs swell when he 
stands, or even when he sits; and he dies of starvation, in a 
state of physical prostration and mental gloom which is most 
painful to witness. Nutrient enemas, even when selected and 
administered with the utmost judgment and care, seem only to 
prolong the agony. 

The objective signs are obtained by the passage of bougies 
and by auscultation of the oesophagus. 

Obstruction to the passage of the bougie is the final con- 
firmation of stricture or narrowing of the gullet. The instru- 
ment must be soft and flexible, and it must be passed with 
great delicacy. Several varieties of suitable instruments are 
in use ; none are superior to the soft French bougie a boule. 



352 GASTROSTOMY. 

I believe that passage of the oesophageal bougie, in cases of 
stricture, is not always regarded with the gravity which it 
demands. I was present when a patient dropped dead off a 
chair while a distinguished surgeon was passing the oesophageal 
bougie : an aneurism of the aorta was found ruptured. I have 
known of two others where death resulted from perforation of 
the pleura at the hands of skilled surgeons. The slightest force 
is therefore to be strongly condemned. 

Some idea of the nature of the stricture may be derived 
from the passage of the instrument. Its position in the gullet 
may be deduced from the distance which the instrument 
traverses without being checked, as measured from the teeth. 
If the stricture is cancerous, blood or pus, or even small shreds 
of tissue, may be found on the instrument when withdrawn ; if 
it is simply fibrous, the instrument is covered with mucus only. 
In fibrous constriction, the bougie is grasped with increasing 
tightness as it is passed along ; in malignant disease, the 
obstruction is suddenly met, and, once passed, does not produce 
increasing difficulty. 

Further assistance in diagnosing the nature of the obstruc- 
tion is derived from the history. In all cases this must be 
carefully gone into. The interpretations are obvious, and need 
not be particularised. Spasmodic contractions of the gullet as 
found in young hysterical females need only be mentioned as a 
possible, but improbable, source of error. 

As a supplementary aid to passage of the bougie, we may 
employ the method of auscultation of the oesophagus as intro- 
duced by Hamburger in 1867.* Morell Mackenzie, + Clifford 
Allbutt,t Zenker, § and others, have employed and favourably 
commented upon this method. Though its inventor claimed 
too much for it, there need be no dispute that by auscultation 
over the spine we can detect the existence of an obstruction 
to deglutition, and, within somewhat uncertain limits, fix upon 
its site. Familiarity with the normal sounds of deglutition must 

* Klinik (lev GLsophagus-Krankheiten, 1871. 

t Lancet, May 30th, 1874. \ Brit. Med. Journ., Oct. 2nd, 1875. 

§ Ziemssen's Cyclopadia, vol. viii., p. 12. 



MORTALITY. 353 

first be acquired in healthy subjects. The whole length of the 
gullet, from the fifth cervical to the ninth dorsal vertebra, must 
be examined with the stethoscope over the spine during suc- 
cessive acts of deglutition of the same substance, liquid or 
solid. The character of the sound it is impossible to describe : 
it is said to resemble the word "glou-glou" pronounced in a 
loud whisper. An obstruction to the descent of the food in the 
gullet is inferred if there is marked diminution or cessation of 
the sound at any part ; if there are prolonged gurgling or 
clucking sounds ; or if the sound, arrested at a given spot, 
passes upwards again as the material is regurgitated. After 
special training, diagnosis by auscultation may be satisfactory 
and final ; with most, it is merely a confirmation of other 
methods. Probably most clinicians would agree with the 
opinion recently expressed by Ogston, that the value of 
auscultation is chiefly in showing delay in the downward 
passage of the material swallowed. 

The oesophagoscope is not of much practical value ; its 
mirrors are obscured by the mucus, which is abundantly 
secreted when the instrument is passed. 

MORTALITY AND APPRECIATION. 

Gross'''' and Zesasf have collected elaborate statistics of the 
results of gastrostomy. Gross has gathered together 207 opera- 
tions : Zesas gives the results of 162 cases, and provides at the 
same time a short description of each case. 

Zesas, who lays great stress upon antiseptics, divides the 
operative period into two eras — the pre-antiseptic and the anti- 
septic. Of his 162 cases, 31 belonged to the former period; 
and only one, at the end, was successful. In the antiseptic 
era there were 131 operations — 104 for cancerous stricture, and 
27 for cicatricial stricture. Of the first class, 87 died and 17 
recovered — a mortality of nearly 84 per cent. Of the second 
class, 16 died and 11 recovered — a mortality of about 60 per 
cent. The chief causes of death were : exhaustion in 36, 
peritonitis in 20, and pneumonia in 10. The periods of dying 
* Trans. Amer. Surg. Association, vol. ii., p. 363. t Loc. cit. 
24 



354 GASTROSTOMY. 

are divided as follows : under 24 hours, 17 cases ; under 
30 hours, 69; between i and 12 months, 19; between 12 and 
18 months, i. So far as I know, the most successful operation 
for cancerous stricture is one performed by Dr. James Murphy, 
of Sunderland. His patient lived 403 days after the operation, 
which was not performed till obstruction was complete. * 

Gross gives for his 207 cases 61 deaths onl}^, or a mortality 
of 29.47 per cent. At the date of the last reports, he reckons 
that these operations had prolonged life for an average of 82 
days in each case. For cancer, 167 operations were performed, 
with 49 deaths (29.34 P^^ cent, mortality) ; for cicatricial 
stricture, 37 operations, with 11 deaths (29.72 per cent.). 
Peritonitis, pneumonia, and shock, were the chief causes of 
death. This shows results apparently much more favourable 
than Zesas quoted. Gross adds of cancerous stricture : " Of 
the entire number, 117 died in one month; 4 were living, but 
how long cannot be determined ; and 46 survived longer than 
one month — the average duration of life, after the stomach was 
opened, being 33 days." Speaking of cicatricial stricture, he 
says : " Of the entire number, 20 died within one month, 
and 17 survived upwards of one month — the average duration 
of life, after the stomach was opened, having been 295 days." 

An examination of these figures, apparently irreconcilable, 
will show how difficult a thing it is to say what is, and what is 
not, a death from operation. To fix an arbitrary period up to 
which the operation is said to cause death, and beyond which 
the disease is blamed, is simply impossible ; and nothing short 
of this would render statistics trustworthy. We are dealing 
with imponderable quantities. Death from peritonitis at the 
end of a week in a moderately well-nourished young patient 
with cicatricial stricture, is a very different thing from death 
in the same wa}^ in an old patient in the last stage of exhaustion 
with cancerous stricture. They cannot be classed together for 
comparison. 

Statistics seem to prove little in the way of results, beyond 
the fact that the operation is systematically delayed too long. 
* Brit. Med. Journ., Oct. 28, 18S8. 



APPRECIATION. 355 

It would probably be no exaggeration to affirm that, at the 
present day, a skilled surgeon could operate on suitable cases 
with a mortality under lo per cent. Looked at practically, the 
question is something like this : What is best for the patient — 
early operation, a ten per cent, risk, a certain avoidance of 
death from starvation, and a probably considerable prolon- 
gation of life ; late operation, and a risk rising up to or even 
beyond fifty per cent. ; or no operation at all, with the certainty 
of death from starvation if he escape certain accidents. 

The answer is widely different, according as the disease is 
malignant or non-malignant. In the case of simple stricture, 
successful gastrostomy saves life, and adds indefinitely to the 
span of healthy existence. In this sense the operation is as 
justifiable as any which receives the sanction of the profession. 
When other measures fail, gastrostomy gives the only chance of 
life : if it saved only ten per cent, of the cases, it would still be 
justifiable, as much as ligature of the very largest arteries if the 
patient is bleeding from them. I conceive, therefore, that in 
every case of cicatricial stricture of the oesophagus, as soon as 
it becomes evident that minor measures are ceasing to be 
efficient, we ought to perform gastrostomy. And, further, the 
operation ought not to be delayed beyond the time when the 
health begins palpably to suffer. If the necessity for operation 
becomes apparent, the patient ought not to be deprived of the 
best chances of success. 

In cancerous stricture the case is very different. Here 
gastrostomy is a procedure of the nature of colotomy for 
malignant stricture of the rectum, intended merely to prolong 
life and to render it less uncomfortable. Theoretically, it ought 
to have a smaller mortality than simple stricture. While gas- 
trostomy for simple stricture would be justifiable with a large 
death-rate, the same operation for malignant stricture would not 
be recommended if the mortality were excessive. What, in 
actual figures, would constitute an excessive mortality it is 
impossible to say. Indeed, to lay down any hard and fast line 
up to which the proceeding is justifiable, and beyond which it 
is not justifiable, would be absurd. It must be left to the 

24 * 



356 GASTROSTOMY. 

judgment of the surgeon. In such a case, I am of opinion 
that considerable weight ought to be given to the desires of the 
patient, after an honest and impartial statement of the possible 
and probable results have been put before him. My experience 
is, that he elects not to be operated upon. If he can swallow 
even a little, he is loth to believe that he will not improve, and 
he puts off operation from day to day, till it is too late ; when 
the power of swallowing has passed, and he is being fed entirely 
on enemas, he has already got so near to the inevitable end, 
that he desires nothing more than that it should not be much 
longer postponed. In some the love of life is strong, and it 
may be difficult for the surgeon to withstand entreaties to 
operate in a case where the prospects are all but hopeless. 
To dictate advice is impossible ; the action of the surgeon will 
follow the leadings of his conscience. 

The question of removal of the cancerous stricture (oeso- 
phagectomy) may be introduced as an alternative. Of the five 
cases of this operation collected by Gross, to which Butlin-'' has 
added a sixth, three died of the operation, and the others soon 
died of recurrence of the disease. Butlin concludes, in my 
opinion, rightly, that the operation has at present no locus standi, 
and that there is little prospect of our being able to perform it 
except in very exceptional instances. 

It is necessary to state that certain surgeons of repute 
consider that gastrostomy ought never to be performed for 
cancer of the oesophagus. Gunther and Gallard consider the 
existence of cancer as an absolute contra-indication. Lagrangef 
thinks the operation ought to be limited to certain favourable 
cases. He argues that, when complete obstruction by cancer 
has taken place, the neighbouring viscera will have been in- 
volved — a statement which is manifestly too sweeping. 

The operation has suffered in two ways. It has too often 
been performed by unskilled operators, and it has been delayed 
too long in the large majority of instances. A fuller knowledge 
of the conditions surrounding the operation will no doubt partly 
remove these objections ; more judgment will be exercised in 
* Op. cit., p. 210. t Revue de Chirurgie, 1885, No. 7. 



THE OPERATION. 357 

the selection of cases, and more skill will be exhibited in the 
technics of the operation. 

For syphilitic disease the operation has been performed at 
least twice, in neither case with success ; and twice for obstruc- 
tion produced by enlarged bronchial glands, with one success 
and one failure. 

In cicatricial stricture in children, dilatation is particularly 
difficult, and operation is called for at an early period. The 
success, too, immediate and remote, is naturally greater. 



THE OPERATION. 

Any preparatory proceedings will depend on the method 
selected and on the condition of the patient. It simplifies the 
operative details to have the stomach distended. In cases 
where the patient can swallow, some bland, innocent drink may 
be given before operation. The employment of any of the 
numerous artificial methods of dilating the stomach, such as 
may be used in gastrotomy, is not advisable in this operation, 
except in certain cases of cicatricial stricture. The operation 
must be done with as little worry and disturbance to the patient 
as possible, and quickly as well : artificial dilatation, either 
before or during anaesthesia, is objectionable on both these 
grounds. Besides, the advantage of it is doubtful. We desire 
to place the sutures in the stomach wh?re there will be least 
traction, and this may not be where the dilated stomach pre- 
sents. If the stomach is full at the operation, it will be empty 
very soon afterwards. By placing the sutures when the stomach 
is empt}', we see and know the worst that its contraction can do. 
The increased difficulty in operating refers only to the finding of 
the stomach ; and, if the operator has that amount of tactile 
skill in the abdominal cavity which he ought to have, this diffi- 
culty is very small indeed. I should not, therefore, in the 
slightest degree add to the patient's discomfort by trying to 
dilate the stomach. 

Before operation it will be wise to administer a specially 
stimulating enema containing an ounce or two of brandy. 



358 GASTROSTOMY. 

The operation is conveniently described under three heads : 
(i) Making the parietal incision ; (2) Suturing the stomach-wall 
to the opening; and (3) Opening the stomach. 

The Parietal Incision. — Many forms of incision have been 
recommended and adopted. Sedillot used a cross incision 
belovv^ the xiphoid process. Fenger's incision, next introduced, 
made parallel, and near, to the left costal margins, is the one 
now most generall}^ used. Sydney Jones made an almost ver- 
tical incision in a line drawn from the left nipple to the spine of 
the pubes. Kiister incised the linea alba. Maury used a curved 
incision, with its convexity towards the middle line. Cooper 
Forster employed a vertical incision through the top of the 
linea semilunaris, and manj^ English surgeons have adopted his 
plan. Howse recommends a vertical incision through the outer 
edge of the rectus — a method which has the advantage of 
surrounding the fistula by muscular fibres, which in their con- 
traction tend to close it. Girard^'' has suggested a method of 
increasing the sphincter action of the rectus by isolating two 
bundles of its fibres as thick as fingers, and crossing them so as 
to form a double loop around the opening in the stomach. 

The actual line of incision followed would not seem to be of 
supreme importance. It must be as short as possible. A long 
incision unnecessarily weakens the abdominal wall, and has a 
tendency to permit subsequent protrusion of the stomach. It 
must not be too close to the ribs, as their movements during 
respiration disturb the wound and weaken or tear or stretch the 
peritoneal adhesions. Unless at least an inch of space is left 
between the edge of the wound and the costal margin, the upper 
lip of the wound protrudes, and the lower lip is drawn inwards. 
This last objection does not apply to the vertical incision. 
Then, again, it must be so placed that the margin of the left 
lobe of the liver does not press upon the sutures fixing the 
stomach to the abdominal wall. Now, the position of the 
margin of the left lobe varies. It may lie as high as the lower 
edge of the xiphoid process, or it may descend as low as the tip 
* Wiener Med. Presse, 1888, No. 28. 



THE PARIETAL INCISION. 



359 



of the cartilage of the ninth rib. We may expect to find it 
lower than normal, as it falls downward on account of the 
hollow viscera being empty. In a case on which I operated the 
left lobe was greatly enlarged and its margin depressed through 
the presence of a shrivelled hydatid cyst in the right lobe. 

The site of election must be as high up as possible, to avoid 
traction on the stomach ; and it must be low enough down to 
be well clear of the margins of the ribs and the liver. The 
situation is better decided by palpation and percussion, than by 
anatomical landmarks. The retiring angle between the ribs and 
the edge of the liver is marked out, and a site is fixed upon at 

least an inch distant from 
both. At this point the 
fistula should be estab- 
lished. The incision, 
therefore, ought to extend 
equally on both sides of 
this point — say, three- 
quarters of an inch on 
each side of it. (Fig. 47.) 
The vertical incision 
has man}' advantages, 
more especially after the 
fistula has been estab- 
lished. But the oblique 
incision is on the whole, 
perhaps, the better, and 
more particularly because it gives greater freedom during opera- 
tion. Tillaux recommends, as an anatomical landmark, the tip of 
the cartilage of the ninth rib, which is separated a little way from 
the fixed cartilage above it, and can be diagnosed by the sensa- 
tion of grating which is felt when it is rubbed on this cartilage 
Landmarks taken from the linea semilunaris vary too much to 
be trustworthy. If the edge of the liver cannot be determined 
by palpation or percussion— a rare event — then the tip of the 
ninth rib-cartilage is, perhaps, the best landmark. But its 
position I have found, from repeated observations, to vary also. 




Fig. 47. 

Diagram to sfiom Site of Fistula in 
Gastrostomy. 

The opening is made at a, b, or c, according as the 
liver margin corresponds to the lines i, 2, or 3. 



360 GASTROSTOMY. 

Frequently the line of incision will be found to lie equally on 
both sides of the linea semilunaris ; more often, it will be on the 
outside of it. Occasionally it will be entirel}' to the inside of 
this line. The direction of the incision will always be parallel 
to the edges of the ribs, distant from them three-quarters of an 
inch, or a little more, if the abdominal walls are thick. It need 
not be longer than an inch and a half, or at most two inches — 
this is sufficient to admit two fingers. 

The skin and fascia being divided, the muscles are severed 
by successive cuts of the knife, pressure-forceps being placed 
on the bleeding points. The external oblique, thick and fleshy, 
will be divided almost transversely to the direction of its fibres. 
The thin fibres of the internal oblique lie nearly parallel with 
the direction of the wound, and they may be separated with 
the handle of the knife. The fibres of the transversalis will be 
cut transversely. If the linea semilunaris is crossed, the fibres 
of the rectus are cut obliquely. From a surgical point of view, 
it is a matter of no moment what fibres are cut through, nor 
how they are cut. Union is equally certain, and the difficulties 
are insignificant. When the sub-peritoneal fat is reached, it is 
pinched up with catch-forceps and pulled to the surface. A 
second pair of forceps is placed below the first, which is handed 
to an assistant, and the raised fold of peritoneum gently sawed 
through by the blade of the knife held horizontally. 

The peritoneum being divided on the finger to the length of 
the wound, two retractors draw the edges of the incision apart, 
so as to permit a view of the presenting organ. If the stomach 
is distended, it may present at the wound, and this visible 
portion may at once be selected for the placing of the fixation 
sutures. Theoretical considerations as to the advisability of 
having the opening in a certain position of the stomach, pre- 
ferably near the cardia and the lesser curvature, are of small 
weight, as compared with the importance of avoiding all trac- 
tion on the stomach-wall. 

In most cases, however, the stomach will be contracted, and 
situated high up under the diaphragm, while the colon or the 
omentum presents at the wound. It is quite possible to mistake 



FIXATION OF THE STOMACH. 361 

the colon for the stomach : more than once the colon has been 
opened. To find the stomach, we may either pull it down by 
dragging on the omentum and the colon, or we may follow the 
suggestion of Legond, highly recommended by Farabeuf, and 
use the under surface of the liver as a guide. The fingers are 
carried under the left lobe of the liver till they reach the ver- 
tebral column : they are then moved to the left, close to the 
diaphragm, when the lesser curvature will be felt. The stomach 
is always the highest of the hollow viscera. When recognised, 
a fold of its anterior wall is pinched up between the two fingers 
and pulled to the surface of the wound. The part which seems 
best to fulfil the double purpose of avoiding traction and pro- 
viding a suitable spot for forming a fistula is then fixed upon, 
and the next step proceeded with. 

Fixation of the Stomach. — The mode of fixing the wall of the 
stomach to the parietes will depend on whether the opening is 
to be made at once, or postponed for several days until adhe- 
sions have formed. The usual practice is now, in all cases, to 
follow the latter plan. Where the patient can afford to wait, 
this is no doubt the better method ; but it is by no means cer- 
tain that it is always the better method. A few continental 
surgeons of the highest repute advocate immediate opening of 
the stomach. They maintain that, the stomach being in most 
cases empty, the danger of extravasation is exaggerated ; and 
that, if the sutures are properly placed, the danger of subse- 
quent escape of fluids into the cavity is very small. Zesas and 
others have pointed out the great danger of withholding food 
from a half- starved patient upon whom has just been put the 
additional strain of a severe surgical operation. Exhaustion is 
the most common cause of death ; and exhaustion is best com- 
bated by stomach feeding. The low vitality of the patient is 
against the rapid formation of strong adhesions. Kocher points 
out the risks of traction on an empty stomach, through inter- 
ference with its circulation : this risk is obviated by immediate 
feeding. 

I take it that we cannot lay down a rule which will apply to 



362 GASTROSTOMY. 

all cases : the mode of opening, and therefore of suturing, must 
be decided for each case. The advantage of having even a little 
fresh lymph between the serous surfaces is evident : this can be 
secured by waiting for a few hours. In the worst cases, we can 
spare ten or twenty-four hours : this time may nearly always be 
given to the formation of adhesions. In cases where the power 
of swallowing exists, or where weakness is not excessive, or 
where (as sometimes happens) power to swallow returns after 
operation, we may wait as long as possible, and open the 
stomach only when the strength is beginning to fail. We must 
not let the patient die while we wait for surgical perfection in 
the wound ; nor, on the other hand, need we be in haste to 
establish the fistula if the patient's strength holds out well. 

The proceeding to be adopted, if we intend to postpone the 
opening of the stomach for a week or so, may be much simpler 
than if we desire to make immediate opening. Sedillot, in his 
second case, sought to cause adhesion of the stomach to the 
parietes, and at the same time to make the opening in the 
stomach by necrosis, by attaching a forceps to the stomach and 
leaving it there. This plan he did not like, and he proposed to 
transfix the stomach-wall by an ivory pin. FoUowmg a sugges- 
tion of Macnamara, Boyce Barrow and others have adopted 
this plan, employing harelip pins ; and there is probably none 
better. Other plans of forming adhesions, by caustics, acupunc- 
ture and rows of needles, have been recommended and adopted; 
but none of them seem trustworthy. Howse is said to use 
clamp forceps padded with India-rubber; and his results are 
excellent. 

In cases, therefore, where the opening of the stomach is to 
be postponed for some days, sutures need not be inserted. 
Mere apposition of the surfaces will result in the formation of 
sufficiently strong adhesions. To secure this end, the use of two 
thick harelip pins is by far the simplest plan, and perfectly satis- 
factory. The points of the pins should be rounded and smooth, 
and not cutting. They are carefully inserted under the serous 
and muscular coats of the stomach, in lines transversely to the 
direction of the wound; and they enclose a square area of 



FIXATION OF THE STOMACH. 363 

stomach-wall, whose sides measure about three-quarters of an 
inch. In the centre of this square the opening is subsequently to 
be made. The ends of the pins are stuck into pieces of India- 
rubber, to prevent them from chafing the skin on which they 
rest. If the abdominal walls are thick, the pins may be bent 
downwards in the middle ; in fact, a little downward curve will 
always be advantageous. If the pins are not removed, it may be 
possible to open the stomach after four or five days, so perfect 
is the apposition which they give. Macnamara has supplemented 
this plan by the insertion of a piece of thick silver wire into a 
fold of the stomach, which was fixed to the skin of the chest. 

If it is decided to open the stomach within three or four days, 
it will be wise to make use of sutures, Chavasse, in a successful 
case, used only four sutures. Two or three sutures in addition to 
pins would be as good a plan as any to adopt, if the stomach is to 
be opened between the third and the fifth day. For late opening 
the suturing has been overdone. In one case I used a deep 
continuous silver suture and four superficial silk sutures, with 
success. In another, four deep and four superficial sutures gave 
perfect apposition. Many similar plans have been successfully 
used — most of them, like mine, erring on the side of doing too 
much. 

When the stomach has to be opened at once, or after a few 
hours, the method of suturing must be more elaborate. It must 
secure accurate apposition from the beginning all around, with- 
out inflicting too much injury on the stomach, and without 
involving too large an area of its walls. Many plans are in 
vogue : the following is, perhaps, as good as any. By it, 
stomach-wall is kept in accurate apposition with parietal 
peritoneum in a continuous circle, and not at interrupted points. 
Firstly, following Bryant's excellent suggestion, insert two loops 
of silver wire near the spot where the opening is to be made. 
By these the stomach is manipulated during the process of 
suturing, and they serve to fix it when the opening is made. 
Then, with a round needle threaded with thick soft silk about a 
foot long, pass a continuous suture, in a circle of about two 
inches in diameter, under the peritoneal and muscular coats of 



364 



GASTROSTOMY. 



the stomach. At every third quarter of an inch in the circle, 
the needle is taken out and re-inserted ; so that six or eight free 
loops, about an inch and a half in length, are left protruding on 
the serous surface. (Fig. 48.) Then, at corresponding situations 
in the abdominal wall, a handled needle with a recurved hook 
instead of an eye (Fig. 50) is pushed through, and catches up 

the loops one after the other. 

As each loop is drawn 

through, a piece of rubber 

tubing is slipped under it. 

The loops are pulled with 

moderate tightness over the 

rubber tubing from each end 

of the incision. Finally, the 

ends of the 

silver su- "V 

tures are 

hooked un- 

d e r the 

tubing, and 

serve to 

keep the 

exposed 

portion of 

stomach 

well up in 

the gaping 

w o u n d . 

(Fig. 49.) 
A suture at 
each end of 
the wound 
may be 
necessary. 

It will 
be seen 
that this 




Fig. 48. 




Fig. 49. 

Figs. 48 & 49. — Diagrams to show Fixation 

of Stomach to Parietes for 

Immediate Opening in Gastrostomy. 



Fig: 50. 
Eyeless Needle 



for Inserting Sutures 

as it is withdrawn. 

One -third size. 



OPENING THE STOMACH. 365 

mode of fixing the stomach is easih' and rapidly carried out : 
that it provides accurate apposition under elastic pressure ; and 
that it does not draw the stomach too much outwards, and so 
increase the risk of having a dribbling fistula to deal with. 

Opening the Stomach. — This is a very simple proceeding. It 
is quite painless, and requires no anaesthetic. Consequentl}-, as 
adhesive material is very rapidly thrown out between serous 
surfaces, — they may be glued together in four or five hours, — 
the opening need not be made till the patient has full}' recovered 
from the anaesthetic, when also the stomach is more likely to be 
tolerant of food. 

It is important to follow Bryant's wise advice, and make the 
opening as small as possible, to prevent dribbling of the gastric 
contents. The opening may be made by gentl}'^ inserting the 
fine point of a curved bistoury under the muscular and serous 
coats, and cutting outwards. Through this minute opening, 
a Lister's sinus forceps is insinuated through the mucosa, its 
blades are separated, and a small French gum-elastic catheter 
is passed into the stomach between them. The divergent blades 
of the sinus forceps pull the stomach outwards while the 
catether is being passed inwards, and the whole operation is 
easily concluded without any disturbance of parts. 

Fluid food in small quantity— about six ounces of warm 
peptonised milk is perhaps the best — is slowly passed into the 
stomach through the catheter. After feeding, the catheter may 
either be removed or left in place, as seems most desirable. 
Both plans have their advantages and disadvantages. If it is 
removed, the small opening is completely closed by the mucous 
membrane acting as a plug ; but a little difficulty may be 
experienced in re-introducing it : if it is left, this difficult}' is 
obviated ; but fluid is liable to find its way along the side of the 
catheter. Such fluid, acid gastric juice, has an irritating effect 
on the wound, seeming to disolve up the recent and delicate 
adhesions. To collect any juice that may escape, the wound 
should be kept covered by some highly absorbent unirritating 
material, which is to be frequently changed. 



366 GASTROSTOMY. 

When the opening is made a few days after operation, the 
procedure is compHcated by the presence of a layer of lymph 
filling up the cavity between the lips of the wound. This may 
bleed if it is removed by forceps. In this case, it is not so easy 
to judge of the depth of the puncture to be made by the knife, 
and more disturbance of the parts may be caused than in imme- 
diate opening. But this matters little, for adhesions are likely 
to be firm. And if the plan of fixation by pins be adopted, the 
opening is a very simple affair. The insertion of a catheter is 
conducted as above recommended ; and it may be left in, with a 
plug to close it. It is fixed by a thread to pieces of strapping 
on the skin of the abdomen. 

When the opening of the stomach is delayed, and the 
patient cannot swallow, feeding by the rectum must be instituted. 
This is a proceeding of great importance, requiring care both in 
the preparing and in the administering of the enema. Rectal 
feeding has received much attention of recent years, and many 
valuable preparations may be had. I believe that we do not 
always remember, in rectal feeding, that a certain quantity of 
fluid is an essential ingredient of all foods. The concentrated 
meat capsules and suppositories now frequently used should be 
supplemented by an injection once or twice daily of a pint of 
tepid water. A good enema for such cases I have found to be 
the following : an egg beaten up in ten ounces of milk, with two 
or three teaspoonfuls of meat jelly, peptonised in the ordinary 
way, and administered warm, with or without the addition of 
brandy, every five or six hours. If the enema is passed in very 
slowly, it will usually be retained without difficulty. A large 
enema of tepid water to cleanse the rectum is necessary every 
day, or ever}^ other day. If some of it is absorbed, it will do 
good : starvation is robbed of half its terrors if plenty of fluid is 
given. Zesas and others who have spoken of nourishing enemas 
in such cases are inclined to put very little value upon them. 
Under the best form of rectal alimentation yet devised, the 
patient steadily and surely loses ground. But the opinion that 
they help, if they are not all-sufficient, is too general to be 
delusive. In every case, rectal feeding must be used where 



AFTER-TREATMENT. 367 

feeding by the mouth is impossible ; onl}' we must remember 
that it is at best an inefficient substitute for feeding by the 
stomach, and that opening must not be unduly delayed. 

The mode of feeding by the fistula is of some importance. 
The food must at first be small in quantity, and of a nature to 
be readily absorbed, so as to cause the least possible physical 
and physiological disturbance. Peptonised milk, or beef tea, or 
beef peptonoids, are readily absorbed and nourishing. Starchy 
and fatty foods, which undergo digestion chiefl}' in the intestine, 
maj'' be administered alternately with the more stimulating 
fleshy materials. " Often and little " has been the advice given ; 
but, as previously remarked, not too often nor too little. Too 
frequent feeding may irritate the stomach as well as the fistula, 
and too little will fail to support the patient's strength. Half 
a pint, slowly administered every four hours, would be an 
average quantity and frequency. 

All foods introduced into the stomach should be of the 
temperature of the body. When the patient has got over the 
dangers of the operation, the food may be administered only at 
the ordinary meal times. It has been recommended that solid 
food should be masticated before being passed into the funnel 
which leads to the stomach. If there is a sympathy between 
the mouth and the stomach, causing the stomach to undergo 
certain physiological changes preparatory to the reception of 
food, this recommendation has a meaning beyond the gustatory. 
Cases are recorded where, by the help of ingenious contrivances, 
the patient has sat at table, masticated food, and passed it into 
the stomach-tube without shocking the susceptibilities of his 
companions. The patient will soon learn what apparatus is 
best for feeding ; and how, in the intervals, the fistula may be 
most perfectly kept closed and protected. Feeding by gravi- 
tation is usually the mode selected, and a pad of clean linen 
will, in most cases, efficiently guard the wound. 



Gastrotomy, 

Gastrotomy {r'/aa-Ti'jp — stomach, and to/i>/ — incision) is here 
used in the limited sense of meaning the operation of making 
an incision into the stomach, and more particularly with the 
view of removing foreign bodies lodged in that viscus. Gas- 
trotomy may have to be performed for other purposes, as for 
dilatation of the pylorus or the oesophagus, or for the removal 
of foreign bodies in the gullet ; but in these cases the operation 
is subsidiary. As a synonym for abdominal section, the Avord 
Gastrotomy is in frequent use at the present time ; in this sense 
its employment is confusing. 



GASTROTOMY FOR THE REMOVAL OF FOREIGN BODIES IN THE 

STOMACH. 

This is a very old operation. One Crolius is said to have 
removed a knife from the stomach in 1602, and Guenther is 
credited with a similar operation in 161 3. In 1635 Shoval* 
successfully removed a knife six inches long, and in the same 
year Schwaben had a like success. Considering the early and 
striking success of gastrotomy, and the undoubted frequency of 
the necessity for it, it is remarkable that the operation was 
performed so few times in the following century. Successful 
cases are reported by Hubner in 1720, by Cayroches in 1829, by 
Bell in i860, by Labbe in 1874, ^-nd by others. | It is perhaps 
even more remarkable that in the modern era of abdominal 
surgery the operation should have been so rarely performed. 
Gross§ quotes only twenty cases, three of which were fatal. 
The more accurate tables of Credei] and Richardsonli and 

* Chelius's Surgeyy, vol ii., p. 391 t Ht^vin, Mem. de I'Acad, de Chir. de Par. 

\ See Poulet, Foreign Bodies in Surgical Practice, vol. i., p. 162. 

g Trans. Amer. Surg. Assoc, vol. ii. || Arch. f. klin. Chir., XXXIII., iii. 

IT Boston Med. and Surg. Journ., Dec. i6th, 1886. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 369 

Bernays,* which exclude all doubtful or ill- authenticated cases, 
reduced the number to 13 or possibly 14. All recovered save 
two, and in these were specially troublesome complications. 
There can be no doubt, therefore, that gastrotomy is not a 
dangerous operation : under modern rules, it ought not to have 
a death-rate of more than eight or ten per cent. 

Indications for Operation. — The conditions pointing to operation 
are twofold : (i) the presence of a foreign body in the stomach, 
of such a nature that we know it cannot be passed through the 
intestines, or can be passed only at great risk ; and (2) the 
existence of serious and urgent symptoms in the patient. 

The great majority of foreign bodies swallowed pass through 
the pylorus, and are voided in the stools. It is a common state- 
ment that anything which passes the cardiac opening will pass 
the pyloric. And so it will, as far as the smallest diameter of 
the body is concerned ; but where long bodies are swallowed, 
such as knives, spoons, forks, pencils, bars of lead, or, as in 
Fournier's case, the hoop of a barrel fifteen inches long, we can 
scarcely expect that they will be passed through the pylorus 
and along the duodenum and the numerous coils of small intes- 
tine. As a matter of fact, long bodies rarely escape from the 
stomach at all. 

Aggregations of small foreign bodies require removal, as 
much as long or large single bodies. They may become glued 
together by mucus, and form a mass whose diameter is con- 
siderably greater than that of the pyloric orifice. Thornton f 
and Schonborn I have successfully removed large masses of hair 
swallowed by their patients. 

Apart from the remote risk attending the prolonged presence 
of a foreign body in the stomach, the subjective condition of the 
patient may be such as to demand operation. Tlie patient is 
constantly nauseated ; he has an indefinable sensation of 
distress and anxiet}' referred to the pit of the stomach ; he 
complains of severe shifting pains in various situations, which 

* Phila. Med. News, Jan. ist, 1887. t Lancet, Jan. 9th, 1886. 

J Langenbeck's Archiv,, 1883, vol. xxix., p. 609. 

25 



370 GASTROTOMY. 

are sometimes distracting (in at least one case they drove the 
sufferer to suicide) ; and his combined sufferings often render 
hfe a prolonged agony. In other cases the symptoms are less 
urgent, but they are always more or less distressing. Frequently 
the ingestion of food relieves the pain ; sometimes it aggravates 
it. The patient occasionally finds relief in special postures, 
and constantly assumes them. The slightest movement may 
aggravate the pain ; the patient may have to tread with 
slowness and difficult}^, and his breathing may be performed 
superficially or with effort. Soon the health fails ; the patient 
becomes pale, thin and worn ; he becomes liable to attacks of 
syncope, or even convulsions ; vomiting sets in, sometimes with 
bleeding ; wasting goes on to extreme degrees, and death takes 
place in the last stage of exhaustion. 

Local conditions demanding operation may exist. These 
are produced when the foreign body shows signs of perforating 
the walls of the stomach, either immediately by cutting them 
through, or gradually by ulceration and the formation of abscess. 
Richardson '•' has collected ii such cases occurring between 1602 
and 1882, the foreign body in each case escaping either spon- 
taneously or after a simple incision ; and only one of these cases 
died. Perforation into the peritoneum, if untreated, is certainly 
fatal. The risks of perforation through the parietes when the 
stomach becomes adherent to them are evidently not so great, 
but they are sufficient to demand operation. Perforation in 
other directions — towards spleen, liver, lung, or heart— must be 
reckoned among the terminal casualties. 



THE OPERATION. 

To facilitate operation, various plans of distending the 
stomach have been suggested. Felizet of Paris f utilised the 
vapour of ether for this purpose, m an operation for the removal 
of a spoon. A piece of rubber tubing was passed into the 
stomach ; the outer extremity of the tube was bifurcated — one 
of the ends communicating with a funnel, the other with an ether 
* Loc. cit. t Lancet, vol. ii., 1882. 



THE OPERATION. 371 

reservoir. The stomach was first washed out with a solution 
of bicarbonate of soda, poured in through the funnel. The 
ordinary incision was then made ; when it was concluded, the 
ether reservoir was placed in hot water, and the vapour, passing 
along the tube into the stomach, distended it and forced it 
through the wound. Felizet, while the stomach was distended, 
sutured it to the wound before removing a spoon, and a gastric 
fistula was left, Schonborn,* in a case of gastrostomy, made 
use of a bladder attached to the end of a hollow sound, which 
he distended by blowing. Jacobi f and Fowler I have caused 
distension by pouring into the stomach measured quantities of 
acid and bicarbonate of soda. Other methods have been used 
or recommended. 

It is very doubtful if the advantages of distending the 
stomach counterbalance the disadvantages. The advantages 
are, increased facility in finding the stomach, and the com- 
paratively small size of the opening made while the walls are 
stretched. The chief disadvantages are, the trouble to the 
patient connected with the process of distension, the difficulty 
in preventing the distending agent from coming into contact 
with the peritoneum (even ether is not innocuous), and the 
increased difficulty of finding the foreign body in a distended 
cavity. Billroth, in one case, found this last difficulty a very 
troublesome one to overcome. The exigencies of the case would 
probably be met by a prior cleansing of the stomach with a 
dilute solution of bicarbonate of soda. There is no objection 
to the patient's swallowing, just before operation, eight or ten 
ounces of some innocuous fluid ; this amount will be quite suffi- 
cient to throw the stomach into prominence, while it is not too 
large to be collected in sponges should it escape. On the whole, 
perhaps, it is best to operate upon an empty stomach, which 
has been previously cleansed by an alkaline solution. 

The site of the incision is not of so much importance as in 
gastrostomy. It may be higher up ; if the liver is in the way, it 

* Langenbeck's /irc/(/i;., xxii., p. 500. 

t New York Med. Joiirn., 1874, vol. xx., p. 142. 

I Ann. Anat. and Surg., vol. vi., p. 27. Brooklyn, 1882. 

25 * 



372 GASTROTOMY. 

can easily be kept back by a retractor. No advantage is gained 
by getting close to the ribs ; the flexibility of the parietes, which 
is useful in permitting manipulation and the introduction of 
sponges, is diminished by proximity to the fixed rib-cartilages. 
If, as occasionally happens, the foreign body can be felt, the 
incision through the parietes is best made directly over it. And 
if sign of perforation show at any part, this also guides to the 
site of incision. Labbe recommended an incision parallel to the 
left costal margins, the lower end of which did not descend 
below the level of the tip of the ninth cartilage. Bell and Neal 
made use of an incision extending from the umbilicus towards 
the left false ribs ; Vidal de Cassis made his incision in the 
middle line ; and other incisions, too numerous to mention, have 
been employed. 

If the foreign body is very large, as in Thornton's case, the 
incision is best made in the middle line. The linea semilunaris 
is, for most cases, too far outwards. Labbe's incision is probably 
as good as any for those cases where the site of election is not 
determined by the foreign bod}' being felt. The incision, begin- 
ning at the level of the tip of the ninth rib-cartilage, and about 
an inch and a half to the inner side, is carried upwards parallel 
to the costal margin for a distance of two and a half or three 
inches. The muscles are divided and the peritoneum opened in 
the same way as in gastrostomy. 

Now that the competency of sutures in wounds of the hollow 
viscera to prevent escape of their contents has been abundantly 
proved, the old practice of fixing the stomach to the parietes 
need not be followed. The stomach may be opened, sutured, 
and returned to the abdominal cavity, with an assurance that, 
if the stitches have been properly placed, there will be no escape 
of gastric fluids. 

When the peritoneal cavity is entered, two fingers are 
passed over the anterior surface of the stomach, to feel for 
the foreign body. Occasionally some difficulty in detecting the 
body is encountered. If, as is usually the case, the body is 
long, the end which lies most conveniently to the parietal wound 
is selected as the site of the stomachic incision. If the body is 



THE OPERATION. 373 

sharp-pointed at one end (as a fork), the blunt end is chosen. 
Particular care must be taken that the gastric wall is not 
perforated by rough handling of a sharp-pointed foreign body. 
If the blunt end lies at considerable distance from the parietal 
incision, it will be wise policy to open the stomach over the 
sharp extremity- In the case of collections of hair, the stomach 
may be opened where it protrudes most. Each case must be 
judged on its merits as to site of opening. 

When the spot for making the opening has been selected, 
the whole surface of the stomach around this spot is covered 
with flat sponges. Two silver or silk guiding loops are inserted 
through the muscular and serous coats at the sides of the pro- 
posed line of incision ; the stomach is gently pulled to the 
surface by these loops, the ends of which are now entrusted to 
an assistant, who keeps the stomach pressed up against the 
sponges b}' means of them. The line of incision is best made 
parallel to the course of the vessels — that is, transversely to the 
curvatures, or in a line with the abdominal wound. An opening 
of sufficient size is made between the loops by knife or scissors, 
and the forefinger, inserted through it, feels the body and enables 
the surgeon to decide upon the best mode of extraction. The 
finger may be able to push the end of the body through the 
wound, when it may be caught ; or it may be lifted out between 
the forefinger and a lithotomy scoop or similar instrument ; or 
the end may be seized in suitable forceps, whereby it is dragged 
out of the wound. Sometimes the body is found embedded 
in granulations, which bleed freely on being disturbed ; the 
greatest care must then be taken to avoid perforation of the 
stomach. During the manipulations, the assistant takes care 
that the sponges are well placed to absorb any escaping 
fluid. 

When the foreign body has been removed, it may be wise, 
if there is much mucoid or purulent or bloody material in the 
stomach, to cleanse it by means of small sponges on sponge- 
holders. The less the stomach is irritated the better, however. 
Before beginning to place the sutures, a very soft suitably shaped 
flat sponge is inserted through the wound, with a long piece of 



374 



GASTROTOMY. 



thick silk passed through it to draw it out by when the deep 
sutures have been inserted and before they are tied. 

The best form of suture for the stomach wound is the 
Lembert (Fig. 51), or some simple modification of it. The best 
needle is a milliner's needle of medium size ; the suture material 
should be fine Chinese twist. The sutures are most easily and 
rapidly inserted along folds of the stomach-wall raised by trac- 
tion on quilt stitches placed about two inches apart, in the 

manner described and depicted 
^-^^ further on for Enterorraphy. 

^y^ The needle passes through the 

serous, sub-serous, and muscular 
coats, piercing but not cutting 

- the tissues, and does not enter 
_^ the mucous coat. The accom- 
panying diagram (Fig. 51) may 

■^ be taken as representing on 
natural scale the mode of plac- 

— ing and the closeness of the 
sutures. When the sutures have 
been placed, their ends are 
gathered together in the blades 
of catch - forceps, the threads 
crossing the middle of the 
wound are teased apart, and 
the sponge is removed. The 
sutures are then systematically 
and carefully tied, beginning at 

one end and going on to the other. A second row of sutures, 
passing through peritoneum alone, is sometimes placed in alter- 
nation with the first row. These sutures are ordinarily inter- 
rupted, but very perfect apposition may be got by making them 
continuous. A double continuous row, where the sutures cross 
and the free ends are tied together at the end of the wound, may 
be used if the wound is small. Appolito's suture (see Enter- 
ectomy) would seem to be very suitable. Expansion and con- 
traction takes place through a wider range in the stomach than 



Fig. 51. 

Leviben's Suture. 



THE OPERATION. 375 

in the intestine. The continuous suture prevents stretching of 
the intervals, and subsequent escape of fluid when the stomach 
expands ; if the stomach contracts, the continuous suture might 
get loosened. Unless the stomach is quite contracted, which is 
different from being empty, the interrupted suture is the safer. 

When the stomach wound is perfectly closed, the sponges are 
removed from the abdominal cavity. A dry sponge is finally inser- 
ted on a sponge-holder, to make sure that no foreign matter is left 
behind. The parietal wound is then closed in the ordinary way. 

The subsequent treatment consists in giving absolute rest to 
the stomach for three or four days, the patient being fed on enemas 
meanwhile. Very small quantities of peptonised milk, diluted 
with water, are given at stated intervals for two or three days 
more ; and then beef peptonoids and thin broths may be added 
to the diet, while the intervals of feeding may be lengthened and 
the amounts of food increased. At the end of a fortnight, starchy 
foods may be given ; and at the end of three weeks, ordinary 
light diet. 

If vomiting takes place at any time, all food must be with- 
held till it has ceased. Separation of the lips of the wound is 
more likely to take place when the stomach contracts or is com- 
pressed over fluid contents, than when it is empty. 

The chances of successful issue are very good. Mr.Thornton's 
case made an admirable recovery, in spite of his having to 
remove, on the day after the operation, a sponge which was 
inadvertently left inside the abdomen, and in spite also of sup- 
purative inflammation of the parotid. In his case also the 
stomach wound was very large. When closed, it measured 
three inches. There is no other record of a foreign body of 
such dimensions having been removed from the stomach. 

GASTROTOMY FOR REMOVAL OF FOREIGN BODIES IN THE 
CESOPHAGUS. 

For foreign bodies impacted near the cardiac extremity of 
the oesophagus, when all attempts to remove them by the mouth 
have failed, gastrotomy may be performed with the view of 
removing them through the stomach. 



376 GASTROTOAIY. 

Maurice H. Richardson of Harvard University, in 1886, 
introduced the operation by a very successful case. He suc- 
ceeded, after introducing the whole hand through an opening in 
the stomach, in removing a denture of teeth impacted in the 
lower portion of the gullet. Since then he has made careful 
anatomical observations on the details of the operation, and 
studied its indications and possibilities.* In a series of cases 
he found that the average distance from the incisors to the 
diaphragm was 14^ inches : a foreign body arresting the point of 
the probang at a distance of 13 inches from the incisors would 
therefore be near to the cardia, and might be removed by gas- 
trotomy. He found that all parts of the oesophagus were 
accessible to the finger, either by gastrotomy or external oesopha- 
gotomy. It is possible with the fingers of the left hand to reach 
three inches above the cardiac orifice. 

Richardson recommends an oblique incision along the mar- 
gins of the left ribs long enough to admit of the introduction of 
the whole hand. The vertical incision he considers best for the 
introduction of instruments. The stomach is pulled to the sur- 
face and carefully isolated with sponges. The lesser curvature 
is put on the stretch, so as to make a sulcus between the ante- 
rior and posterior surfaces, leading straight to the cardiac 
opening and serving as a guide for the introduction of instru- 
ments. The site of the incision in the stomach is unimportant. 
It must be far enough to the right to allow of the passage of the 
instrument along the sulcus, as described. If the instrument is 
brought obliquely to this groove and passed upwards, all the time 
being pressed gently against the straightened lesser curvature, it 
will glide into the oesophagus every time with the greatest ease. 

The assistant, standing on the patient's left, holds tlie 
stomach by the greater curvature in both hands, so that the 
whole viscus is flattened out. "The operator, standing on the 
right of the patient, holds the lesser curvature between the left 
thumb and forefinger, thereby making tense the lesser curvature, 
and assisting in the passage of the instrument. Before doing 
this it is best to introduce the hand into the peritoneal cavity, 
* Lancet, Oct. 8th, 1887. 



THE OPERATION. 377 

and examine the diaphragmatic opening externally. With the 
stomach held as described, the opening through its walls may be 
made anywhere on the flattened surface, so as to avoid the large 
vessels." In most cases the foreign body may be removed with 
a suitable instrument : if this fails, the stomachic incision must 
be enlarged, and the whole hand introduced. The opening in the 
stomach is closed by the Lembert suture in the ordinary way. 

W. T. Bull of New York,''' in recording an operation of this 
sort successfully performed by him, makes some novel and 
valuable observations. The patient was a boy of i6, and had 
swallowed a peach-stone, which was found firmly impacted in 
the oesophagus, at a distance of 13 inches from the incisors. 
After ineffectual attempts to dislodge it by the mouth. Bull, 
through a median vertical incision in the parietes, made a small 
opening in the stomach just large enough to admit the finger. 
After passing sponges into the abdominal cavity to collect any 
fluid that might escape, he placed four loops of thread in the 
wall of the stomach around the opening, and then, invaginating 
the anterior wall of the stomach while the finger plugged the 
opening, pushed the finger onwards to the end of the oesophagus. 
The peach-stone was felt, but could not be dislodged by finger 
or forceps. He then passed a fine bougie from below upwards 
past the stone into the mouth ; attached a piece of sponge by a 
strong -silk ligature to the end of the bougie, and pulled it 
through the mouth. The sponge passed by the foreign body ; 
but a second and larger sponge, attached to the same string, 
pulled it into the mouth. 

The patient made an excellent recovery. In this case very 
thin and lax parietes made the operation possible without passing 
the hand into the abdomen. In most cases it would probably 
be necessary to pass the hand inside the abdomen ; but it need 
not always be necessary to make the large opening into the 
stomach. 

It is too early to draw conclusions from these operations. There 
can be no doubt, however, that they present a valuable means of 
treating a peculiarly difficult, if uncommon, class of cases. 
* New York Med. Jourti., Oct. 29th, 1887. 



378 GASTROTOMY FOR TUMOURS. 



GASTROTOMY FOR REMOVING CANCEROUS GROV/THS IN THE 
STOMACH. 

Augustus C. Bernaj^s of St. Louis has recently* introduced 
to the profession a remarkable operation, whereby, after making 
an incision in the walls of the stomach, he removes, by curette 
or other suitable instrument, cancerous growths bulging into the 
stomachic cavity. He records two cases, and the results in 
each were so strikingly favourable as to warrant the conclusion 
that the operation he has introduced is worthy of a full trial in 
the hands of others. 

As a result of extended study, he found that " one-half of all 
cancers of the stomach start near the pylorus, and that in nine- 
tenths of all cases they have a tendency to grow towards the 
lumen of the stomach. In the beginning the mucous membrane 
is the seat of the disease ; the sub-mucous, loose connective 
tissue is next attacked ; and only in the last stages are the 
muscular and serous coats invaded by the neoplasm." The 
muscular layer becomes soon hypertrophied, but it is last 
invaded ; " cancer of the stomach originally grows inside the 
muscular layer, towards the lumen of the organ." 

Reasoning from these facts, and from the analogy of results 
got after curetting similar cancers elsewhere, Bernays decided, 
as an alternative to other impossible or unsatisfactor}^ operations, 
to give certain selected cases a trial by scraping or curetting. 
He first made an accurate examination of the parts from the 
outside of the stomach ; then fixed a fold of the stomach to 
the parietal wound by numerous sutures. He then opened the 
stomach and carefully stitched the lips of the opening to the 
lips of the wound in the parietes. The stomachic cavity being 
thus completely shut off from the abdominal cavity, he proceeded 
with fingers and curettes to tear and scrape away masses of the 
growth. The bleeding was free, but soon ceased. 

The stomach remaining attached to the parietes, the opera- 
tion may be repeated without performing laparotomy when the 
* Annals of Surgery, Dec, 1887. 



GASTROTOMY FOR TUMOURS. 379 

renewed growth of the tumour calls for it. The gastric fistula 
may or may not be closed. 

For a full account of the operation, and a history of the 
cases, I must refer the reader to Bernays' paper. As an alter- 
native to such operations as gastro-enterotomy and pylorectomy, 
where these are impossible, the operation seems to me to have 
already assumed a justifiable position ; and, even in cases where 
these are possible, it seems likely that Bernays' operation will 
appear as a worthy competitor. 



Gastrorraphy. 

Gastrorraphy (r^^aaTrjp — stomach, and /5(/0/} — suture) is here 
used to mean the closure of a wound or opening in the stomach. 
In its old sense, as meaning suture of a wound in the abdominal 
parietes, the word may now be considered obsolete. 

History. — According to Wolfler,'-' a Bavarian surgeon in 1521 
first performed Gastrorraphy. So far as I know, Billroth! is 
the only living surgeon who has performed the operation. His 
case was one of gastric fistula, which he had failed to cure by 
plastic operation. Gastric fistula is not common : Murchison 
was able to find records of only twenty-five cases in a period 
extending over three centuries ; therefore, operations for the 
cure of it must always be rare. 

Conditions indicating Operation. — Cases of gastric fistula, in 
which the stomachic contents are constantly dribbling away, or 
in which the food taken by the mouth freely escapes, and which 
have resisted all other treatment to alleviate or cure, are legiti- 
mate subjects for gastrorraphy. Fistulae arising from ulcerative 
destruction by malignant diseases are, of course, unsuitable for 
operation. Perforating ulcer of the stomach, the most common 
non-traumatic cause of gastric fistula, may pass through the 
parietes by direct extension, or through an intervening abscess ; 
in the latter case we may expect more inflammatory thickening 
than in the former, and the operation will be correspondingly 
difficult. The site of the fistula is, however, the most important 
consideration. If, as in St. Martin's case, it lies between the 
ribs, the operation would be complicated. If, as in Maillot's 
case, it lies close to the ensiform cartilage, the operation would 
be difficult. But, if it is well free of the bony parts, it need 
present no great obstacles to successful performance. 

Cases of perforating ulcer of the stomach can, when perfora- 
tion has taken place, be saved from certain death only by the 

* Ueber die . . . Resedionen des Carcinomatosen Pylorus. Wien, 1881. 
t Wiener vied. Wochenschrift, 1887, No. 38. 



THE OPERATION. 381 

performance of gastrorraphy. Two or three such operations 
have been performed ; one, at least, with success. When, with 
a clear history of ulcer of the stomach, undeniable symptoms of 
perforation suddenly come on, abdominal section, cleansing of 
the cavity, and closing of the stomach-opening, give the patient 
the only chance of life. A very slight chance of success would 
justify the operation. 

Traumatic wounds of the stomach, by bullets, knives, or 
other means, justify gastrorraphy or not, according to principles 
which will be discussed when the whole question of perforative 
wounds of the hollow viscera is considered. 



THE OPERATION. 

For gastric fistula, the operation is preceded by a thorough 
washing out of the stomach by an alkaline solution. If the 
fistula be large enough, several soft sponges, with long pieces 
of string attached, are passed into the stomach and pulled out- 
wards against the opening by an assistant. These prevent the 
escape of mucus, steady the organ, and absorb any blood that 
may be lost during subsequent proceedings. They need not be 
rem.oved till the first row of sutures is placed in the stomach- 
wall. 

The parietal incision, about three inches in length, passes 
through the fistulous opening, and is made in an}' direction that 
seems most convenient. The peritoneum is divided at one 
extremity of the wound, so as to get beyond the adhesions which 
fix the stomach to the parietes. The finger inserted through 
this opening carefully separates the adhesions up to the fistulous 
opening, and as soon as possible sponges are packed into the 
abdominal cavity. The adhesions at the other extremity of the 
wound are separated in the same way with finger and finger- 
nail. When the stomach has been freed, the fistulous opening 
is drawn to the surface by means of the strings attached to the 
sponges inside the stomach. In most cases it will be wise to 
freshen the edges of the fistula in the stomach by means of 
scissors ; and in doing so, as little of the tissue as possible will 



382 GASTRORRAPHY. 

be removed. The stitches are placed as in gastrotomy, the 
sponges being removed before they are tied. The fistulous tract 
in the abdominal wall is cut away. The subsequent steps are 
exactly as in gastrotomy, and the after-treatment is the same. 

In perforating ulcer of the stomach, we have little experience to 
guide us. The oblique incision recommended for gastrostomy 
would probably satisfy all requirements. It might with advan- 
tage be half an inch further away from the ribs, and it might 
extend a little higher. If the perforation is in front, the 
stomachic contents will have escaped into the greater cavity of 
the peritoneum, and will be at once visible. If the perforation 
is behind, the contents may be confined to the lesser cavity of 
the peritoneum, and it may be necessary to tear through the 
anterior layers of the great omentum to get at the opening in 
the stomach. 

When the extravasated fluids are seen, wherever they be, 
the first thing to be done is rapidly to pass sponges into the 
cavity, so as to soak them up. If the opening in the stomach 
can be seen, the subsequent proceedings are now simple enough : 
to pare the edges of the ulcer, and suture the opening. If it is 
not seen, the stomach surface is carefully and systematically 
explored with the fingers, and by pulling it towards the abdo- 
minal opening for inspection. If, after most careful examination, 
no perforation is found on the anterior surface, the posterior 
surface must be explored. To do this, the anterior layers 
of the great omentum must be perforated. A convenient spot 
is selected midway between the transverse colon and the greater 
curvature of the stomach, and an opening large enough to 
admit the finger is teased out with forceps. This opening is 
enlarged by slow dilatation with the fingers ; no vessels need be 
severed. Perforation of the posterior surface of the stomach 
will be shown by the escape of gastric contents through this 
opening, and then the finding of the site of perforation is merely 
a question of time and tactile sensibility. To bring it into view 
may not be easy. If the ulcer lies near the greater curvature, 
it can be rendered visible and brought within the reach of the 
fingers for manipulation. If the perforation lies high up behind, 



OPERATION FOR PERFORATION. 383 

it may be very difficult to bring it into view, and still more 
difficult to place sutures around it. By a properly arranged and 
sufficiently long incision, I have found, post-mortem, that it is 
always possible to render every part of the posterior surface of 
the stomach visible through an opening made in the great 
omentum, and that, with the help of sponges and retractors, 
sutures may be placed an3-where in the stomach walls. 

If it is found very difficult to suture the perforation in the 
posterior surface, I would, rather than leave the operation 
unfinished, recommend incision of the stomach in front, pushing 
the perforated part through the incision by the forefinger placed 
behind, and suturing of the ulcerated opening from the mucous 
surface. To pinch up a fold of stomach on its mucous aspect 
and insert a few sutures, would give accurate peritoneal apposi- 
tion. The incision in the stomach would then be closed as in 
gastrotomy for foreign bodies. 

After any operation for perforating ulcer of the stomach, the 
abdominal cavity should be well washed out by a stream of warm 
aseptic fluid. 



Operative Dilatation of the Orifices of the 
Stomach. 

History. — Professor Loreta of Bologna introduced this 
operation ; though Richter of Breslau first suggested it.* In 
September, 1882, Loreta performed his first operation,! a notice 
of which was first suppHed to British readers by Mr. Holmes. | 
Up to the present he has operated about thirty times. A few 
other surgeons, chiefly Italian, have performed the operation. 
McBurney of New York has operated twice. Barton of Phila- 
delphia § has operated twice. Treves of London has operated 
once. In a case with advanced cancer of the stomach for which 
gastro-enterostomy was contemplated, I found great contraction 
of the pylorus, which I dilated through an opening made in the 
stomach, the patient recovering well and being benefited. 
Barton II has collected twenty-five published operations, and has 
heard of about eighteen more. The general mortality would 
seem to be about 40 per cent. : performed sufficiently early and 
with proper skill, the operation should not have a mortality of 
over 10 per cent. The cases are too few, and the operations are 
too recent, for formulating any conclusion as to the permanent 
value of the proceeding. So far, the results have been most 
gratifying. 

The Aim of the Operation. — The operation is intended only for 
cases of non-malignant character, — simple cicatricial or fibrous 
narrowing of the pylorus or the cardia, or the lower end of the 
oesophagus. With such narrowing there is usually found con- 
siderable hypertrophy of the inorganic muscular fibre, and the 
stretching of this circle of muscle is an important element in the 
operation. Professor Loreta justly compares his operation 
with that of over-distension of fibrous stricture of the rectum, 

* Deutsche vied. Woch., 1882, p. 381. 

t Afemoire dell' Accademia delle Scienze Instituo di Bologna, ser. iv., vol iv. 

\ Brit. Med. Joiirn., Feb. 21st, 1885. 

§ Med. and Surg. Rep., VhWa.., K^rW 13, 1889, and N. Y. Med. Rec. , 'M.diy 2sih, 1889. 

II N. Y. Med. Rec., May 25th, 1889. 



DIAGNOSIS. 385 

which is well known to be highly successful. As dealing with 
simple narrowing of the pylorus, the operation is intended 
to replace pylorectomy ; for narrowing of the lower oesophagus 
and cardia, it takes the place of gastrostomy for simple 
stricture. 

The diagnosis is important. In pyloric obstruction the patient 
is greatly emaciated, but the symptoms will have lasted so long 
as to exclude cancer. The stomach is much dilated, and the 
diagnosis is then between dilatation " due to pyloric obstruction 
and that due to idiopathic gastritis." In forming the diagnosis, 
Prof. Loreta places most value on the chemical and microscopical 
examination of the contents of the stomach. When positive 
results are got from the examination of matters rejected or 
extracted^ we may conclude that the dilatation of the stomach is 
idiopathic ; when the results are negative, we may infer dilatation 
from mechanical obstruction. In mechanical dilatation the 
gastric contents give an acid reaction, and no traces of albumen 
or peptones are found. In the other forms of dilatation the re- 
action is usually neutral or alkaline, rarely acid, and the 
albuminoid substances are found unchanged or nearly so. 
Other and more elaborate instructions for making a diagnosis 
are given by Prof. Loreta. '•= Speaking generally, a greatly 
dilated stomach, vomiting without nausea and with slight 
effort of great quantities of fluid, obstinate constipation over 
which purgatives have no effect, and a history of gastric ulcer, 
may be taken as indicating pyloric obstruction. 

The diagnosis, in simple stricture of the lower end of the 
oesophagus and beginning of the cardia, is more easy. In most 
cases there will be a history of the swallowing of caustic fluid ; 
in all there will be an absence of the signs of cancer ; and the 
ordinary signs, subjective and objective, of oesophageal obstruc- 
tion will be present. In this case it is presumed that attempts 
to dilate the stricture by the mouth have failed, and that the 
so-called " tubation of the gullet " is either impracticable or 
devoid of result. 

* See Brit. Med. Joiirn. 1885, i., p. 373. 
26 



386 LORETA'S OPERATION. 

THE OPERATION. 

For operating on the pylorus, Loreta at first made his 
parietal incision, about five inches in length, " on the right of the 
median line, the upper and inner end being about four centi- 
metres below the xiphoid cartilage, the lower and outer end 
three centimetres from the cartilage of the ninth rib." He now 
makes the incision in the linea alba. The muscles and peritoneum 
are divided in the ordinary manner. The pylorus is felt for, and 
will be found thickened and hardened, and perhaps adherent to 
surrounding organs. The coats of the stomach, lifted out of the 
wound as far as necessary, are then pinched up into a fold, and 
divided by scissors midway between the two curvatures about 
an inch from the pylorus, or more if necessary. Any bleeding is 
stopped by forci-pressure. (Loreta says nothing of placing 
sponges around the site of incision in the stomach, to protect 
the bowels and collect extravasated blood or gastric fluids.) 
The right forefinger, introduced through the opening in the 
stomach, is pushed into the pyloric opening, while the left fore- 
finger steadies it. Considerable force and great patience may 
be required to overcome the powerful grip of the narrowed 
orifice. When the finger is passed through the opening, the 
pylorus may be hooked downwards towards the abdominal 
wound, and then the left forefinger is also insinuated through the 
stricture. Even with the fingers thus opposed, the resistance 
offered to dilatation ma}^ appear almost insuperable. After a 
time the muscle yields, and the dilatation is continued till a 
sensation is felt as if further distension would result in tearing. 
The fingers are kept in the opening thus dilated for a few 
minutes. In Loreta's first case the fingers were more than three 
inches apart as they lay in the opening. 

The wound in the stomach is then sewn up, the stomach 
returned to its place, and the abdominal incision closed. The 
after-treatment is that of gastrotom}'. 

In operating upon stricture of the cardia and lower oeso- 
phagus, the parietal incision Is the same, only on the opposite 
side. The difficulty of the operation is likely to be increased by 



THE OPERATION. 387 

the contracted condition of the stomach. When the viscus is 
drawn out of the opening as far as is safe, a longitudinal incision 
is made between the two curvatures as near to the cardia as 
possible. There may be some difficulty in finding the orifice of 
the gullet by exploring with the finger inside the stomach ; if so, 
the left forefinger carried between the lesser curvature and the 
under surface of the liver, will be of assistance by localising 
the situation of the gullet. The next step is to introduce the 
dilator, guided by the forefinger in the stomach. The dilator 
which Loreta used is made "something like that which 
Dupuj^tren introduced for lithotomy, only longer, measuring 
about eight inches from the joint to the end of the blades, and 
so constructed that the blades would not separate more than five 
centimetres." When the instrument is introduced the blades 
are dilated to the full extent ; thus dilated, the instrument is run 
up and down the oesophagus several times. 

The subsequent steps of closure of the wounds in the stomach 
and parietes, and the after-treatment, require no description. It 
is curious that, in two cases operated upon, there appeared on 
the fourth day serious disturbances of the circulation and respi- 
ration, with abundant secretion of mucus from the trachea and 
bronchi ; and these symptoms, in both cases, lasted over five 
days. This condition Loreta is inclined to attribute to an 
exudative hyperaemic process. 

It is somewhat surprising that so few surgeons have adopted 
Loreta's operation. Forcible dilatation of the oesophagus b}^ 
the mouth has not been attended with much success, and this 
may have deterred surgeons from imitating Loreta's proceeding 
through an incision in the stomach. But this objection does 
not hold with respect to pyloric dilatation. It is certain that 
many cases diagnosed during life as pyloric cancer turn out, 
post-mortem, to be nothing more than pyloric obstruction, 
mainly produced by enormous hypertrophy of the muscular 
tissue. In the last five years I have seen at least three such 
cases ; and the facts were specially impressed upon me, because 
I had spent much time in examining with the microscope for 

26 - 



388 LORETA'S OPERATION. 

the cancer which was supposed to be present, and found nothing 
but inorganic muscle. Such cases ought to be diagnosed ; and 
if diagnosed, they are susceptible of great improvement, if not 
of permanent cure, by Loreta's operation. Pylorectomy has 
been performed for at least one case of cicatricial contraction : 
in the face of the proved success of forcible dilation, removal of 
the pylorus would seem to be doing too much. 



Pylorectomy. Partial Gastrectomy. 

By Pylorectomy is meant removal of the pylorus and so 
much of the duodenum and stomach as may be involved in the 
disease for which the operation is performed. The operation 
may thus be a partial Enterectomy as well as a partial Gas- 
trectomy. 

History. — According to Blum,* Merrein, in 1810, first con- 
ceived the idea of removing the p3dorus. A little later Gunther 
practised the operation on dogs. Gussenbauer and v. Wini- 
water, f in 1876, demonstrated b}^ experiments on animals that 
gastrectoni}^ was a feasible operation. Kaiser, at Czerny's 
instigation, I repeated these operations with success ; and 
Wehr ; further continued the experiments. 

Pean,|| in 1879, first performed the operation on a human 
being, but without success. Rydygier, in 1880, performed the 
second operation, also unsuccessfully. Billroth, who performed 
his first operation on Jan. 25th, 1881, is the chief exponent of 
the operation ; and, through the writings of his assistant Wolfler, 
has been chiefly instrumental in bringing it before the profession.^ 

Conditions for which the Operation may he Performed. — Thus far 
the operation has been performed almost entirely for cancer of 
the pylorus. It has five times been performed for ulcer of 
the stomach in the pyloric region, and once successfully for 
cicatricial stenosis. Billroth, Czerny, and others strongly 
advocate it for non-malignant forms of pyloric obstruction, 
ulcerative or cicatricial, whether originating pathologically or 
after traumatism, as from swallowing corrosive liquids. Fen- 
wick relates a case of cicatricial stenosis after injury, which 
might come under this category. 

* Arch. Gen. de Med., vol. cl., 1882, p. 332. 

t Langenbeck's Arcliiv., bd. xix., p. 347. 

I Beitragcn ziir Operativen Chirurgie. Stuttgart, 1878. § Zeitschr.f.Cliir., 1882, p. 93. 

II Gaz. des hop., No. 60, 1879. 

H Uebey die von Herrn Professor Billroth Ausge/iirhten Resectionen des 

Carcinomatosen Pylorus. Vienna, 1881. 



390 PYLORECTOMY. 

For non-malignant forms of pyloric obstruction most surgeons 
would probably prefer Loreta's operation of forcible dilatation 
— at least, as a primary proceeding. And for ulcer, unless it 
lies in the pylorus, a very limited gastrectomy might be con- 
sidered more advisable. Still, if under any circumstances the 
operation is justifiable, it will continue to be so for certain cases 
of non-malignant stenosis or obstruction. 

Certain cases of pyloric obstruction are produced by strong 
peritoneal adhesions compressing the bowel from the outside. 
These are peculiarly suitable for operative interference — not, 
however, by pyloric resection, but by dividing the adhesions. 
Obstruction caused by pressure from a tumour outside is re- 
mediable or not, according as the tumour is removable or not. 

Cancer of the pylorus remains as the leading indication for 
pylorectomy. The majority of cases of cancer of the stomach 
are situated at or near the pylorus: according to Gussenbauer 
and V. Winiwater, of 903 cases of gastric cancer, 542 were 
pyloric. In a surgical sense it is important to note that at 
death in 223 of these cases there were found no peritoneal 
deposits, and in 172 there were no adhesions. Rokitansky has 
observed that cancer of the pylorus scarcely ever extends into 
the duodenum.* There is always considerable hypertrophy of 
the muscular tissue surrounding the diseased area, and the 
obstruction may be due as much to the inability of this mass to 
contract as to the ingrowth of the tumour. 

In making the physical diagnosis, it is recommended that the 
patient be anaesthetised. Special attention is paid to the range 
of mobility of the tumour, to its size, and to the nature of its 
surface — whether it is smooth or nodulated. If the tumour is 
freely movable, we may infer, with a high degree of probability, 
that there is no invasion of neighbouring organs. In one case 
the tumour was freely movable, yet the adhesions were so strong 
and so numerous that the operation had to be abandoned. On 
the other hand, fixation does not so certainly indicate extension 
of the disease. Mobility is an effect of dilatation of the stomach ; 
if extensive dilatation does not exist, the pylorus may not have 
* See Billroth's Clinical Surgery, New Syd. Soc, p. 494. 



MORTALITY. 391 

been disturbed from its natural situation. A greatly dilated 
stomach, with fixation of the pylorus in an abnormal situation, 
strongly suggests extension of the disease : if irregularity of the 
surface of the growth co-exists with these conditions, we may 
certainly infer that the disease has spread, and then operation 
is out of the question. Free mobility has been found associated 
with invasion of lymphatic glands; this can be discovered only 
after proceeding to operate. 

There must be present unequivocal symptoms of pyloric 
obstruction. Dilatation of the stomach will usually be the 
most important symptom. If there is any doubt as to this 
condition, it will be advisable to verify it by the generation 
of carbonic acid gas in the stomach by drinking two solutions 
one after the other, which when mixed will evolve the gas. The 
history is important. From other species of pyloric obstruction, 
cancer differs in producing local pain and impairment of appetite. 
In cases not cancerous, pain is not a prominent symptom, and 
the appetite may be increased, often to voracity. INIore than 
one observer has noted that, in cases of cancer of the stomach, 
hydrochloric acid is not found in the gastric juice. 

Mortality and Appreciation. — The operation is a very fatal one. 
Mikulicz of Cracow* collected 32 cases, of which only 8 re- 
covered from the effects of the operation. Up to the end of 
1887 Billroth! is reported to have operated i8 times, saving 8 
patients for a longer or shorter time. One had lived five years. 
Winslow :[: has tabulated records of 61 cases, which he believes 
to be all the operations performed up to date of writing. Of these, 
16 recovered and 44 died ; in one case the result was unknown. 
Collapse was the chief cause of death, claiming 27 of all the 
cases. Peritonitis, pure and simple, is not a frequent termi- 
nation — a fact which speaks volumes for the technical skill of 
the operators. Four of Winslow's cases died of gangrene of 
the colon, and a fifth case has since been recorded. § In a large, 

* Wiener med. Woch., Nos. 23 and 24. t Obstet. Gaz. Cincin., Oct., 1887. 

X Amer. Journ. of Med. Sc., April., 1885. 

§ Lauenstein, Ccntralbl. fiir Chiriirgie, 1882, No. 9; March 28th, 1S85; and 
Feb. 2ist, 1885. Also, Rydygier, Ibid., March 28th, 1885. 



392 PYLORECTOMY. 

and as yet not fully reported, number of cases recurrence takes 
place a few months after operation. No case, according to 
Winslow, has lived longer than three years without signs of 
recurrence. Six cases of non-carcinomatous stricture have been 
recorded, with three recoveries. In these, of course, recurrence 
is not to be expected. 

The most recent statistics are at once contradictory and un- 
promising. Mc Ardle*' has collected records of 70 operations — 
8 for simple stricture, 62 for cancer. Of the former, 5 recovered 
and 3 died; of the latter, 21 died directly from the operation, 
14 from peritonitis or septic absorption; "the remaining 27 made 
good recoveries, many of them being reported well four years 
after operation." It is a pity that, in this report, fuller details of 
the cases were not given; for then it might have been possible to 
explain the remarkable discrepancy with Butlin's painstaking 
studies,! which seem to demonstrate that, thus far, not one case 
of those which recovered from operation can be claimed to have 
been really cured of the disease. 

With these results before us, we must admit that if pylo- 
rectomy is to be considered anything more than a mere 
" surgical exercise," it is to be contemplated only in a very 
carefully selected class of cases. If the patient is not in fairly 
good condition, if the stomach is greatly dilated, if the growth 
is large, fixed and displaced, the operation ought not to be con- 
templated. And, even when the obverse conditions are present, 
it is doubtful if it could ever be a surgeon's duty to advise the 
operation ; he ought to undertake it only at the patient's urgent 
request, and after fully and honestly explaining to him the 
hazardous risk which he undergoes. 



THE OPERATION. 

Before operation, the stomach must be thoroughly cleansed 
by irrigation through a stomach-tube. If there is fermentation 
of the gastric contents, an antiseptic such as boro-glyceride 
should be used in the solution. A final cleansing should be 

* Dithlin Jotirn. Med. Sc, June, 1887. t Operat. Surg, of Malig. Dis., page 221. 



PARIETAL INCISION. 393 

carried out not more than two hours before operation ; and the 
whole of the fluid should be removed, so as to have the stomach 
empty at the operation. It is unwise to operate if the stomach 
is greatly distended, for an over-dilated stomach must be badly 
nourished and intolerant of operative interference. The amount 
of distension may be readily ascertained by percussion after a 
seidlitz powder has been administered in separate draughts — 
one draught containing the acid and the other the alkali. 

The operation may be described in successive stages : the 
incision in the parietes ; the isolation of the pylorus ; its resec- 
tion ; and the closing of the wound in the stomach, and the 
uniting of the duodenum to it. 

The Parietal Incision. — Various lines of incision have been 
recommended. Pean and Rydygier used vertical incisions — the 
former in the middle line, the latter a little to the right of it. 
Others have employed incisions more or less oblique, or almost 
transverse, Billroth and Wolfler made their incisions almost 
transverse, and most other surgeons have followed their example. 
It is evident that the greatest space for manipulation will be 
secured by an opening made in the line of the long axis of the 
stomach, and the pylorus ought to be very near the middle of 
this opening. If the pylorus has sunk low down in the abdomen, 
Wolfler recommends that it should be elevated before the in- 
cision is made. This would undoubtedly give the full benefit to 
the operator of the relaxation of parts which permits of the 
descent of the organ. 

The first incision, made over the pylorus in the line of the long 
axis of the stomach, need be no more than two inches in length. 
Through this small opening the pylorus is thoroughly explored, 
and a decision is come to as to the possibility of removing it, 
and the best course in which to prolong the incision to accom- 
plish removal. Before prolonging the incision (best done with 
scissors), a sponge is placed inside the abdomen to collect any 
blood that may escape. The bleeding may be somewhat free, 
but it is easily controlled by forci-pressure. The whole length 
of the incision will be from three to five inches. There 
is no objection to making a second incision at right angles to 



394 PYLORECTOMY. 

the first, if the subsequent steps of the operation will thereby 
be facilitated. 

Isolation of the Pylorus. — The stomach is lifted up to the wound, 
and the growth carefully examined, to determine the amount of 
tissue which has to be removed. The great omentum is first 
divided close to the greater curvature, and over as little area as 
is possible consistently with complete removal of the growth. 
The omentum is caught up in successive portions between pairs 
of pressure forceps, and divided between them. Ligatures are 
applied behind the forceps attached to the omentum, and the 
forceps are removed. Morris suggests that " double ligatures 
may be passed with an aneurism needle at short intervals 
through the portions of the omentum to be divided, and the 
section made after the ligatures are tightened." The same 
proceeding is carried out with the lesser omentum. Any en- 
larged lymphatic gland may now be removed. If the pylorus 
is low down and adherent, the danger of wounding the trans- 
verse meso-colon, and so causing gangrene of the bowel, must 
be borne in mind. To avoid this risk, Lauenstein has made 
a suggestion to peel the peritoneum off the posterior surface of 
the pylorus ; but this is scarcely advisable in malignant disease. 

When the portion to be removed has been freed from its 
connections, one or more large flat sponges are placed under it, 
so as to raise it up through the parietal opening. Other sponges 
are packed around, covering and protecting every portion of 
exposed peritoneum, and so rendering the operation as nearly 
extra-peritoneal as may be. 

Resection of the Diseased Structures. — The walls of the stomach 
are best divided by successive cuts with a scissors. Bleeding 
vessels are ligatured as they are divided. The direction of the 
incision is guided by the shape of the growth : but the mode of 
its completion will depend on where it is intended to insert the 
duodenum into the divided end of the stomach. If there is 
much dilatation of the stomach, Wolfler's advice, to insert the 
duodenum close to the greater curvature, will be followed. 
In this case, the upper section of the stomach-walls may be at 
once sutured before completing the removal of the diseased 



FIXING DUODENUM TO STOMACH. 395 

mass. In his later operations Billroth, in lessening the calibre 
of the divided end of the stomach so as to fit the small opening 
of the duodenum, does not divide the mucous membrane at the 
end of the incision, but removes a V-shaped flap composed only 
of peritoneum and muscular coat. The edges of this gap are 
brought together by stitches, which do not include the mucous 
membrane, this layer being bent inwards towards the cavity of 
the viscus. Threads placed in the peritoneal coats prior to 
complete division insure that there is no rotation of stomach 
or duodenum, and that they are united in their natural 
planes. No definite instructions applicable to every case 
can be laid down : the lines of division, the sites of appo- 
sition, and the mode of suturing, must be decided upon by 
the operator. 

When the stomach is opened, any extravasated contents 
are at once absorbed by a sponge. A suitable sponge may be 
temporarily placed in the duodenum. 

Sutimng the Duodenum to the Stomach. — The opening of the 
stomach being larger than that of the duodenum, two sets of 
sutures will be necessary — one for uniting the duodenum to the 
stomach, the other for closing the opening in the stomach 
itself. Circumstances must determine at the time whether it is 
better first to suture the superfluous gap in the stomach, or first 
to insert the duodenum into the space retained for it. Probably, 
in most cases, part of each proceeding will be finished before 
concluding the whole of either. 

Wolfler's suggestion, that as many sutures as possible be 
placed from the inside, is a valuable one. The lips of the 
incision are inverted, so as to bring peritoneal surfaces into 
contact, and the first rows of stitches are inserted and tied 
from the mucous aspect. As the openings are gradually closed, 
it will become less easy to place these inner sutures, and then 
the double row must be inserted from without. About a third 
or more of the suturing may be done partly from the inside and 
partly from the outside ; the rest must be done entirely from 
the outside. However applied, the sutures are essentially the 
Czerny-Lembert. At the part where the transverse line of 



396 PYLORECTOMY. 

sutures in the duodenum meets the longitudinal line in the 
stomach, a few extra stitches should be inserted. 

Nearly all operators have used the simple interrupted 
suture. Inserting and tying a double row of these, which 
must be very numerous — from forty to sixty, — necessarily 
occupies a great deal of time. I can see no objection to the 
employment of the continuous suture, interrupted, as Pollock 
suggests, after every four or five stitches. For the inner row, if 
inserted from the mucous aspect, the continuous suture would 
seem to be particularly suitable. 

Fine Chinese silk is the favourite suture-material : catgut 
has been used : but there is danger of its being absorbed before 
union is firm. The needles now proved to be most suitable for 
this and similar work on the intestines are straight, round 
milliner's needles, about an inch in length. For resection of 
the pylorus some thirty or forty needles should be provided. 

Ver}^ much of the detail must be decided upon at the time 
of operation, and not a little of it will be regulated by the 
habits and manipulative peculiarities of the surgeon. Few 
surgeons would undertake the operation without having per- 
formed it several times on the dead subject, and tested the 
efficiency of the suturing by injecting fluid into the stomach. 
More may be learnt in this way than by a great deal of 
reading. 

When the parts have been satisfactorily united, the sponges 
are removed, the peritoneum is carefully cleansed around the 
site of operation, and the incision in the parietes is closed over 
a sponge in the ordinary way. 

Aftev-treatment. — For the first day or two, or longer if the 
patient's strength will bear it, all food by the mouth is withheld, 
and strength is supported by nutrient enemas. The first 
nourishment ought to be peptonised milk or soup in small 
quantities. Meat has been given on the fifth day after oper- 
ation ; but if there is no urgency, it is wise not to incur 
any unnecessary risk by premature disturbance of the gastric 
wounds. 



Gastro-enterostomy. 

This operation is the estabHshment of a permanent fistula 
between the stomach and some part of the small intestine. 
Gastro-duodenostomy means, more specifically, the making of a 
fistula between stomach and duodenum ; gastro-jejunostom}^, 
between stomach and jejunum. 

History. — Wolfler of Vienna first performed the operation on 
September 27th, 1881. He began with the intention of per- 
forming pylorectomy for cancer ; and finding the operation 
impracticable on account of adhesions to the pancreas, he 
performed gastro-enterostomy. The patient lived four months. 
Billroth and Lauenstein followed, each with one case, in the 
same year. 

Conditions for which the Operation may be Performed. — -In its 
original conception, gastro-enterostomy was intended as a 
substitute for pylorectomy in cases where that operation was 
impracticable. In some cases, however, it appeared as a rival 
of the radical proceeding. Rydygier and Monastryski per- 
formed gastro-enterostomy for cicatricial stenosis, and here it 
may be considered as a substitute for divulsion. 

Generally speaking, gastro-duodenostomy may be considered 
as an operation possible for any form of pyloric obstruction, 
malignant or non-malignant. In non-malignant stricture, it 
ought not to be performed until dilatation has failed. In malig- 
nant stricture it may be regarded both as a rival of, and as a 
substitute for, pylorectomy. As being a less serious operation 
than pylorectomy, and as being feasible in a greater number of 
cases, it has a wider field. Even in cases where pylorectomy is 
possible it may be argued that gastro-enterostomy, by giving a 
greater probable chance of immediate recovery and a not greatly 
diminished likelihood of prolongation of life, is the better 
operation for cancer of the pylorus. 

Appreciation and Mortality. — We have not sufficient grounds 
on which to base conclusions as to the value of the operation. 



398 GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 

So far tlie actual results have not been quite up to expectation. 
Winslow''' collected 13 cases of operation, of which 9 died. 
Eight operations have been performed in Billroth's Clinic, with 
5 deaths. The longest survival after operation for cancer up to 
date was in a case operated on by Barker of King's College, 
London, where the patient lived one year and one week. 
Rockwitzt collected 22 cases. Complete cures were got in 2 
cases of simple stricture ; 5 were alive at periods between one 
and seven months ; 4 recovered from the operation, but died in 
a few weeks; in the remaining 11 (50 per cent.) the operation 
greatly hastened the patient's death. Since Rockwitz wrote, 
Postempski of Rome:]: has had a success; and Ransohoff§ has 
operated successfully, using decalcified bone plates. Mr. H. 
Pagelj has collected 36 cases (the two preceding are omitted or 
overlooked), of which 20 recovered. The mortality is less over 
its first cases than was that of pylorectomy ; but still, it is very 
large. Five died of collapse. Two died of kinking of the bowel 
at the site of junction to the stomach. Haemorrhage, peritonitis, 
and exhaustion are among the other causes of death. 

It is right to say that most of the operations have been per- 
formed under conditions less favourable than pylorectomy has 
had. Probably if the operation were performed earlier, it would 
have better results. As it offers less beneficent results than 
pylorectomy, it ought under similar conditions to be less fatal. 
Time alone will show whether it will be so. 



THE OPERATION. 

The parietal incision, in most of the cases, has been a trans- 
verse or slightly oblique one along the free margins of the right 
ribs. Barker, however,^ in his very successful case used a median 
incision from just below the ensiform cartilage to the left side of 

* Amei: Jonni. Med. Sc, April, 1885. 

t Deutsche Zeit.f. Ghiv., June 22nd, 1887. \ Sperimcntale, August, 1887. 

§ Polyclinic, Phila., Feb., 1889. 

II Meeting Roy. Med. Chir. Soc, May 14th, 18S9. 

^f Brit. Med. Jouvn., Feb. 13th, 1886. 



THE OPERATION. 399 

the umbilicus. The direction of the incision matters little, if 
sufficient room is provided for manipulation. 

The stomach being exposed (it will have been previously 
cleansed and emptied), a suitable piece of intestine is fixed upon 
to attach to the stomach-wall. Prime regard is to be paid to 
the facility with which the bowel can be co-aptated to the 
stomach, and not so much to the physiological importance of 
having the junction made at as high a point in the bowel as 
possible. It will rarely be easy, without unduly dragging on 
the parts, to bring any part of the duodenum into contact with 
the stomach ; and the same may be said of the first six inches 
or so of the jejunum. If the great omentum is torn through, 
apposition is more easily effected in the highest part of the 
bowel. But as two deaths already have occurred from kinking 
of the gut, bringing it through an artificially made opening in 
the omentum is not to be recommended. The whole omentum, 
with the transverse colon, might be turned upwards, and the 
posterior surface of the stomach thus exposed might be united 
to the end of the duodenum or the beginning of the jejunum. 
But this is not an easy proceeding. Barker's proceeding of 
carrying the bowel round the edge of the omentum seems on 
the whole to be the best — at least, where the omentum is not 
very large. 

The omentum is pushed to the left, and the first part of the 
jejunum is caught in the fingers and drawn to the surface. The 
middle of the anterior wall of the stomach is also drawn out of 
the wound, and both are supported by packing warm carbolized 
sponges around. On the loop of intestine two spring clamp- 
forceps, such as Makins used for resection of the bowel, may 
now be placed about three inches apart, after all intestinal 
contents have been gently squeezed out between them. An 
assistant holds and manipulates the bowel by means of these. 
Barker used two pieces of rubber tubing carried through the 
mesentery for this purpose. The gut and stomach are now laid 
together at the points where the openings are to be made, and a 
longitudinal fold of the latter, with the empty bowel, is pinched 
up between the finger and thumb. An incision about an inch 



400 GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 

and a half long is made in the wall of the stomach, and a 
corresponding one in the approximated gut. This incision may 
be made completely through the walls of the viscera, or, accord- 
ing to Barker's excellent plan, only through the serous and 
muscular coats. By this method the most important part of 
the suturing may be carried out before the stomach or bowel is 
opened. I quote his words : " Still holding the parts, as before, 
between finger and thumb, I now united the posterior edges of 
the wound by a continuous suture, the needle entering and 
emerging in each case between nmcous and muscular coats, 
and the threads crossing the cut edges of the muscular and 
serous coats. In this way the serous surfaces were closely 
united from end to end before either viscus was opened. The 
row of stitches (which were about an eighth of an inch apart) 
was carried about a quarter of an inch beyond each end of the 
incision in the coats of the bowel. The moment had now come 
to open both the stomach and intestine completely; and this 
was done with a stroke of the scissors through the mucous coat 
in each case, special sponges being ready to receive any fluid 
which might escape. After careful cleansing, the anterior 
borders of both openings were now united by a row of inter- 
rupted fine silk sutures, introduced according to Czerny's 
method. When this was completed, the two openings were 
securely closed ; but, as an extra precaution, the intestine was 
turned over, and the posterior suture was reinforced by a second 
row of interrupted sutures, placed about a quarter of an inch 
away from the first. The anterior row was then similarly rein- 
forced by a row of continuous sutures, taking up, as before, 
only the serous and muscular tunics." This description I 
believe to represent the most perfect technique of the operation 
which has yet been carried out. 

It would be wrong to conclude a description of the mode of 
performing this operation without referring to the results of the 
highly valuable experiments of Senn of Milwaukee.* These 
show that the use of decalcified and perforated bone plates are 
of great value in the artificial formation of intestinal anas- 
* Trans Internat. Med. Congress, vol. i., p. 460 



INTESTINAL ANASTOMOSIS. 401 

tomosis, and suggest other improvements, which, in the absence 
of a sufficient number of operations on the human subject, it 
would be out of place here to fully describe. As, however, 
from the highly favourable results of his numerous experiments, 
the rapidity with which the operation could be performed, and 
the palpable soundness of the physiological processes, it would 
be quite proper to put Senn's method in practice in human 
beings, I shall give a short resume of his method. It is equally 
applicable to all parts of the intestinal tract ; the operation — 
gastro-enterostomy, jejuno-ileostomy, ileo-ileostomy, ileo-colos- 
tomy, colo-colostomy — whatever it may anatomically be, is 
practically the same. 

After shutting off the general lumen from the part to be 
operated upon, two longitudinal incisions are made through the 
walls of the viscera to be approximated. The best incision is a 
longitudinal one on the convex aspect of the bowel most dis- 
tant from the mesenter}', the length in dogs being from an inch 
and a-half to two inches, corresponding to one from two to two 
and a-half inches in human beings. The stomachic incision, if 
the operation is gastro-enterostomy, is of equal length : through 
the two incisions oval-shaped perforated decalcified bone plates, 
with four threads attached, one thread near to each end of 
the oval ; the other two at the sides of the perforation. The 
lateral threads perforate all the coats of the bowel. (Fig. 52.) 
Silk was the material preferred for the threads. The two plates 
were approximated b}' tying the threads, the knots being buried 
between the serous surfaces. The plates then held fir-mly in 
contact and at perfect rest two large areas of serous s^irface, 
which quickly became agglutinated and united by organised 
tissue. The decalcified plates soon broke up or dissolved in the 
stomachic and intestinal fluids, and the opening was established. 
The perforations in the plates in the meanwhile prevented danger 
from intestinal obstruction. 

The directions given for preparing the bone plates are as 
follows. It must be remembered that these were for emploj'ment 
in dogs, and that they must be of greater size for use in the 
human subject. " The compact layer of an ox's femur or tibia 

27 



402 



GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



is cut with a fine saw into oval plates one-fourth of an inch in 
thickness, two and one-half to three inches in length, and an 
inch in width. The plates are then decalcified in a ten per cent, 
solution of hydrochloric acid, changed every twenty-four hours 
until they have become sufficiently soft, and can be bent in any 
direction without fracturing. After decalcification, they are 




Fig. 52. 



Diagram shonnng the employment of perforated bone-plates in 

the formation of Intestinal Anastomosis. The dotted 

outlines shotv the limits of the plates. 

washed by letting water flow over them from three to six hours, 
so as to remove the acid. The plates are then covered with 
porous paper, and compressed between thin pieces of tin until 
they are perfectly dry. If, during the process of drying, the 
plates are not compressed between two smooth surfaces, they 
become disturbed by warping. The hardened plates are next 
drilled several times in a straight line in the centre, and the 
openings enlarged and connected with a file until the opening is 
five-eighths of an inch in length, and about one-eighth to one- 



DUODEN OSTOMY. 403 

sixth of an inch in width. The sharp margins of the plate and 
perforation are removed with a file. With a fine drill four per- 
forations for the sutures are made near the margins of the oblong 
perforation — one at each end, and one at each side. For preser- 
vation, the plates are kept in absolute alcohol. When the plates 
are to be used they are washed in a two per cent, solution of 
carbolic acid, and the threads or sutures attached by threading 
two fine sewing needles each with a piece of aseptic silk twenty- 
four inches in length, which are tied together." The needles 
are used to perforate the walls of the viscus at the margins of 
the opening, and the plates are approximated and tied. For 
further details, the reader is referred to Senn's report. In the 
meantime, the educated surgeon will be prepared tO apply his 
knowledge in any suitable case ; and it will be proper that he 
should approach any case in which the formation of intestinal 
anastomosis may be contemplated with an assorted supply of 
perforated bone plates preserved in alcohol. 

The abdomen is cleansed and the parietal wound closed in 
the ordinary way. The after-treatment need in no way differ 
from that of other operations upon the stomach. 

Duodenostoniy. — This is the establishment of a duodenal fistula 
through which nourishment is passed into the bowel. It is per- 
formed as a mode of relief in cases of pyloric stenosis, under 
circumstances similar to those for which gastro-enterostomy is 
carried out. The operation has not been done often. Langen- 
buch of Berlin performed the first operation, in 1879; and 
Robertson, Southam, and a few others have operated in recent 
years. None of the reported cases have recovered. Two of 
them have been performed for cicatricial stenosis, and would 
probably have been better treated by forcible dilatation. 

The operation is found practically not to be so difficult as 
might be expected. In health, it would scarcely be possible to 
bring the duodenum up to the abdominal wound ; but, in disease, 
the attachments of the duodenum are stretched, and the bowel 
is usually displaced downwards with the dilated stomach, so 
that it can without much difficulty be brought to the surface. 
Langenbuch and Southam performed the operation in two 

27 * 



404 JEJUNOSTOMY. 

stages — postponing the opening of the bowel for seven and 
three days respectively. The principles of operation are essen- 
tially the same as in gastrostomy for stricture of the oesophagus, 
and need not be again repeated. 

Jejunostomy. — This is the same proceeding as duodenostoni)^, 
carried out for a similar purpose, onl}' a little lower down in the 
bowel, where it is less closely attached and more easily drawn 
to the surface. Pearce Gould, Golding-Bird, Ogston, and 
others have performed the operation in England. Ogston's 
case was ver}'^ successful ; the others were failures. A few 
scattered cases are recorded ; but the operation is still in its 
infancy, and little can be said about it. It seems theoretically 
to be a better operation than duodenostomy, as regards facility 
of performance : as regards the worth of it, as offering an 
opening for the supply of food, there is probably little to choose 
between them. 

If in any case in which pylorectomy was contemplated, and 
found, after making the parietal incision, to be impracticable, it 
is still considered advisable to give the patient a chance of 
prolongation of life, then I believe that the choice lies between 
gastro-enterostomy and jejunostomy. If the patient is fairly 
strong and is bearing the operation well, gastro-enterostomy 
might be selected ; if it appears advisable to shorten the pro- 
ceeding as much as possible, jejunostomy is substituted. 

The operation requires no special description. The jejunum 
may be found by pushing aside the omentum, and is drawn to 
the surface, sutured to the abdominal wall and opened, either at 
once or later on, as in gastrostomy. The value of peptonised 
foods in the subsequent treatment of the case is likely to be 
conspicuous. 

Gastrectomy, or total extirpation of the stomaceh, was begun 

in 1883 by Connor of Cincinnati,* but was not completed, as 

the patient died on the table. He intended, after removing the 

stomach, to unite the cardia to some part of the small intestine. 

* Phila. Med. News, Nov. 22nd, 1884. 



GASTRECTOMY. 405 

He says nothing as to how the vitaHty of the colon is to be 
provided for, and produces insufficient evidence to show that 
the operation is either feasible or proper. 

Partial Gastrectomy, for cases where a malignant growth is 
situated in the walls of the stomach away from the pylorus or 
cardia, would seem to be a proceeding easier than pylorectomy, 
and likely to be followed by greater success. So far as I know, 
the operation has not yet been performed. 

Intubation of the Pylorus, for stenosis, has been carried out by 
Hahn of Berlin. He performed gastrostomy, then carried a tube 
through the stenosed pylorus into the duodenum, and left it 
there. The patient lived three weeks. Forcible dilatation would 
now, in all probability, be preferably adopted. 



Section VII 



OPERATIONS ON THE INTESTINES. 



SURGICAL AND TOPOGRAPHICAL ANATOMY. 

There is no definite topography of the small intestines, except 
at their extremities. Treves* as a result of careful examina- 
tions in one hundred bodies, came to the conclusion that accu- 
rate localisation was quite impossible. In the majority of adult 
bodies the following arrangement was found : " The small in- 
testine is disposed in an irregularly curved manner from left to 
right. The gut, starting from the duodenum, will first occupy 
the contiguous parts of the left side of the epigastric and 
umbilical regions ; the coils then fill some part of the left 
hypochondriac and umbilical regions ; they now commonly 
descend into the pelvis, reappear in the left iliac quarter, and 
then occupy in order the hypogastric, lower umbilical, right 
* The Anatomy of the Intestinal Canal and Peritoneum in Man. Lond., 1885. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 407 

lumbar, and right iliac regions. Before reaching the latter 
situation they commonly descend again into the pelvis." 

Special interest attaches to a knowledge of the parts of bowel 
which usually occupy the pelvis. It is not till some three or 
four years after birth that the pelvis begins to accommodate 
intestine. According to Treves, the parts usually found in the 
pelvis of an adult "belong to the terminal point of the ileum, 
and to that part of the intestine which has the longest mesen- 
tery — the part, namely, which extends between two points, 
respectively six and eleven feet from the end of the duodenum. 
It is not, therefore, uncommon to find loops lying together in 
contact with the pelvic floor that are in reality some twelve or 
fourteen feet apart." 

An examination of some twenty bodies, with a view to fixing 
the topography of the bowels, convinced the writer that the 
variations were too great to be of value in practical surgery. 
The average disposition, as described by Treves, though for the 
majority of cases probably correct, is yet liable to so many 
variations in individuals, that rules of practice cannot with 
safety be based upon it. 

The attachments of the mesentery have some surgical 
importance. (Fig. 53.) In localising a certain portion of bowel, 
and ascertaining the direction of it from duodenum to caecum, 
it may be of assistance to remember that the right layer of the 
mesentery is also its upper layer, and the left layer the lower. 
The upper layer is continuous with the lower layer of the trans- 
verse meso-colon, and also with the peritoneum which invests 
the ascending colon. The lower layer is continued over the 
descending colon, forms the mesentery of the sigmoid flexure, 
and descends into the pelvis. When the abdomen is not dis- 
tended, the length of the mesentery is such that any part of the 
small intestine can easily be raised up through an opening in 
the abdominal wall near the umbilicus. When the abdomen is 
distended, it may be impossible to bring certain portions of 
bowel through a median incision. Normally, according to 
Treves, the bowel cannot be dragged down below the level of 
the spine of the pubes. In elderly women with lax parietes the 



408 



OPERATIONS OF THE INTESTINES. 




Fig 53- (Gray's Anatomy, nth Ed. 



Diagram devised by Dr. DeUpine to show the lines along zchich the Peritoneum 
leaves the Wall of the Abdometi to invest the Viscera. 



I. Peritoneum. 2. Extra-peritoneal Tissue. 3. Diaphragmatic end of Gastro-hepatic 
Omentum. 4. Gastro-piirenic Ligament. 5. Gastro-splenic Omentum. 6. Foramen of 
Winslow. 7. Duodenum (ist part). 8. Costo-colic Ligament. 9. Dot between two Anterior 
Layers 01 Great Omentum. 10. Transverse Meso-colon. 11. Bare surface for Descending 
Colon. 12. The two layers of the Mesentery Proper. 13 Bare surface for Ascending Colon. 
14. Sigmoid Meso-colon. 15. Bare Surface for Caecum. 16. Meso-rectum. 17. Bare surface 
for 2nd part of Rectum. 18. Left Lateral False Ligament cf Bladder. 19. Vena Cava Inferior. 
20. CEsophagus. 21. Right Phrenic Artery. 22. Coronary Artery. 23. Hepatic Artery. 
24. Splenic Artery. 25. Pancreas. 26. Inferior Pancreatico-duodenal Artery. 27. Colica Media. 
28. Superior Mesenteric. 29. Duodenum (3rd part). 30. Aorta. 31. Duodenum (2nd part). 
32. Right and Left Kidneys. 33. Superior Mesenteric. 34. Aorta. 35. Colica Sinistra. 
36. Colica Dextra. 37. Vasa Intestini. 38. Sigmoid Artery. 39. Sup. Haemorrhoidal Artery. 
40. Common Iliac Artery. 41. Internal Iliac Artery. 42. External Iliac Artery. 43. Epigastric 
Artery. 44. Bladder. 45. Right Lateral Ligament of Liver. 46. Falciform Ligament of 
Liver. 47. Left Lateral Ligament of Liver. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 409 

mesentery is long, and the bowels are permitted greater freedom 
of range. 

The topography of the large bowel is more definite. With 
respect to the caecum, Treves's investigations have shown the 
existence of very general misconception.^' It is generally held 
that the posterior surface of the caecum is uncovered by peri- 
toneum, and is attached by areolar tissue to the iliac fascia, thus 
bespeaking the existence of a meso-caecum. Treves found, on 
the contrary, that the caecum was always entirely enveloped by 
peritoneum, and lay free in the abdominal cavity ; that there 
was no sign of a meso-caecum ; and that it usually lay upon the 
psoas muscle, so placed that its lowest point projected beyond the 
inner border of that muscle. In the great majority of instances, 
the apex of the caecum will be found to correspond with a point 
a little to the inner side of the middle of Poupart's ligament. 
The lower limit of the reflexion of the peritoneum from the under 
surface of the caecum to the posterior surface of the abdominal 
wall — in other words, the lower border of the ascending meso- 
colon is a little below the level of the superior crest of the ilium. 

The direction of the ascending and the descending colon is 
vertical, and the transverse colon lies almost horizontally 
between them. The splenic flexure is higher than the hepatic, 
and lies deeper in the abdomen. And the transverse colon very 
frequently takes a bend downwards. These bends sometimes 
descend a considerable distance, occasionally reaching the 
pubes ; but they rarely get below the level of the crests of the 
ilia. They are sometimes quite acute, forming V-shaped curves. 

Of much surgical importance is the disposition of the ascend- 
ing and descending meso-colon. It is generally supposed that a 
meso-colon is more common on the right side than on the left, 
and this is often quoted as an argument in favour of left lumbar 

* Although it has very recently been shown (Matas, in New Orleans Med. 
and Surg. Journal, Dec, 1887) that twenty-five years before Treves wrote, 
Bardeleben and Luschka insisted on the fact that the ca:cum is completely 
surrounded by peritoneum, and several German anatomists maintained the 
same view, I have preferred to leave the text as it was printed in the first 
edition, if only to show that, so far as we in England have been instructed, 
Treves's studies deserve to be considered as discoveries. 



410 OPERATIONS ON THE INTESTINES. 

colotomy. Treves found the reverse to be the case. "In fifty- 
two (out of a hundred) bodies there was neither an ascending 
nor a descending meso-colon. In twenty-two there was a 
descending meso-colon, but no trace of a corresponding fold on 
the other side. In fourteen subjects there was a meso-colon to 
both the ascending and the descending segments of the bowel ; 
while, in the remaining twelve bodies, there was an ascending 
meso-colon, but no corresponding fold on the left side. It 
follows, therefore, that in performing lumbar colotomy a meso- 
colon may be expected upon the left side in 36 per cent, of all 
cases, and on the right side in 26 per cent." 

It may perhaps be right to remark, that some indefiniteness 
must be admitted as to the existence or not of an ascending or 
descending meso-colon. A collapsed gut may have a well- 
marked meso-colon, when a distended gut would have none. 
As the bowel empties, the peritoneal layers fall together behind 
it ; while, as it is filled, they are pushed apart, and the intestine 
becomes sessile. It will be found that a dilating colon borrows 
more of its investing peritoneum from behind, where the areolar 
tissue is lax, than from the front, where it is more firmly 
adherent. 

The left meso-colon is usually attached along the outer 
border of the kidney, and is vertical. The right meso-colon 
is not quite vertical, but " crosses the lower end of the kidney 
from right to left, and then ascends along the inner border of 
the gland " (Treves). 

In surgical operations on the intestines, it is impossible to 
ignore the great omentum. Rarely is it found conforming to 
the anatomical descriptions of it — spread out like an apron over 
the bowels. In many cases it is never seen, being placed high 
up, coiled or folded upon itself. In other cases it lies entirely 
on one side of the abdomen, usually the left. It may be twisted 
up like a rope, or spread out in one part and contracted in 
another ; frequently it is adherent to bowel or parietes ; some- 
times it is partly embedded among the intestines. It may be 
thin and translucent or even cribriform, or it may be very thick 
and laden with fat. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 411 

The free anastomosis of the intestinal vessels in the peri- 
toneum has as much surgical significance on the one hand, as 
their circular distribution in the intestinal walls on the other. 
Thus, though a piece of mesentery may be destroyed at a little 
distance from the bowel without impairing its vitality, the 
smallest portion of bowel left without its mesentery closely 
attached to it may, and probably will, die. 

A word must be said on the sigmoid flexure of the colon. 
Treves has shown that the curve which this part of the bowel 
describes is more of the shape of the Greek Q than the letter S. 
This omega-flexure has a well-marked mesentery. It usually 
lies wholly in the pelvis. When distended it rises out of the 
pelvis, reaching sometimes as high as the umbilicus, and, in 
cases of extreme distension, even to the liver. In this condition 
it is liable to become twisted upon itself, producing volvulus. 
Its more exact disposition does not here specially concern us. 

As bearing upon all operations on the intestines, and espe- 
cially on resection and suture, the anatomical structure of the 
intestinal coats and the mode of attachment of the tube to the 
mesentery are of supreme importance. The following state- 
ments are based upon the elaborate studies of William S. 
Halsted of New York;* also upon notes by Mr. Anderson of 
St. Thomas's Hospital,! and upon some observations made by 
myself. As they, in some respects, modify or contradict generally 
accepted views, they must be given with some degree of fulness. 

Firstly, as to the structure of the internal coats. Fig. 54 is 
copied from Halsted's paper. It "is a diagram of the dog's 
intestine, and is intended to represent accurately the thickness 
of the several coats. The serosa is prolonged beyond the outer 
muscular coat to emphasise its thinness. Between the sub- 
mucosa and the glands of Lieberkiihn — in other words, between 
it and the lumen of the intestine — practically nothing intervenes; 
and, literally, nothing but the two layers of muscularis mucosae 
and fibrosa mucosae respectively. Fully two-thirds of the thick- 
ness of the wall of the intestine is mucous membrane. When 

* Internat. Journ. Med. Sc, Oct., 1887. 
t MacCormac's Abdominal Section, 1887, p. 25. 



412 



OPERATIONS ON THE INTESTINES. 



TUM f" 



the needle, therefore, has been passed through its outer third it 
must have entered the glands of Lieberkiihn, and, hence, the 
lumen of the gut. It is an easy matter to isolate the sub-mucosa. 
The outer muscular coats strip from it readily, and the mucous 
membrane can be rapidly scraped off with a knife. Thus 
obtained, the sub-mucosa is found to be an exceedingly tough 
fibrous membrane. It is air-tight and water-tight, and is the 
* skin ' in which sausage-meat is stuffed. It is, moreover, the 
coat of the intestine from which ' catgut ' is made. 

"A needle, on being pushed vertically through the walls of the 
intestine, meets with considerable resistance when it reaches the 

sub - mucosa, and 
still greater re- 
sistance is en- 
countered if it be 
attempted to pass 
the needle hori- 
zontally through 
its meshes. A 
delicate thread of 
this tissue is very 
much stronger and 
better able to hold 
a stitch than a 
coarse shred of the 
entire thickness 
of the muscular 
and serous coats." 
Practical experiments to test this point bore out these views. 
Halsted " soon discovered that, even to the sharpened end of a 
needle, sufficient resistance is offered by the sub-mucosa to be 
readily appreciable, and that it is possible and, with very little 
practice, not difficult to pick up at each stitch a thread-like 
piece of sub-mucosa without incurring the danger of passing 
into the lumen of the gut." 

Practical advantage of the toughness of this sub-mucosa may 
furthcx be taken by picking up portions of it in stitches, carefully 




-vM 



Fig. 54. 
Diagram of Section of Dog's Intestine. 

P, Peritoneum ; L, Longitudinal Muscular Coat ; C, Cir- 
cular Muscular Coat; S, Sub-mucosa; mm, Muscularis, 
mucosae ; L, Glands of Lieberkiihn. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 413 

placed so as to pierce it some distance apart, and making 
traction on the sutures. This raises a ridge on the serous 
aspect of the gut, which at once marks the line in which the 
co-aptating sutures should be placed, and by raising the tissue to 
the needle, greatly facilitates the introduction of the individual 
sutures. I have endeavoured to show this in the diagram 
accompanying the description of enterorraphy. 

As to the disposition of the mesentery around the gut, we 
must not forget that it is not a complete envelope, but leaves a 
portion of the lumen, averaging about five-sixteenths of an inch 
in width (Anderson), for which the outer covering is the mus- 
cular. The divergence of the layers of mesentery begins at a 
distance varying from two-thirds to three-fourths of an inch 
from the wall of the gut, and we thus get a triangular space, 
filled with fat, intestinal vessels and lymphatics, bounded by 
mesentery on two sides and bowel on the third. The arterial 
loops to supply the intestines lying in this space come to within 
a third of an inch of the gut, closer in the lower portion of the 
ileum than in the jejunum. From these loops ane given off the 
straight vessels, which pass directly, on each side of the inter- 
space, to supply the bowel. It is evident that the anastomosing 
loops should be injured as little as possible, if the vitality of the 
bowel is to be assured ; triangular resection of the mesentery 
should therefore be, as far as possible, avoided. The layers of 
the mesentery at their attachment to the bowel are very lax and 
easily drawn together by purse-string sutures, so that they need 
not be in the way, even if they are left behind ; while, as will be 
pointed out further on, they may be employed to give breadth 
and solidity to the intestinal union at a point where it has been 
found that it most frequently gives wa}'. 



Laparotomy for Intestinal Obstruction. 

The relief of intestinal obstruction by Laparotomy is, in 
most cases, of the nature of a herniotomy. If we regard an 
ordinary hernial sac as an artificial diverticulum of the ab- 
dominal cavity, and if the sac is opened during operation, we 
may regard such as an abdominal section. In intestinal hernia 
we operate without full knowledge of the site and nature of the 
obstruction ; it is not visible, very rarely tangible, and, in many 
cases, can only be inferred with a high degree of probability 
from rational symptoms. 

History. — The question of operative treatment in intestinal 
obstruction has been discussed for centuries. It is doubtful if 
the Greeks or Romans performed the operation. Le Clerc, in 
his History of Medicine, tells us that Praxagoras advised lapar- 
otomy in cases of volvulus * or intussusception ; and even 
incision into the gut to allow the faeces to escape, when the gut 
should be sewn up and the abdominal wound closed. This is 
certainly very advanced treatment ; but it is more than 
doubtful if it was ever carried out. Praxagoras was very 
fond of the use of emetics in intestinal obstruction : they did 
good, no doubt, by relieving the distended viscera of fluids and 
gas, just as Kussmaul's treatment does by the repeated use of 
the stomach-pump. The injection of air per anum had been in 
use since the days of Hippocrates. In later times bleeding was, 
of course, in constant requisition. 

In more recent times, Bonet, who edited Barbette's work, 
writes a foot-note to his remarks on volvulus, that he has known 
an operation performed for volvulus with success. I find the 

* Up till comparatively recent times the term Volvulus was made to 
include all varieties of Intestinal Obstruction. The word is simply the Latin 
equivalent of the Greek ejAeJs : the iliac, rolling or twisting passion, also 
known as " miserere mei." The word has a purely subjective meaning, and 
has no relation to pathological anatomy. The giving of an anatomical 
significance to the word "volvulus" is simply an example of the legion of 
modern medical linguistic barbarisms. 



■HISTORY. 415 

note quoted by M. Hevin, in a paper on " Gastrotomy " in the 
Transactions of the Royal Academy of Surgery of Paris, vol. 4, 1768 : 
" The baroness de Lanti, of Chatillon-sur-Seine, was nearly 
dead of an iliac passion. A young surgeon who had served in 
the army for a long time came forward, and promised recovery 
if the patient would submit to operation. He was allowed to 
operate. He pulled out a great deal of the intestine before he 
found the twist ; he freed it, nodos dissolvit, and returned it to its 
place. He sewed up the abdomen, and the wound healed nicely, 
and the patient recovered." The Baroness very properly settled 
a pension on this daring young surgeon, but he did not live long 
to enjoy it. Hevin considers that this may have been a case of 
hernia ; but it is difficult to see why he should have to undo 
twists, and stitch up the abdominal wall, for a herniotomy. No 
doubt can be cast on another case, recorded by Oesterdykins 
Schacht, in which Nuck was the counsellor of operation. In 
this case the exposed intestines were carefully covered by warm 
milk while the coils were unravelled, and the patient also 
recovered. Most authors of the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, with the notable exceptions of Hoffman and Felix 
Platerus, condemn the operation. Van Sweiten has been 
quoted as being favourable to Barbette's operation, and other 
names might be added. No doubt the operation was many 
times performed in the last two centuries, but with almost 
uniform failure ; and this may have prevented the operators, 
in the face of the very general condemnation which it received 
at the hands of the greatest men, from publishing their cases. 
M. Hevin himself, in the article quoted, is by no means in 
favour of operative proceeding. 

In the surgery of the present century, up to comparatively 
recent times, the operation had no history. It was either con- 
demned or ignored. And even at the present day, in spite of 
the great advances in abdominal surgery and the increased 
certitude of diagnosis, there are many medical men who would 
consider it no discredit to stand by with folded hands while a 
patient is dying of an unrelieved internal strangulation of the 
bowels. 



416 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 



CONDITIONS FOR WHICH OPERATION MAY BE PERFORMED. 

A full account of these conditions involves a description of 
all the forms of intestinal obstruction, with their differential and 
general diagnosis. The limits set to this work demand that 
such description be ver}^ short. And the need for it will not be 
felt by English readers, who have had provided for them the 
admirable manual by Treves on Intestinal Ohstniction. 

For clinical purposes, we may divide the forms of intestinal 
obstruction into Acute and Chronic : the one, where the symp- 
toms come on suddenly in a patient who has shown no previous 
symptoms of disease; the other, where the onset is more or less 
slow, or where there have been previous signs of intestinal 
disease. Thus classified, the varieties are : 

Acute, 

I. Strangulation by bands or through apertures. 
II. Volvulus. 

III. Intussusception. 

Chronic. 

IV. Stricture from disease in the walls of the gut, cica- 

tricial or neoplastic. 
V. Obstruction in the lumen : neoplasms, gall-stones, 

enteroliths, faeces, and foreign bodies generally. 
VI. Obstruction from compression outside by tumours, &c. 

I. Strangulation by Bands or through Apertures bears 
a close resemblance to ordinary hernia, not only in symptoms 
and causation, but also in treatment. The bowel is snared in 
an unyielding opening, which obstructs its lumen and strangu- 
lates its vessels. The small gut is nearly always implicated. 

Various forms of bands are described. 

(i) Isolated Bands of organised Inflammatovy Material — " peritoneal 
false ligaments," as they are called — are frequently the cause of 
strangulation. Such bands vary greatly in length, density, and 
thickness : sometimes they are round ; often they are flat. Not 



STRANGULATION BY BANDS. 417 

infrequently several such bands exist, and cases are recorded 
where strangulation took place simultaneously under two false 
ligaments. The attachments of these bands present an almost 
endless variety. Frequently one end is attached to the mesen- 
ter}^ the other being inserted into any part of the peritoneum. 
Strangulation takes place either by the bowel slipping under 
the band, in which case it must be comparatively short ; or by 
the bowel being caught in a twist or loop of the band, when it 
must be long. Sometimes obstruction is caused by the band 
dragging on the bowel, and so causing kinking. The modes of 
constriction are so bewilderingly varied, that it is impossible to 
classify them. 

(2) Bands or Cords of Omentum constitute another mode of con- 
striction. The omentum becomes adherent to some spot in the 
peritoneum ; the whole, or part of it, is rolled up or twisted into 
a cord, which constricts the bowel, just as peritoneal false 
ligaments do. Omental bands are usually thick and vascular. 
They are found attached to any site where omentum can reach ; 
and that is, practically, anywhere. But the}^ most frequently 
have an origin in some way connected with old herniae. Multiple 
cords and multiple constrictions are more common with omental 
than with peritoneal bands. The greater length and mobility 
of omental adhesions render strangulation through noose or knot 
a more likely occurrence than with the peritoneal bands. 

(3) Strangulation by Meckel's Diverticulum is of the nature of the 
preceding. Constriction may take place either when the diver- 
ticulum is attached to the umbilicus or when it has become 
adherent at some novel situation. In the former case, the tube 
may be wholly or partially obliterated. The diverticulum acts 
as a peritoneal or omental band by constricting gut which passes 
below it, or by forming loops in which the gut is snared. I have 
operated on a case where strangulation was caused by several 
coils of bowel passing between the abdominal wall and a par- 
tially obliterated Meckel's diverticulum. Mere dragging on the 
diverticulum, by causing kinking or setting up inflammation, 
may induce intestinal obstruction. False diverticula have not 
been found associated with the complaint. 

28 



418 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

(4) Strangulation by Normal Structures which have become ad- 
herent is also met with. Thus, the vermiform appendix, or the 
Fallopian tube, or the appendices epiploicse, or even the bowel 
and the mesentery itself, may all be causes of intestinal strangu- 
lation. I have operated on a case where it was difficult to say 
whether the obstruction was caused by kinking from draggmg 
on an old adhesion to the parietes, or by compression of a 
portion of bowel which passed over it. 

(5) Strangulation may take place through slits or holes in the 
mesentery, or the omentum, or even in such situations as the 
broad ligament of the uterus and the suspensory ligament of the 
liver. Strangulation by the gut becoming caught in the foramen 
of Winslow has been described. Mr. Treves* has operated on 
such a case, but found it impossible to effect reduction. About 
fifty examples of retro-peritoneal or mesenteric hernia, from 
the bowel getting entangled in the fossa duodeno-jejunalis, have 
been described. 

In the great majority of cases owning the above causes, the 
small bowel is the part involved, and in most of these the lower 
part of the ileum. The probability of site advances almost in 
geometrical progression from duodenum to caecum. The length 
of intestine strangulated ranges from a mere nipping of part of 
the calibre, to a capture of several feet. The average length is 
a little over a foot ; but the limits are so wide apart, that any 
average is misleading. 

The mechanism of obstruction is essentially the same as 
in external hernia. Simple entanglement, followed by con- 
gestion and partial or complete obstruction, will explain 
many cases ; others are completely strangulated from the 
outset ; a few, after the bowel has been caught and held for 
some time, undergo strangulation by a sudden and final twist 
or contortion. Senn's recent experiments show that in circu- 
lar constriction of the intestine the immediate cause of gan- 
grene is due to obstruction of the venous circulation, and 
takes place at a point most remote from the cause of the 
obstruction. 

* Lancet, Oct. 13, 1888. 



VOLVULUS. 419 

II. Volvulus is the name given to occlusion caused by 
torsion of the bowel, or rotation round its axis of attachment. 
In some cases, simple twisting is the cause ; in others, two 
suitable coils become mutually intertwined. Volvulus is found 
at the sigmoid flexure, in the caecum and ascending colon, and 
in the small intestine. 

(i) Volvulus of the Sigmoid Flexure about its mesenteric axis is 
the most common form; two -thirds of all cases are of this 
nature. The Q-shape of this part of the gut, the length and 
loose attachment of its mesentery, and its tendency to become 
overloaded and displaced by collections of faeces, explain its 
liability to volvulus. The bowel may be twisted once or twice, 
or even three times around its axis. In another class of cases 
the sigmoid loop, acting as a pedunculated tumour, becomes 
intertwined with a loop of small bowel, and induces strangula- 
tion of both. 

(2) Volvulus of the Cacum, or of the caecum and colon adjoining, 
is easily understood. Mere acute flexure of the caecum may 
block its passage ; in such cases, however, there is usually some 
congenital malformation. In rotation of the caecum upon 
itself, the colon is liable to be implicated, more especially if 
there is a long meso-colon. As with the sigmoid flexure, so 
here obstruction may be caused by the intertwining of small 
intestine. Volvulus of the ascending colon is rare, and usually 
depends on anatomical abnormality. Volvulus of the caecum 
may be subacute or chronic. I have treated with a medical 
colleague a case where, with only about half a rotation, there 
was enormous caecal distension ; the distended bowel occupied 
half the abdominal cavity. 

(3) Volvulus of the Small Intestine is rare. It may arise from the 
simple twisting of one coil, or from the intertwining of two 
loops. An abnormally long mesentery, as from an old hernia, is 
a predisposing cause. The simple twist is usually through one 
complete circle, and is most frequently from left to right. Vol- 
vulus by the intertwining of two loops is very rare. 

III, Intussusception or Invagination of the intestine 

28 * 



420 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

means the prolapse of a part of bowel into the lumen of the 
part adjoining. It is the most frequent single cause of intestinal 
obstruction, constituting more than one-third of all cases. The 
pathological anatomy of intussusception is well understood, and 
need not be dwelt upon. One portion of bowel catches another 
portion just above it, grasps it as if it were food, and pushes it 
along, invaginating more and more of it. The portion pushed 
inside, consisting of an entering and a returning layer placed 
peritoneum to peritoneum, is known as the intussusceptum. 
The sheath or containing bowel is known as the intussuscipiens. 
The neck is at the entrance of the invagination, where the 
sheath joins the returning layer. Rare varieties are met with 
where double or triple intussusceptions take place, where a 
second intussusception is invaginated in a first, or a third inside 
both. A retrograde invagination, where a descending invagina- 
tion is associated with an ascending one, is described. 

When invagination is complete, adhesions form between the 
opposed peritoneal surfaces of the entering and returning layers, 
and these after a time become so strong as to render reduction 
impossible. Mere invagination need not cause obstruction ; it 
is only when the opening in the intussusception becomes incurved 
by the dragging of the mesentery, or the walls become swollen 
from congestion or inflammation, that obstruction takes place. 
The invaginated portion, as a rule, undergoes inflammatory 
changes, which end in adhesion of the intestinal cylinders ; or 
have more pronounced results in rupture of vessels from intense 
congestion, causing discharge of blood by the rectum ; or even 
terminate in gangrene. Sloughing, with separation of the 
sphacelated portion, is found chiefly in cases of acute intussus- 
ception, though it is not uncommon in chronic cases. This 
sloughing, according to Senn, is caused by obstruction to the 
return of venous blood by constriction at the neck of the 
intussuscipiens. 

There is a curious connection between epithelioma and 
intussusception. Most probably the epithelioma was the origi- 
nator. The indurated mass gets caught in the bowel, is passed 
on as the apex of an intussusception, and there it continues 



STRICTURE. 421 

growing. It is, however, quite consistent with what we know 
of the origin of epithelioma that it should have started in the 
ulcerating areas of the chronic intussusception. 

Into the extremely interesting questions of the origin and 
cause of intussusception, I cannot here enter. I believe that 
many of the cases of acute colic produced by eating indigestible 
substances are intussusceptions which right themselves. The 
frequency of intussusception of the dying is much greater than 
is generally supposed ; if carefully looked for, at least one body 
out of four will show it on the post-mortem table. 

Intussusception may take place — (i) in the small bowel, (2) 
in the colon or rectum, or (3) in the ileo-csecal region. In the 
small bowel, it is found most frequently in the lower jejunum ; 
and next in frequency, though in the proportion of four to one, 
in the ileum. The narrow calibre of the small bowel prevents 
any considerable amount of invagination ; rarely is more than a 
foot engaged. 

Intussusception of the large bowel may occur at any part 
of its course. But it is not common, and when it does occur 
it is small, particularly in the rectum. 

The most common site of intussusception is in the ileo-caecal 
region. Two varieties are here met with — the ileo-caecal and 
the ileo-colic. In the former, the ileo-caecal valve forms the 
apex of the intussusception, and passes up the colon, followed 
by the caecum and the ileum. In the latter, the ileum, passing 
through the ileo-caecal valve, is invaginated up the colon. 
A rare and complicated variety is, where a primary invagina- 
tion of the end of the ileum is either passed through the 
valve into the colon, or invaginated into the colon along with 
the caecum. 

IV. Changes in the Substance of the Intestinal Wall 
may, by narrowing the lumen, be a cause of obstruction. Such 
changes may be of the nature of simple cicatricial stricture, or 
of new growths. 

(i) Simple Sfyicture is produced by cicatricial contraction 
of organised inflammatory material replacing an old ulcer, or 



422 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

loss of substance, or following any chronic inflammation. Ulcers 
may originate in enteric fever, dysentery, or catarrh ; peptic 
ulcer in the duodenum ; syphilis or phthisis. As originating in 
chronic inflammation, stricture is seen in its most typical form 
in bowel that had been engaged in an old hernia. Any injury 
to the bowel may result in cicatricial stricture. 

(2) Stricture may be caused by the development of new 
growths, malignant or benign. The malignant stricture is nearly 
always of the nature of epithelioma of the cylindrical variety ; 
scirrhus and encephaloid are almost unknown. Epithelioma 
typically appears as a hard band embedded in the wall of the 
intestine, and constricting its lumen as if by a tightly-drawn 
ligature. The constriction is not always annular ; sometimes it 
is in broad and diffused areas over a considerable portion of the 
intestinal wall. Thickening of the peritoneal and muscular 
coats is always present. Epithelioma of the intestine is practi- 
cally always single and localised, and the mesenteric glands are 
late in becoming affected. As existing in the rectum, within the 
reach of the exploring finger, and treated by a special operation 
— colotomy — the disease will again come under review. 

Sarcoma and lympho-sarcoma are rarely found as causes of 
obstruction. 

New growths of benign nature — such as, adenomata, tumours 
of pure fibrous tissue, or of fibrous and muscular tissue com- 
bined ; fatty and vascular growths ; and growths of a cystic 
nature* have all been known to cause obstruction : but they are 
by no means common. 

V. Obstruction by a Foreign Body blocking the lumen of 
the gut is sometimes found. In this class must be reckoned the 
accumulation of faeces. Foreign bodies swallowed and becoming 
aggregated, gall-stones, and intestinal calculi or enteroliths, are 
causes of intestinal obstruction. Some polypi or pedunculated 
adenomata cause obstruction by their bulk in the cavity of the 
bowel. 

* See Janicke and Buchvvald, Deutsche med. Woch., 1887, xl. Also 
Abstract in Lond Med. Rec, Nov. 15th, 1887. 



DIAGNOSIS. 423 

In such cases obstructed circulation and strangulation of the 
bowel do not occur, and the symptoms in consequence are not, 
at first, very urgent. 

VI. Compression of the Gut by Tumours outside of it 
forms a separate class. Obstruction may be produced in the 
most varied ways. I have seen a case where alarming symptoms 
of intestinal obstruction were produced by retroversion of the 
gravid uterus, pressing probably on entangled loops of small 
bowel. All sorts of growths — solid or cystic, or even abscesses 
in the peritoneal cavit}^ — may press on the bowel and block its 
passage. Growths of the liver or pancreas may cause obstruc- 
tion in the duodenum ; tumours of the ovary, uterus, or pelvic 
bones, may compress the rectum ; and the small bowel may be 
compressed by tumours in any part of the peritoneal cavity. 
Naturally, the less movable parts of intestine are most likely to 
suffer. 

Usually such causes provide examples of chronic obstruction. 
The sudden displacement of a tumour may, however, produce 
sudden obstruction, with acute symptoms. 



diagnosis of intestinal obstruction. 

In cases of acute obstruction, the onset is sudden ; the 
symptoms from the beginning are urgent ; and the result, after 
a rapid course, is almost uniformly fatal. Spontaneous recovery 
after volvulus is unknown ; a very small proportion of cases of 
intussusception get well ; and genuine examples of recovery 
after strangulation by bands or through apertures must be less 
common than in ordinary hernia, where the chance of recovery 
is practically considered as nil. In the case of the last, recovery 
takes place from gangrene of the gut, with the formation of false 
anus ; in internal obstruction, gangrene is certain death. There 
is a variety of intussusception which is chronic, and is not 
reckoned among examples of acute strangulation. 

The symptoms are those of strangulated hernia, aggravated. 
Severe abdominal pain, collapse, vomiting, constipation, and 



424 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

abdomina] distension are the leading symptoms. The pain is 
always severe and often agonising. It is frequently intermittent, 
and liable to exacerbations — possibly, as Treves suggests, on 
account of the intermitting nature of the construction. The 
character of the pain varies : sometimes it is of the nature of 
severe colic, pure and simple ; at other times, a sensation is 
felt as if a band were drawn tightly round the abdomen. 
The site of the pain is not a trustworthy guide to the seat of 
obstruction. 

Collapse, always marked, often alarming, attends every case 
of acute intestinal obstruction. We may expect to find the 
collapse most severe in cases where the onset is very sudden, 
and the patient is young and vigorous. Profound collapse 
suggests complete strangulation ; but the degree of it is no guide 
to the amount of bowel involved. 

Vomiting is always an early and well-marked symptom. 
The irritated bowels soon become filled to distension with 
secretions, fluid and gaseous ; and, under increased abdominal 
pressure and the constant contractions of the intestinal muscle, 
these secretions escape by the only possible exit — the stomach. 
Anti-peristalsis, or Dr. Brinton's ^yell-known explanation of the 
process by the production of an axial and a peripheral current, 
may account for this vomiting. But such explanations are no 
more necessary to explain the regurgitation of the intestinal 
contents in the living than in the dead. Mere gaseous disten- 
sion and increased abdominal pressure force the contents out of 
the mouth after death ; and these passive causes, in addition to 
the very active one of intestinal contractions, may do the same 
during life. 

The vomiting may or may not be attended with retching. 
Sometimes the fluids are ejected in great gushes without much 
straining effort. The vomit at first consists of the natural 
contents of the bowel ; then, of bile-stained fluids ; then, of dark 
grumous material — " coffee -ground "; and finally, of faecal 
matter, more or less diluted. That faecal matter may be 
vomited, even if the constriction is well above the large bowel, 
there is no longer any dispute ; but we should not expect faecal 



DIAGNOSIS. 425 

vomiting if the constriction is not below the jejunum. At first 
the vomiting may be of the nature of a reflex nerve symptom ; 
later on, it is mainly a mechanical discharge of accumulated 
secretion, and the existence and continuance of such vomiting 
affords relief to the patient. 

Constipation, absolute and insuperable, is an important sign. 
Occasionally at an early stage of the complaint, faeces are 
passed from the bowel below the seat of constriction ; but when 
the disease is well established, neither faeces nor flatus pass. 
Discharge of blood by the anus is found in a considerable 
number of cases of intussusception. 

Abdominal distension, from the accumulation of gas and 
fluid, is an early and prominent symptom. It increases with 
the duration of the illness ; and in marked examples the 
parietes may be tense, like a drum, and visibly white and 
glistening from being stretched. In such cases mechanical 
obstruction to respiration is present. Tympanitic reso- 
nance all over the abdomen, except perhaps in the flanks, 
is marked. 

It need scarcely be added that, in making the diagnosis, all 
the usual sites of external hernia must be explored, and the 
rectum must be digitally examined. 

The Diagnosis from other Diseases is not often difficult. A 
localised paralysis of the gut, from inflammation of its walls or 
from nerve disturbance, may produce sj-mptoms very similar to 
those of intestinal obstruction. A bruise or crush of the bowel, 
inflammation after reduction of a strangulated hernia, are prac- 
ticall}^ varieties of obstruction. Decending testicle becoming 
incarcerated or inflamed is well known to cause symptoms like 
those of obstruction. I have been called to treat a man aged 
76 for urgent symptoms of obstruction, which were found to be 
produced by inflammation in a testicle, which lay undescended 
in the inguinal canal, and I have seen two similar cases in 
hospital practice. 

Acute peritonitis may be mistaken for intestinal obstruction; 
in fact, the mistake has been made on not a few occasions. If 
peritonitis is caused by perforation, the symptoms may be most 



426 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

misleading. A few hours will, however, make the diagnosis 
clear. The temperature is no guide ; the worst cases of perito- 
nitis may have a normal, or even subnormal, temperature. The 
nature of the onset, the character of the vomiting, the quality of 
the pain, and, most important of all, the palpation of the 
abdomen, will also guide us. Lead colic, accompanied as it 
often is with obstinate constipation, and renal or hepatic colic, 
where pain, collapse, and vomiting may be present, might also 
be mistaken for intestinal obstruction. 

The Diagnosis of the Variety of Obstruction may be attended 
with considerable difficulty. It is nearly always possible to 
say whether the case is one of acute or of chronic obstruction ; 
the difficulties appear in the diagnosis of the individual variety. 

A chronic case, in which the primary symptoms have been 
obscure, may suddenly become acute. The terminal symptoms 
of all cases of obstruction are very similar. 

The Symptoms of Acute Obstruction are as follows : The patient, 
in ordinary health, is suddenly seized with severe abdominal 
pain of a griping character, with exacerbations. He is at 
once prostrated, suffers from shock, and his face indicates the 
patient's consciousness that he is seriously ill. Vomiting very 
soon follows the first attack of pain, and continues at irregular 
but short intervals. There is absolute constipation, and 
abdominal distension which goes on increasing with the duration 
of the malady. 

It must be noted that acute symptoms occasionally supervene 
on chronic causes ; and the reverse, to a more limited extent, 
holds true. 

The diagnosis of the Variety of Acute Obstruction may often be 
successful. 

Strangulation by Bands. — The patient is probably a young 
male adult, who will usually have a previous history of perito- 
nitis. In a few cases a previous attack of obstruction, partial 
and mild, will be recorded. The disease will have attacked him 
suddenly, and without warning, in the midst of his ordinary 
pursuits. The pain, which from the beginning is severe, is 
continuous, with exacerbations, and is usually located in the 



DIAGNOSIS. 427 

region of the umbilicus. There is no tenderness on pressure. 
Vomiting soon comes on, and is frequent and copious. In more 
than half the cases, it becomes stercoraceous about the fourth 
or fifth day. From the first constipation is complete. No blood 
is discharged. Extreme prostration, or even profound collapse, 
may be present from the beginning ; usually it is most marked 
at the onset, and becomes less marked afterwards. Abdominal 
distension is not at first a marked symptom. No tumour is felt 
on palpation. 

Such cases die about the fifth or sixth day. 

Volvulus of the Small Intestines presents symptoms very similar 
to the above. Volvulus of the Colon, nearly always at the sigmoid 
flexure, presents more distinctive symptoms. It is usually found 
in males, after the age of forty, who have suffered for some time 
from constipation. Pain comes on at once, but it is not so severe 
as in strangulation through bands, and it frequently intermits. 
Occasionally the pain is referred to the hj^pogastrium or the 
back. Tenderness on pressure comes on as the disease con- 
tinues. Vomiting comes on late, or not at all, and is never very 
urgent. In only fifteen per cent, of the cases does it become 
faeculent. Prostration is never extreme. Constipation exists 
from the first. 

A distinctive symptom is a rapid and excessive accumulation 
of gas, which soon causes great distension of the abdomen. 

The average duration of life is about six days. 

Acute Intussusception usually appears in children. Pain is a 
prominent symptom ; it comes on in waves, reaching a point of 
great intensity, and then subsiding. Vomiting is a very variable 
symptom : sometimes it is present from the onset, and is copious 
and frequent ; at other times it comes on late, and is never 
severe ; a few have no vomiting at all. The most characteristic 
sign is the discharge of blood by the rectum, frequently attended 
with diarrhoea and tenesmus. A definite tumour is frequently 
palpated through the parietes ; and, in intussusceptions affecting 
the large bowel, the apex of the invaginated bowel may be felt 
through the rectum. Abdominal distension is usually absent ; 
occasionally the abdomen is retracted. 



428 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

These cases may be fatal within twenty-four hours ; or they 
may last for several days ; or they may become chronic, lasting 
for weeks. 

The Symptoms of Chronic Obstruction need not be detailed. 
They are simply those of acute obstruction in a milder form, 
and prolonged over a longer period. 

Stricture of the Small Bowel may be taken as representative of 
a large class of cases whose symptoms are broadly as follows. 
In such there is usually some previous history of intestinal 
trouble, followed at a considerable interval by attacks of 
obstruction, gradually increasing in gravity till the final attack 
which jeopardises the life of the patient. Pain comes on in 
paroxysms, and completely intermits : not infrequently it 
appears after eating. Vomiting is not an urgent symptom ; 
it is late in coming on, is neither frequent nor copious, and 
rarely is faeculent. Constipation, not absolute, or alternating 
with diarrhoea, will be present. Before the final attack, the 
patient will have lost flesh and spirits. Abdominal distension 
is replaced by attacks of flatulence, more or less distressing; 
but never, except at the end, causing dyspnoea. 

Such cases may last for a month or more. In most cases, 
however, more or less acute symptoms supervene on the chronic, 
with corresponding curtailment of the duration of life. 

It is rarely possible, unless a distinct tumour is felt, to 
diagnose simple from malignant stricture. The history may 
be of some assistance, however. Anything which causes 
gradual obliteration of the bowel, tumours outside or inside, 
contracting adhesions, and all such conditions, may produce 
identical S3'mptoms. 

Stricture of the Large Bowel has most features in common with 
stricture of the small bowel. There are the same irregular 
beginnings, and the same exacerbations, with occasional inter- 
missions. Vomiting is less frequent in stricture of the large 
bowel. Distension is, however, always a marked, and often a 
very troublesome, accompaniment ; and tenesmus, with the 
discharge of blood, mucus, or pus, is often found. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 429 

As cancer of the rectum, malignant stricture is perhaps 
the best known of all causes of intestinal obstruction. 

Fcecal Accumulations have some special features of their own. 
They occur chiefly in women who have passed the prime of life, 
and, more particularly, in lunatics. The symptoms are simply 
those of constipation, becoming more and more intractable. 
There is usually a palpable, or even visible, tumour having the 
characters of faeces. The abdomen becomes generally dis- 
tended with gas or faeces, or both. Pain of a paroxysmal 
nature supervenes. Vomiting is late in appearing, and is long 
in becoming faeculent. There may be a history of previous 
attacks. 

This is about as far in differential diagnosis as our present 
knowledge will carry us. Individual variations of symptoms 
must be allowed to each case on a liberal scale. The differences 
between a cumulative and an instantaneous cause, — between 
strangulation and mere obstruction ; between obstruction in the 
small bowel and obstruction in the large bowel, — theoretically 
marked enough, are found in practice to be very difficult of 
detection. But, by a careful summation of the concrete symp- 
toms in each case, it will nearly always be possible to form a 
tolerably correct opinion as to the exact nature of the obstruc- 
tion, and formulate, either at once or after waiting a few hours, 
a consistent and definite plan of treatment. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 

The indications to operate in any given case depend, in the 
first place, upon the chance which the patient has of getting 
well without operation ; and, in the second place, upon the 
degree of probability with which success will follow the 
operation. 

To cases of acute obstruction there is practically but one 
termination — death. No case of volvulus, whether of large or 
small intestine, has as yet been known to recover under treat- 
ment purely medicinal. Spontaneous recovery, in the numerous 
class of cases of strangulation by bands, is not to be looked for. 



430 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

In the case of intussusception, where we have been accustomed 
to look for favourable results without operation, it seems to 
me that Treves has made out a clear case against expectant 
treatment. Looked at from the side of causation, or actual 
pathological condition, there is practically no expectation of 
recovery. Certainly ninety-five per cent, of all such cases 
die. 

Here, then, the indication is clear enough — as clear as the 
indication to tie a bleeding carotid — operation. In the sense 
of avoiding the risk of death, the indication is more definite 
than in external hernia ; for in hernia there is a chance of 
recovery by gangrene. In the sense of promoting the chances 
of recovery, the indication is not so strong ; for more cases of 
external herniotomy must always recover, than of internal. 
The risks are increased in the same way by waiting, and by 
handling or purgation — which are almost the same in evil effect. 
There is but one treatment — release of the strangulated bowel 
from the strangulating band. 

From the pathological standpoint, it is easy enough to be 
definite ; but not so from the diagnostic. We are too seldom 
certain of the diagnosis, to be always dogmatic as to the 
treatment. But if we are doubtful whether we can do good 
by operating, we may be certain there are many ways of doing 
harm by administering drugs. There never yet was a case of 
true intestinal strangulation in which purgatives did not do 
harm ; and not one out of ten escapes purgation. Emetics 
may do good ; even bleeding may not do harm ; but certainly 
purgation is baneful. I say nothing about manipulation of the 
abdomen under an ansesthetic. The cases of success recorded 
certainly do not read hke cases of acute obstruction. But 
manipulation early in the case ought to be less harmful than 
purgation. 

At once, or within a few hours, we ought to make a definite 
diagnosis. If we are convinced that it is acute obstruction, 
then operation should be performed at once; if we are con- 
vinced that it is not, another treatment equally definite ought 
to be pursued. From the beginning a definite plan of treatment 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 431 

ought to be laid down, and this plan ought to be adhered to. 
Let it be either drugs or operation, and never that fatal com- 
promise — operation when drugs fail. 

The indications for operation in chronic and sub-acute cases 
are by no means fixed and definite. Generally speaking, when, 
in a chronic case, we find that in spite of careful dieting and 
treatment the attacks of obstruction become more numerous 
and more severe, and finally if one attack supervenes which is 
positively insuperable and is rapidly kihing the patient, then 
operation is indicated. But, with this, some conception must be 
formed as to the nature of the operation, and the probable 
ultimate effects of it. Thus, in the case of peritoneal cancer 
obstructing the gut, uncertainty as to the amount of bowel 
involved, and the certainty of early death in spite of operation, 
would make operation scarcely justifiable. Cases of fsecal 
accumulation sometimes recover after the patient is apparently 
in extremis, with obstruction lasting, perhaps, for weeks ; and in 
such operation is rarely indicated. In chronic intussusception, 
the question of operation is very difficult to settle. It is true 
that cases may have gone on for weeks without the formation 
of strong adhesions, rendering reduction impossible ; but this 
chance is not to be reckoned upon. If the invagination cannot 
be reduced, and the bowel involved cannot be removed, we have 
still the unsatisfactory resources of making an artificial anus 
above the intussusception, or of forming anastomosis with 
another piece of bowel below the intussusception. 

In many cases of stricture the question of resection of the 
bowel will arise : this will be considered later. In the case of 
foreign bodies in the bowel, treatment must be guided by the 
urgency of symptoms pointing to obstruction, or to ulceration 
and inflammation, and the proved inefficacy of other means of 
treatment. 

Some discussion has taken place as to whether it is advisable 
to perform laparotomy for intestinal obstruction if peritonitis is 
present. Such a discussion is of an arm-chair nature — a reason- 
ing away from the facts. Peritonitis is present in every case of 
true intestinal obstruction : it may be local or wide-spread, and 



432 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION.- 

it may be serous, plastic, or purulent. It is an essential con- 
comitant of the disease. In a marked case of intestinal obstruc- 
tion, I doubt if the separate diagnosis of peritonitis is ever 
possible. In any case its presence can be no contra-indication 
to operation. On the contrary, if other circumstances do not 
forbid it, I would regard peritonitis as a positive indication. 
It would be just as valid to argue against the performance 
of herniotomy because there was fluid in the hernial sac, as 
against laparotomy for obstruction because there was fluid in 
the abdomen. 

Mortality and Appreciation. — The death-rate of laparotomy 
for intestinal obstruction is high, probably more than 70 per 
cent. Even thus the operation would still be justifiable ; for 
nearly every case which recovers may be reckoned as saved 
from death, and the deaths are only hastenings of the natural 
termination. There can be no doubt that delay is the chief 
cause of mortality. We know how successful early herniotomy 
is : surely, in the face of recent exploits in abdominal surgery, 
early laparotomy for intestinal strangulation ought to be only 
a little less successful. Before abdominal distension has come 
on, before the bowel has become inflamed, and before the 
patient's strength is exhausted, I have no hesitation in affirming 
that, in competent hands, laparotomy for intestinal obstruction 
would not have a mortality above fifteen per cent. 



THE OPERATION. 

The details of the operation include what is common to 
all cases of obstruction, and what is special to each variety. 
Some of the special proceedings are comparatively trivial ; 
these will be described in the general account : others are of 
great moment, and these will receive separate consideration. 

* 

These patients are rarely promising subjects for anaesthesia. 
The surgeon is usually called in late, when the patient's heart is 
very weak, and his stomach and intestines are full of fluid. 



THE INCISION 433 

Vomiting, liable to occur during the anaesthetic, is full of 
danger : I have lost one patient on the operating table from 
this cause. It is often a question whether the stomach 
should not be first emptied by the stomach-pump. The mere 
administration of an anaesthetic is often followed by alarming 
symptoms: in a few minutes, though the operation may not be 
severe or prolonged, the condition of the patient maybe changed 
from one not very serious to one positively alarming. This fact 
has so strongly impressed me that, in a bad case, with distended 
abdomen, I should always operate without general anaesthesia ; 
make the incision, a very short one, after a local injection of 
cocaine ; be content with a short exploration, and, if the cause 
were not found, make an artificial anus. The operation may 
subsequently be completed when the patient is out of danger. 
Enterotom)'' with local anaesthesia is a very simple affair ; 
general anaesthesia with an explorator}^ laparotomy is a very 
serious matter in an exhausted patient whose hollow viscera 
are distended with fluid and gas. 

In this operation we have specially to bear in mind that the 
prime object in surgery is, not merely to perform a scientific and 
technically complete operation, but to save our patient's life. 
An operation for intestinal obstruction is certainly not completed 
till the cause has been removed; but if the cause can be removed 
only after a prolonged and difficult operation at the expense of 
the life of the patient, then I maintain it is better to temporise, 
save the patient's life by enterotomy, and remove the constric- 
tion afterwards when the patient can bear it. In every very bad 
case I should begin by putting the patient out of immediate 
danger, by the performance of enterotomy without general 
anaesthesia : as soon as he can bear it the cause of strangu- 
lation may be sought for, and the operation completed. 

The Incision. — As we are rarely certain of the site of obstruc- 
tion, we must adopt a form of incision which will give the 
greatest range and freedom for exploration and operation. This 
is a rnedian incision, about midway between umbilicus and pubes 
if the abdomen is much distended, and nearer to the umbilicus 

29 



434 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

if there is little distension. This incision is adopted merely for 
its convenience in exploring ; there is no strong anatomical 
reason against adopting any other site. 

The incision is made long enough to admit two fingers. 
When the sub-peritoneal fat is reached it bulges into the 
wound, being pushed outwards by the distended bowels. Tait's 
plan of opening the peritoneum, by pulling it outwards between 
pairs of catch-forceps and dividing the raised fold between 
them, is the best. If the membrane is thin, I prefer to pinch 
it up between the finger and thumb, roll it about to see that no 
bowel is included, and make a small opening at the top of the fold 
with the scalpel. The opening is enlarged by scissors, upwards 
and downwards, to the extent of the external wound — that is, 
to about two inches. Bleeding will have been checked in the 
ordinary way. Jf afterwards found necessary, the incision may 
be prolonged. 

Finding and Relieving the Obstruction. — The plan usually recom- 
mended is as follows. The hand, inserted through the wound 
(for this purpose the incision must be longer than that recom- 
mended), is first carried to the caecum. If it is found much 
distended, we may expect to find the cause lower down some- 
where in the colon. The hand follows the course of the ascend- 
ing, transverse, and descending colon to the sigmoid flexure, 
seeking the cause of obstruction on the way. If it is not in the 
colon, we seek for it in the small bowel ; and for tliis purpose, 
we are told to find and follow up the collapsed bowel below the 
the obstruction. Lastl}^, the region of the umbilicus and the 
promontory of the sacrum, as being likely spots, are explored. 

Now, these are excellent directions, from the pathologist's 
point of view ; and they would be easily enough carried out if 
the bowels were not distended, and the abdominal walls not 
hard and tense. To explore the whole length of the colon 
through tense parietes and over dilated bowels would require 
that the arm be inserted half wa}' up to the elbow — particularly 
if, as is often the case, the transverse colon is pushed upwards 
under the diaphragm. And to follow up individual coils of the 



FINDING THE OBSTRUCTION. 435 

small bowel with the hand is no more easy : if it is possible at 
all, it is tedious and difficult in the extreme. The finding of 
collapsed bowel would be of assistance : but, as often as not, 
there is no part of the bowel collapsed ; it is only less distended 
than another part. The passing of the bowel along inch by 
inch will certainly expose the constriction, but it will probably 
kill the patient. 

I believe that the best means of reaching the seat of con- 
striction will be by inspection of the bowel presenting at the 
wound. There is a high probability, wherever the cause lie, 
that the most dilated coils will rise nearest to the surface ; and, 
the greater amount of bowel being within three inches of the 
umbihcus, there is a further probability that the most dilated 
coils wnll be within sight. Very gently they may be moved first 
on one side, then on the other, as well as upwards and down- 
wards. The most dilated portion, which will be also the most 
congested or not far off it, is fixed upon and followed in the 
direction of increasing distension and congestion, wherever that 
may lead. It will certainly lead to the stricture. The whole 
manipulation may be carried out with two fingers. If, now that 
the obstruction and the nature of it are discovered, it seems 
necessary to prolong the incision to relieve it, this can be done 
in the direction which is most convenient. 

Should this method not succeed (it has failed only once in 
twelve cases on which I have operated), I should then recommend 
the insertion of the hand to explore. Should this also fail, I 
should recommend that the most distended portion of bowel be 
permitted to extrude under a large flat sponge, wrung out of 
warm antiseptic lotion. One end of the loop will extrude less 
readily than the other, and one end will appear to become 
increasingly congested ; these characters are sure guides to the 
seat of obstruction. When the bowel begins to show that it is 
fixed inside the abdomen, or when the evidences of congestion 
are striking, the finger inserted along this portion of bowel will 
detect the origin of the mischief. 

This protrusion of bowels has a purpose other than the 
providing of more space for discovering and treating the cause 

29 * 



436 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

of obstruction. It will be called for only in cases of great 
intestinal distension ; and excessive distension I believe to be a 
condition which requires relief almost as urgently as actual 
strangulation. This distension can be relieved only by puncture 
o-r incision when the bowel is extruded. 

The plan of permitting bowels to protrude has been very 
generally and very heartily condemned. The condemnation, 
however, has been in the spirit of the peritoneal surgery of the 
last generation, rather than of the present. In the face of the 
actual practical work now successfully carried out, it is idle to 
argue that extrusion of the bowels, properly managed, is a 
source of serious danger. Less damage is likely to be inflicted 
on bowels by a soft sponge or sponge-cloth lightly resting on 
them, than by a rough hand pushing them about under great 
pressure inside the abdomen. Since writing the above for the 
previous editions, I am glad to be able to quote a good many 
successful practical experiences in favour of my view, at the 
hands of other surgeons. The chief objection to protrusion of 
bowel is the supposed difficulty of returning it. If in any case 
it is proper to return it, it is not very difficult to do so. An 
assistant hooks a finger of each hand under the ends of the 
incision, and pulls the parietes forwards ; the surgeon spreads 
both hands over the sponge which covers the bowels, and by 
steady gentle pressure forces their contents into the bowels 
inside the abdomen. When empty and collapsed, the extruded 
bowels are readily returned. 

But it is not always proper to return distended intestine into 
the abdominal cavity. I hold, on the contrary, that no opera- 
tion for intestinal obstruction is properly completed if the patient 
leaves the operating table with a greatly distended abdomen. 
The effects of distension are doubl}' deleterious — on the system 
generally, and on the bowels themselves. That dyspncea, pal- 
pitation, and what may be called abdominal shock, follow great 
distension of the abdominal cavity is well enough known. That 
paralysis may, and does, follow over-distension of a viscus such 
as intestine, whose contraction depends on inorganic muscle in 
its walls, is also known. But it is not generally recognised that 



ABDOMINAL DISTENSION. 437 

the mere presence of an excess of fluid or gas in the intestine is 
in itself an efficient cause of obstruction. When the intestine, 
confined by mesentery and by the limits of the abdominal cavity, 
is fully distended, it does not form gentle curves, but acute 
flexures ; at these flexures the intestinal walls on the mesenteric 
side encroach on the lumen, so as to form valves which obstruct 
the passage of contents. Even when the intestines, artificially 
distended in the deadhouse, are removed from the cavity with 
the mesentery attached, and laid on the table, they do not empty 
themselves. The disappointing results of simple tapping of the 
bowels are thus explained : the gut is emptied down to the 
second or third flexure, and no further. These view^s, founded 
on observations during operations and on experiments in the 
deadhouse, have recently been incidentally confirmed by certain 
experiments of Senn on inflation of the intestine with gas. Of 
their truth and of their importance there can, I think, be no 
question. 

Further considerations in support of this view may be 
brought forward in the practical benefits derived from Nelaton's 
operation of enterotomy and Kussmaul's treatment b}' artificial 
emesis. Many cases of cure b}^ enterotomy, which is nothing 
more than drainage of intestinal contents, have been recorded. 
And alread}' a considerable number of cures by drainage through 
the oesophageal tube (Kussmaul's plan) have accumulated. ■•' 
The relief that vomiting affords is evident in every case of 
intestinal obstruction. There can be no doubt that, as Senn 
puts it, "great distension of the stomach constitutes an import- 
ant factor in causing or aggravating intestinal obstruction, as it 
effects compression, which again causes impermeability of the 
intestines, or aggravates conditions arising from an antecedent 
partial permeability, by producing sharp flexions among the 
distended coils of the intestines." No one, experienced in 
abdominal surgery, can fail to have observed the dangers of 
distension, or to have appreciated the benefits of getting rid of 
intestinal fluids. 

I would therefore, in every case of laparotomy for intestinal 
* See, in particular, Rhen, Ccntralbl.f. Chir.,]\x\y 23rd, 1887. 



438 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

obstruction with distension, consider evacuation of the intestinal 
contents as an essential part of the proceeding. 

To open the bowel, it is best to make an incision by a scalpel 
transversely to its axis at the point most distant from the 
mesentery. A trocar and cannula, large enough to permit outflow 
with sufficient rapidity, would make a ragged, bruised wound, not 
so suitable for being dealt with b}' suture, and not so likely to heal 
kindly, as a simple incision. The bowel, properly protected, is 
pulled a few inches away from the wound, and held over a 
vessel by both hands, while an assistant gently kneads the 
sides of the abdomen to force the fluids along the bowel and up 
to the opening. The first flow of gas and liquid rushes out with 
considerable force, and a notable diminution in the size of the 
abdomen will at once be apparent : artificial pressure, however, 
is wanted to empty the rest of the bowels. Of course, the bowel 
that had been constricted will have been carefully examined to 
see that there is no chance of its being ruptured in the manipu- 
lation. But the operation having, on the whole, an effect of 
relieving the bowels of tension, need not be regarded as 
endangering the continuity of the intestinal walls. When the 
bowel is sufficiently empty, the opening is carefully closed by 
a continuous catgut or silk suture, including only peritoneum 
muscle and sub-muscular fibrous tissue, in the ordinary manner. 
In three cases on which I operated in this way I used a double 
continuous suture, simply repeating the process with the same 
thread in the opposite direction. Any peritoneal fluid is to be 
mopped out, and the case generall}' treated as an ordinar}' 
abdominal section. 

Removal of the Cause of Obstruction. — The surgical proceeding 
for the relief of the constriction varies according to the cause of 
it. In most cases where laparotom}' is performed, the removal 
of the cause will consist in the division of a band, the enlarge- 
ment of an opening and release of the bowel, the untwisting of a 
volvulus, or the drawing out of an intussusception. In all it 
may, as already indicated, be advisable to incise the bowel and 
draw off its contents. But in some cases it ma}' be necessary to 



OPERATION IN VOLVULUS. 439 

resect a piece of gangrenous or diseased bowel — enterectomy. 
In others it will be advisable to leave an intestinal fistula — 
enterostomy or enterotomy. These, and other allied special 
proceedings, will receive separate consideration. Here we con- 
sider the special modes of proceeding with the individual forms 
of constriction. 

In Volvulus. — The unravelling of a volvulus of the small 
intestine, especially if it is caused by the intertwining of two 
coils, must frequently be a matter of considerable difficulty. 
Volvulus of the sigmoid flexure is still more difficult to deal 
with. At an autopsy which I performed on a case of volvulus 
of the caecum, I could not, though the incision extended from 
sternum to pubes, undo the twist. Mr. Treves has had a similar 
experience with volvulus of the sigmoid flexure during the life 
of the patient, and found much difficulty in righting matters 
after death. In another case on which I operated, I was able to 
reduce a volvulus of the caecum, and, with the aid of enterotomy, 
to save the patient's life. In a second case on which I operated 
in the Bristol Infirmary, a volvulus of the small bowel was 
found, but could not be reduced till the whole was removed from 
the abdominal cavity. The bowel was twice twisted on itself, 
and when uncoiled, at once collapsed, the contents flowing down- 
wards. At the end of a week, symptoms of recurrence of the 
volvulus appearing, I performed enterotomy without chloroform, 
fixing the bowel to pieces of strapping around the wound. The 
patient at present wears a catheter in the opening, through which 
he passes flatus along a tube into a bottle which he carries in 
his pocket. At the end of a year or so, when the distended 
bowel has contracted, he will probably dispense with this 
catheter, which gradually ceases to be required. The rapid 
distension of the gut in volvulus, the early occurrence of peri- 
tonitis, and the complications which frequently accompany the 
condition, sufficiently explain the difficulty met with in reduc- 
ing it. 

Such cases left to themselves are hopeless, and a strong effort 
should be made to bring success to the operation. As soon as it 
is evident that it is impossible to reduce the twist, the distended 



440 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

intestine, pulled out through the incision, ought to be opened at 
the highest part of the curve, and emptied of its contents. After 
this, reduction ought again to be attempted. If it succeeds, the 
opening in the bowel may be sutured and the abdominal wound 
closed. If it does not succeed, an artificial anus must be made 
in the first convenient piece of bowel above the volvulus. Re- 
section of the affected gut has been suggested ; but such a pro- 
ceeding can scarcely be contemplated unless the volvulus is 
small, in which case reduction is less likely to fail. 

In Strangulation by Bands and through Apertures. — The removal 
of a constriction belonging to this class is not usually a difficult 
proceeding. A peritoneal adhesion may be readily tied in two 
places by suitable ligatures, and divided between them. They 
ought to be tied as close as possible to their sites of attachment ; 
as, if they are left long, they may give trouble at a future period. 
The same treatment ought to be applied to omental cords : they 
ought to be tied close to their point of origin, and cut off short. 
If, as is sometimes the case, the cord is very thick, it may be 
tied by transfixion in two portions; it will rarely be necessary to 
tie individual vessels. Sometimes there exists a second band, 
causing strangulation ; a good few cases are recorded where 
death was caused by an overlooked strangulation. 

In dealing with a Meckel's diverticulum, we must ascertain 
whether we are dealing with bowel, or the still pervious rudi- 
ment that goes to the umbilicus, or a simple inflammatory band. 
The band is treated as are other bands. When we have to deal 
with a pervious tube, we may, according to its size, be content 
with mere division as low down as possible ; or we may, at the 
end next the bowel, have to make the closure as carefully as we 
should for any other opening into the bowel. Though there is a 
remote danger in leaving a diverticulum, there may be a still 
greater immediate danger in removing one if it is large ; and its 
removal involves the making of an opening of a considerable 
size. It ought to be removed at a point where it is perceptibly 
diminished in size. The best mode of closure would probably 
be by pushing inwards the mucous membrane, and ligaturing 
the fibrous coat outside it. If the opening appears to be too 



OPERATION IN INTUSSUSCEPTON. 441 

large to be treated in this way, it may be closed by the Lembert 
suture, or any other plan most affected. In a case on which I 
operated with pervious diverticulum about as thick as a crow- 
quill, I was content with simple ligature and careful disinfection 
of the mucous membrane. 

If the appendix is the cause of constriction, we should try, 
by division of the adhesions, to liberate the constricted bowel. 
If this be impossible, the appendix itself must be cut through, 
and closed by suturing the peritoneal surfaces after having 
doubled the tube inwards. It must not be forgotten that the 
mesentery (so called) of the appendix sometimes contains a 
goodly sized vessel. 

The Fallopian tube, adherent, as a cause of strangulation, 
may be treated as a simple band, and divided as such with 
safety; though, as in other cases, it is better to try and limit the 
division to the inflammatory new tissue. 

In all such cases, the gut will be carefully examined before 
the abdomen is closed. If it is much distended, it will be incised 
and emptied at some distance from the site of constriction ; if it 
is gangrenous or on the point of becoming perforated, this part 
must be excised in a manner to be described. 

In Intussusception. — In most cases diagnosed as intussuscep- 
tion, a full trial to insufflation, injection of fluids, or some such 
means, will have been instituted, before abdominal section is 
thought of. It seems, from Treves's investigations, that spon- 
taneous cure by separation of the gangrenous intussusception is 
a very rare event indeed; and cure, after any plan not operative, 
would seem to take place with far less frequency than is popu- 
larly supposed. With early operation, laparotomy for intus- 
susception, involving as it does nothing more than merely 
pulling out the intussusceptum, ought to be one of the most 
successful of abdominal operations : when postponed till adhe- 
sions have formed, and a large amount of gut has become 
invaginated, it may be impossible to reduce it. In 51 operations 
collected by Braun, attempts to reduce the intussuscepted gut 
succeeded in 26, and failed in 25 ; and 16 of these 26 cases sub- 
sequently died. Operation should not be delayed beyond the 



442 LAPAROTOMY FOR OBSTRUCTION. 

second day. At an autopsy, it will be usually found that the 
bowel will give way before the intussusceptum is pulled out. I 
have failed at operation to reduce a very large intussusception 
of three da3's' standing in a child a year old. 

For reduction, the entering bowel ought to be grasped as 
closely as possible to the invagination, and the other fixed point 
ought to be the bowel just beyond the end of the intussusceptum ; 
with traction is associated a gentle process of kneading. To 
catch the edge of the intussuscipiens close to the entrance, 
would be to force it down on itself and cause compression of the 
intussusceptum, and thereby increase the difficulty of reduction. 
The reduced bowel must be scrutinised most carefully, to see 
that there is no laceration or gangrene. 

If the intussusception cannot be reduced, three plans are 
open : firstly, resection of the whole with suturing of the divided 
bowels ; secondly, resection, and the formation of an artificial 
anus ; thirdly, formation of an artificial anus, without resection. 
A fourth plan which has been recommended is to form an 
artificial anastomosis between two portions of bowel above and 
below the intussusception. The first can be done only where 
the intussusception is comparatively small, not involving more 
than three or four feet of bowel; the second, usually preferable to 
the first, is similarly limited in application ; the third may be used, 
as a last chance, where neither resection nor reduction is possible. 
The fourth plan, of exclusion of the intussusception, and anas- 
tomosis of bowel above and below the obstruction, would be 
facilitated by the use of Senn's decalcified bone plates or some 
similar contrivance. In an infant on whom I operated, where quite 
half of the small bowel lay inside the colon and could be felt 
through the anus, resection was, of course, out of the question. 
I made an artificial anus above, and fixed the bowel with catch- 
forceps, so that more might not be dragged into the wound. A 
better plan would perhaps have been to divide the gut, close the 
lower part, and leave it to its fate with the intussusception, 
while the upper end was taken out of the wound as an artificial 
anus. Such a proceeding, of course, would be advisable only if 
the invagination were low down. The prognosis after such pro- 



OPERATION FOR FOREIGN BODIES. 443 

ceedings must always be bad : all the greater necessity for early 
operation. 

Prof. Braun of Jena* has classified 63 cases of operation for 
invagination. For disinvagination the operation was performed 
51 times : of these, 11 were cured and 40 died ; 30 were children, 
21 were adults. Of 10 cases in which enterectomy was performed, 
all died. After disinvagination failed, resection was performed 
12 times without a single success; enterotomy 9 times, also 
without a success. Disinvagination alone, therefore, would seem 
to offer hopes of success; and this must be attempted very early. 

Intussusception of the rectum may be treated locally without 
the performance of abdominal section. Barkerf has resected 
an invaginated adenoid epithelioma of the rectum successfully, 
after stitching the divided walls of the gut together. Verneuii 
and Hulenkampj had previously done the same operation. 

In Foreign Bodies. — It may be possible to pass these along 
when the abdomen is opened, so that opening of the gut may be 
unnecessary. If this cannot be done, the bowel must be opened, 
and the substance extracted. If the gut overlying the substance 
seems to be but slightly inflamed, it may be opened immediately 
over it, and the material extracted with ease. If the bowel is 
inflamed, as will usually be the case, it will be wise to make the 
opening a little above the site of the obstruction, in the dilated 
and healthy intestine. The opening must be of sufficient dimen- 
sions to permit of the extraction of the foreign body without 
causing laceration. By preference the line of incision would lie 
in the long axis of the bowel, at its free margin. If the body 
cannot easily be pushed up to the opening, the opening may be 
pushed down to the body. It may be of advantage to crush or 
compress the body before attempting to extract it. The intes- 
tinal contents may or may not, according as seems most con- 
venient, be permitted to escape before removing the cause of 
obstruction. During the manipulations, scrupulous care will be 
observed to prevent the escape of faeces into the abdomen. If the 
bowel is seriously damaged by inflammation or ulceration, or looks 
gangrenous, the advisability of resection must be contemplated. 

* Archill, f. Chir., Bd. xxxiii, Hft. 2. t Lancet, May 14th, 1878. 
I Internat. Journ. Med. Sc, October, 1887, p. 529. 



Enterotomy. 

The name Enterotomy is given to the operation of making, 
by peritoneal section, an opening in the bowel through which 
its contents may be discharged. The best name for this is 
obviously Enterostomy, but usage has justified the use of the 
former term. 

Enterotomy, first performed on a patient of Trousseau's by 
Nelaton, and often known as Nelaton's operation, is most pro- 
perly regarded as an inevitable and undesirable substitute for 
other and better proceedings. Nelaton advocated it as a plan 
of treating cases of intestinal obstruction which had lasted over 
six or eight days, in which there was great abdominal disten- 
sion, and where there was faeculent vomiting. Other surgeons 
have performed the operation on Nelaton's principles, and with 
a gratifying measure of success — so far, at least, as immediate 
results are concerned. As it does not attack the cause of the 
illness, and is, consequently, rarely other than palliative, it 
ought never to be instituted, except in cases where other and 
more complete measures are unavailable. It should never be 
undertaken unless there is fairly conclusive evidence that the 
obstruction is either low down in the small bowel, or in some 
part of the large bowel that is beyond the reach of colotomy. 

The operation is a very simple one. Entrance is effected in 
the right iliac or inguinal region, parallel to and a little above 
Poupart's ligament, between the anterior iliac spine and the 
epigastric artery. The incision need not be a long one ; one 
and a half to two or three inches, according to the thickness of 
the abdominal walls, being sufficient. The nearest distended 
piece of bowel, usually some portion of the lower part of the 
ileum, is drawn into the wound, and fixed there by sutures. If 
the case is not urgent the bowel need not be opened at once, 
but left there for two or three days till adhesions have formed. 
It must not be forgotten that if faeces escape, they run into the 
peritoneal cavity ; and seeing that delay in opening, even for a 



ENTEROTOMY. 445 

few hours, might secure the formation of plastic lymph suffi- 
cient to close the opening, wherever it is possible such delay 
may advantageously be observed. If it is decided not to open 
the bowel at once, mere fixation by a couple of harelip pins, or 
by two silk or silver sutures, passing through the fibrous coats 
only, will be all that is required. Some recommend simply 
leaving the bowel in the wound, in the certainty that adhesions 
will soon take place without the insertion of any sutures. If it 
is decided to open the bowel at the time, we must secure very 
accurate co-aptation between the intestinal walls and the edges 
of the wound before making the opening. Here there is more 
abdominal movement than in colotomy, and the opening is into 
the peritoneal cavity, so that the danger of faecal escape is 
greater. Two silver sutures, not thin enough to cut, are usually 
recommended as the main support ; but two or four additional 
silk sutures should be inserted. It matters little how the 
apposition is obtained, provided it be accurate and abiding. 
On two occasions I got perfect union from the application of 
a continuous suture including skin, peritoneum, and outer 
coats of bowel. In two other cases the bowel was simply fixed 
in the wound by loops of silk attached to strapping on the 
parietes. When sutured satisfactorily, the intestine is incised 
by a tenotomy knife, a very small opening being made. 

In a few da3^s the abdominal wound will probably have 
healed, and a faecal fistula will have formed. It will depend 
upon the nature of the case whether we seek later on to cure 
this artificial anus. In cases of unremovable cancer, for which 
chiefly this proceeding is indicated, any further operation would 
not be contemplated. In cases of faecal accumulation where 
enterotomy had been performed, the question of closure of the 
fistula would arise as soon as the tendency to accumulation had 
passed off. In some few cases, where enterotomy is per- 
formed to relieve the patient of very urgent symptoms when 
diagnosis was wrong or more perfect treatment was impossible, 
the subsidence of acute intestinal troubles and further infor- 
mation as to the cause of the disease might make us contem- 
plate closure of the fistula. In most cases, however, it will 



446 ENTEROTOMY. 

remain as an artificial anus, prolonging life and relieving suffer- 
ing, but not curing the disease. Dr. Malins"^' has twice per- 
formed laparo-enterotom}^ for obstruction by adhesions in the 
pelvis which he could not completely divide ; and in each case 
the patient recovered, with a faecal fistula. 

When the first incision has been made in the middle line, 
and, after exploration, the cause of obstruction cannot be found 
or cannot be overcome, enterotomy may be performed at this 
situation. In fact, as a last resource after failure of other 
methods, enterotomy will most frequently fall to be performed 
in the middle hne. In this case accurate suturing by a con- 
tinuous suture to the skin, and immediate opening of the bowel, 
will be carried out. If the parietes are not very thick, the 
parietal peritoneum may be pulled outwards and fixed to the 
wound-margins. The continuous suture is placed in two por- 
tions, and their extremities tied together after being stitched 
into the parietal wound. In a successful case of enterotomy, I 
thought the insertion of a piece of drainage tubing into the 
opening in the bowel maintained accurate co-aptation of the 
uniting surfaces, and helped to prevent contamination by 
faeces. 

For the treatment of very bad cases of intestinal obstruction 
of long standing, I have urged the adoption of enterotomy 
performed under local anesthesia by subcutaneous injection 
of cocaine at the site of incision. In this sense the operation 
is merely temporary or preliminary, intended to ward off death 
where the full operation to relieve the cause of obstruction could 
not be borne, and to permit the patient to recover strength 
sufficiently to bear the major operation. As the aim of every 
surgical operation is to save life, all other motives must be made 
subservient to this chief end. In many cases a prolonged or 
scientifically complete operation under anaesthesia is little less 
than a warrant of death ; for such a proceeding, occupying in 
skilful hands five minutes at most, and not involving anaesthesia, 
may save the patient's life. 

• Brit. Mai. Joimu, Feb., 1S83, p. 381. 



Colotomy. 

By colotomy is meant the establishment of a fistula in the 
colon, ascending or descending, by an opening in that part of 
the bowel which is uncovered by peritoneum and lies in contact 
with the parietes. 

History. — Colotomy was first proposed b}' Littre, in 1710.-'' 
His proceeding was, to open the sigmoid flexure of the colon 
by incision through the abdominal walls in the left inguinal 
region. It was suggested for imperforate anus in children. It 
is not probable that Littre ever actually performed the opera- 
tion ; and his suggestion was forgotten till 1776, when Pillore of 
Rouen operated, but by a different method. He opened the 
caecum by a parietal incision made in the right inguinal region. 
Twenty years later Callisen suggested an operation whereby the 
colon might be opened without entering the peritoneal cavity. 
He sought to expose the bowel where it was not covered by 
peritoneum by a vertical incision in the left lumbar region. He 
failed to do this on the dead subject, and he never attempted it 
on the living. Fine of Geneva, in 1797, made an opening in 
the transverse colon through an incision in the region of the 
umbilicus. Amussat, driven to think of it while he was attend- 
ing the famous Broussais for cancer of the rectum, actually 
performed the retro-peritoneal operation. He operated on the 
right side b}^ a transverse incision. In the two following years 
he operated six times, with five successes. In 1842 Ashmead of 
Philadelphia,! not aware of Callisen's proposal, performed a 
retro-peritoneal lumbar colotomy by a vertical incision on the 
left side. 

The operation, as usually performed now, is a combination 
of the methods of Callisen and Amussat. Like Calhsen's, it is 
done on the left side ; and, like Amussat's, it is carried out 

* Mem. Acad, Sc. Paris, vol. x., p. 36. 
t Trans. Coll. Pliys. Phila,, vol. i., p. 99, 1842. 



448 COLOTOMY. 

through an incision which is either transverse or obliquely 
transverse. The oblique incision, first recommended by 
Bryant,* is that now adopted by most surgeons. 



CONDITIONS INDICATING OPERATION. 

Colotomy may be performed for any condition which 
obstructs the passage of faeces along the colon, or under any 
circumstances in which it is advisable to place that bowel at 
rest. Obstruction may be produced by various causes ; such 
as, cancer of the rectum or sigmoid flexure or any other part of 
the colon ; tumours of the peritoneum or any abdominal organ, 
pressing on the bowel ; volvulus of the sigmoid flexure or of 
the caecum and ascending colon ; and faecal accumulations and 
collections of foreign matter which cannot be disturbed by other 
means. It may be called for in cases of incurable ulceration of 
the bowel, however induced, when we have reason to believe 
that irritation of faeces and unrest of the intestinal walls con- 
tribute to the continuance of the disease ; and in cases of 
extreme dilatation, with atony of the colon, giving rise to 
frequent attacks of obstruction. 

The operation may be considered from three points of view : 
(i) as a curative measure, (2) as a measure intended to ward off 
for a time impending death, (3) as a proceeding intended, in the 
absence of immediate danger to life, to add to the comfort of 
the patient and prolong his existence. 

As a curative measure, colotomy may be performed in cases 
of ulceration of the rectum, simple or specific, when all other 
measures have failed ; in excessive distension, with atony of the 
colon ; in volvulus of the sigmoid flexure, and in recto-vesical 
fistula. 

In ulceration of the rectum, the condition may be kept up 
or aggravated by the irritation of passing faeces and by the 
spasmodic contractions of the hyperaesthetic bowel. B3' 
making an artificial anus above the ulcerated part, the bowel 
is set at rest, and the faeces do not come into contact with 
* Trans. Med.-Chir. Soc, vol, xxxv., p. 99. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 449 

the ulcerated mucous membrane. In most cases it will be 
sufficient to operate on the left side ; but if we suspect that 
the ulceration extends higher up than the sigmoid flexure, it 
will be better to operate on the right side. 

In cases of excessive distension of the colon with atony of 
its walls, where, in spite of strong purgation and the adminis- 
tration of enemas, faeces accumulate and symptoms of obstruc- 
tion frequently appear, right colotom}/ is indicated. By giving 
an exit to the faeces at the commencement of the colon, the 
bowel is kept empty, and has an opportunity of contracting and 
regaining its tone. From being a flaccid tube with no power of 
spontaneous contraction and an almost unlimited capacity for 
distension, it will, in the course of a few weeks' rest and freedom 
from distension, regain its functions as a contractile viscus of 
limited calibre. 

For volvulus of the sigmoid flexure, Bryant recommends 
colotomy as a remedial measure. There is much to be said in 
favour of the proceeding for this condition. As compared with 
laparotomy, it is not theoretically so perfect ; but we have 
already seen that laparotomy in volvulus is not likely to be 
practically successful in every sense, and that it will probably 
result in the formation of artificial anus. Whatever advantages 
accrue from the retro -peritoneal operation are in favour of 
colotomy : these are, probably less severity in the operation 
itself ; avoidance of the risk of escape of faeces into the 
abdomen, which, with the enormous collections that are 
usually found in these cases, must be considerable ; and 
greater facility in operating. But each case must be decided 
on its merits. 

In cases of recto-vesical fistula which have lasted for some 
time, colotomy gives the only chance of cure short of resection. 
The faeces passing through the opening in the colon, no longer 
traverse the fistula, the rectum collapses, and the fistula spon- 
taneously closes. The presence of severe cystitis, the frequency 
with which attacks of retention of urine appear, the condition 
of the patient, and various other circumstances, will in each 
case promote or restrain the advisability of operation. 

30 



450 COLOTOMY. 

As a measure intended to ivard off wiminent death, colotomy is 
called for in all cases of obstruction in the colon, from whatever 
cause arising. The great majority of such cases are examples 
of cancer of the rectum. The condition of the patient must in 
every case settle the justifiability of the operation. If the 
patient is evidently so near death from the disease that relief 
of the obstruction can prolong life only for a week or two at 
most it will be wise to let nature have its way. The choice 
between a death from obstruction, and a death from exhaustion 
interrupted by the horrors of a serious operation, is a choice of 
evils nearly equal. But if the obstruction comes on in the 
earlier stages of the disease, when the patient is not greatly 
weakened, and when a successful result to the operation means 
not only escape of death from obstruction but prolongation of 
life, with increase of comfort, then the operation is clearly 
indicated. 

The indications in other forms of obstruction from growths 
which are not removable — either in the gut itself, or invading 
or pressing upon it from the outside — are similar to those for 
cancer of the rectum. 

It has been said that an operation which is not intended to 
cure the disease, and which places the patient in a condition 
which " must inevitably render him an object of disgust to 
himself and of loathing to everyone around," ought never to be 
performed. The inevitable result of the operation need not be 
revolting ; properly managed, it need cause little more than 
discomfort. I have operated on a lady for cancer of the rec- 
tum, who was able for months, not only to dine at table, but 
to attend dinner parties. And even if the result were revolting, 
and the patients' sufferings were such that they would wish 
to die, it is still our duty, according to the highest ethics, 
to do all that we can to encourage them and to help them 
to live. 

As an Ameliorative Proceeding in cases of Malignant Disease 
where there are no symptoms of obstruction, and where it is 
intended to give relief to the patient from the irritation pro- 
duced by the passage of faeces over the growth, and to remove 



MORTALITY, 451 

from the growth itself this source of harm, colotomy is more 
open to discussion. The progress of cases for which the opera- 
tion, under these conditions, has been performed is notoriously 
uncertain. I have operated on a case in which there were 
no signs of obstruction, and in whom a likelihood of pro- 
longed life, with increased comfort, was predicted : the patient 
died suddenly, of haemorrhage from the growth. In another, 
weaker constitutionally, and with a much larger growth, 
life was prolonged for more than a year, and the patient 
died of extension of the growth to the peritoneum. Cases, 
again, are recorded where decided improvement sets in, 
and continues for some time, where no operation has been 
performed. 

Statistics give us no help in forming an estimate of the 
duration of life in such cases, with and without operation. 
I think it is doubtful if surgeons as a rule follow the out- 
spoken advice of Bryant, to operate as soon as malignant 
disease is discovered ; and much might be said in support 
of their practice — at all events, it cannot unreservedly be 
condemned. The patient ought to have an opportunity of 
deciding : in my experience, the .decision is usually against 
operation. 

For Inipcvfovate Anus, the operation holds a special position. 
It is intended to ward off death, but it may or may not be 
regarded as a cure for the disease. In many cases, it is the 
first step in the process of cure. In every infant born with 
imperforate anus, an operation of a local nature is first 
attempted ; if this fails, colotomy by some method is per- 
formed, to ward off death: later on, an attempt may be made 
to get the bowel to discharge through the anus. 



Mortality. Appreciation. Choice of Method. — The most com- 
plete and elaborate statistics on colotomy which have as yet 
been published are those collected by Dr. W. R. Batt.* He 
records 351 operations; of these, 215 (62 per cent.) recovered, 

Amcr. Journ. Med. Sc, Oct., 1884. 
30 * 



452 COLOTOMY. 

and 132 (38 per cent.) died, — 4 having unknown result. The 
mortahty after the various methods was: 

Operations. Recovered. Died. Unknown. 

After Amussat's method 244 165(6870) 77 (31-6 %) 2 
„ Littre's „ 82 38(47Vo) 43(53-iVo) i 

,, Calhsen's ,, 10 2 7 i 

In Linea Alba 4 4 — — 

These results tally in a remarkable manner with those 

found in another notable collection by Van Erckelens. ■■'■ He 

brought forward 262 cases of colotomy, with 151 recoveries 

and log deaths. 

Operations. Recovered. Died. 

Amussat's method ... 165 102(62%) 63(38%) 

Littre's „ ... 84 45 (53 7o) 39 (464 7o) 

If these statistics can be taken as trustworthy, they would 
seem to indicate an improvement in the mortalit}' of something 
like ten per cent, in the five years preceding 1884. 

Many facts of interest and importance which cannot be 
referred to here are worked out in Dr. Bait's paper. The 
mortality after all operations for malignant disease was found 
to be a little over 30 per cent. Amussat's method gave a 
mortality of just over 25 per cent. ; Littre's gave 45 per cent. 
If it is proper to reason from the results of these old operations, 
there is therefore a 20 per cent, probability of success in 
favour of retro-peritoneal colotomy. Of 52 operations for 
imperforate anus, more than half died ; and the chance of 
recovery is about equally balanced between the two methods. 
Of 20 operations for fistula, all recovered save two. Of 
40 operations for obstruction, one half died; the best results 
being got from Amussat's operation. Of 72 for stricture, 43 
per cent, died, also with better results by Amussat's method. 

Of those cases which recovered from operations for malignant 
disease, 12 died within 6 months, 15 died between the 6th and 12th 
month ; 10 died between the ist and 2nd year ; 8 died between 
the 2nd and 3rd years, and i died at the end of 4^- years. 
* Langenbeck's Arcliiv., 1879, p. 41. 



CHOICE OF METHOD. 

T. ..^ix .1.-^ ^^ ocen that, under ever}^ circumstance, favour- 
able or otherwise, colotomy is not a very deadly operation. 
Mere statistics cannot, however, give a just estimate of the 
mortality. Many operations are performed when the patient 
is in extremis; and in these the result is tabulated as failure, 
even if the patient lives for ten days or a fortnight in com- 
parative comfort. To class such cases with others in which 
the operation is performed while the patient is in fair condition, 
adds to the mortality of the operation unjustly. The conditions 
under which the operation is performed are so varied, and 
even divergent, that the comparison of figures is of little 
value, except as affording means of comparison between 
different operations. 

The figures show distinctly a preponderating bias in favour 
of Amussat's method — or rather, the modern modification which 
goes by his name. Amussat's method, as now understood, is 
retro-peritoneal colotomy performed on the left side by an 
oblique incision between the ribs and the crest of the ilium. 
It is the combined proceeding of Amussat, Callisen, and 
Br3^ant. When the choice is given, this method, as affording 
the best chances of success, ought always to be selected. 

For imperforate anus, Littre's method, of dividing the 
parietes in the left inguinal region and entering the peritoneum, 
has much in its favour. With imperforate anus are frequently 
found other malformations of the colon which would render 
colotomy impossible by the retro-peritoneal method. Indeed, 
to render the chances of success in completing colotomy most 
certain, it is doubtful whether the median incision would not be 
best of all. The distended bowel can be brought to the middle 
line either from the right or the left side : if the descending 
colon exists, it may be opened ; if it does not exist, the as- 
cending colon may be opened ; and if, as sometimes happens, the 
distended rectum is median in position, the advantages of the 
median incision will be most conspicuous. Frequently the situ- 
ation of the bowel may be located by percussion and palpation. 

As the names given to the operation, following the proper 
names of individual surgeons, have already lost their signifi- 




COLOTOMY. 



cance and have caused a good deaToriTmifCTsion, it wilL.. 

convenient to speak of the retro-peritoneal method as Lumbar 
colotomy ; and of the methods in which the abdominal cavity is 
entered, as Laparo-colotomy. 

THE OPERATION OF LUMBAR COLOTOMY. 

By Lumbar Colotomy is meant the making of an opening in 
the colon, ascending or descending, on either side of the body, 
within that area where it is not covered by peritoneum, and 
where it is attached to the abdominal walls by cellular tissue. 
The opening is made through an incision in the lumbar region 
— that is, in the space bounded by the last rib above, and 
the crest of the ilium below, and lying within lines drawn 
vertically between the middle of the iliac crest and the last 
ribs in front, and the lumbar group of muscles behind. 
Dividing the space vertically is the edge of the quadratus 
lumborum and the fascia transversalis. At the bottom of the 
space lies the colon, in its upper part overlapping the kidney ; 
in its lower part lying in contact with the abdominal wall, and 
attached to it by cellular tissue. (See Fig. ^5, 8 & 18.) The 
area of contact varies in extent with the amount of distension of 
the bowel. In full distension the bowel glides under the peri- 
toneum, displacing it laterally, so that the surface in contact 
with the parietes is broadened. When the bowel is contracted, 
the peritoneum enfolds it more or less completely according to the 
length of the mesentery. It is alwaj's possible to separate the 
collapsing peritoneal folds, even when the bowel is empty, and so 
reach the bowel without entering the peritoneal cavity. It must be 
noted that, according to Treves's investigations, there is more 
likelihood of a mesentery being found on the left than on the 
right side. 

The best practical guide to the site of the bowel is that fur- 
nished by Allingham, as a result of numerous dissections. It 
will be found directly under a point marked on the skin about 
half an inch behind the middle of the crest of the ilium, as 
measured between its anterior and posterior spmes. It has 



THE OPERATION. 



455 



been recommended that this point be marked on the skin in ink. 
But, as a matter of fact, when the muscles have been divided 
the forefinger is the best guide. 

The obhque incision recommended by Bryant is the best. 
Its chief advantage is, that it gives more room for its length 
than do other incisions. Further claims in its favour are, that 




Fig. SS' (After Braune.) 

Transverse Section through the Navel to shoiv the parts concerned in Colotomy. 

I. Umbilicus. 2. Rectus Muscle. 3. Great Omentum. 4. U'-eter. 5. Transversalis 
Muscle. 6. Internal Oblique. 7. Right External Oblique. 8. Ascending Colon, g. Quadratus 
Lumborum. 10. Psoas Muscle. 11. Inferior \'ena Cava. 12. Cartilage between 3rd and 4th 
Lumbar Vertebra. 13. Spinous Process of 4th Lumbar Vertebra. 14. Lamina of 3rd Lumbar 
Vertebra. 15. Descending Aorta. 16. Psoas. 17. Quadratus Lumborum. 18. Descending 
Colon. 19. External Oblique. 20. Internal Oblique. 21. Omentum. 22. Ureter. 23. Rectus. 
24. Transverse Colon. 

it necessitates division of a smaller number of nerves and vessels 
than other methods ; and that it facilitates coaptation by lying 
in the line of a natural fold, and helps to prevent prolapse of 
the bowel by lying almost transversely to its axis. In thin 
patients, and particularly in women, whose iliac crests are more 



■i56 COLOTOMY. 

prominent than in men, there is a tendency for the upper lip of 
the wound to fall inwards, while the lower lip protrudes. This 
may be obviated by careful apposition, and by not bringing the 
line of the incision too close to the ilium. 

The patient is laid on his side, or almost semiprone, and a 
hard round pillow is placed under the opposite loin, to separate 
the last rib from the ilium as much as possible, and make the 
site of operation prominent. The centre is at the point indicated 
— a little behind the centre of the crest of the ilium. Its length 
will vary according as the patient is fat or thin. Four or five 
inches is the length usually recommended ; but this is the 
extreme. In a thin patient, two inches is ample ; and I have 
found, in a very fat woman, three inches to give plenty of room. 
It will be found most convenient to have the bulk of the incision 
behind the point marked as the site of the bowel. The incision 
starts about an inch in front of and above this point, and passes 
obliquely upwards and backwards towards the angle formed by 
the spine and the last rib, for a distance varying according to 
the nature of the case. The various structures are divided by 
successive strokes of the knife or scissors, forceps being placed 
on the bleeding-points. The parts divided after the skin and 
superficial fascia are : some fibres of the latissimus dorsi, the 
posterior fibres of the external oblique, the internal oblique, and 
the lumbar fascia. The anterior edge of the quadratus lum- 
borum will then appear in the wound, and may be divided or 
not, as seems convenient. The fibres of the transversalis may 
often be separated without division. When the transversalis 
fascia has been divided, the fat which underlies the colon wil 
bulge into the wound. Each of these layers is divided to the 
whole extent of the cutaneous incision. 

The sub-peritoneal adipose tissue is usually abundant, even 
in lean subjects. It is frequently found in well-defined strata, 
separated by layers of fascia. I have more than once seen these 
la3ers mistaken for bowel, and treated accordingly. Indeed, 
when in doubt as to a fascial fold being bowel or not, it is 
always best to treat it as if it were. An error is then harmless. 
The fat is teased aside by the fingers, a cutting instrument being 



THE OPERATION. 457 

used as sparingly as possible. If it is very abundant it may be 
removed, to give additional space. 

Various means of recognising the bowel have been described, 
such as its immobility, and the presence of bands on its surface. 
These would be valuable if the peritoneum were opened. In 
feeling for the bowel, the forefinger and thumb, or the first two 
fingers, are inserted into the wound, separating its margins. The 
bowel, if distended, will bulge outwards, and may be readily 
seized. If it is empty, it is sought for more deeply in the wound, 
keeping well backwards and separating the overlying tissues 
widely. If the peritoneum is pushed apart by the two fingers, 
only colon can be grasped between its layers. The existence of 
hard fasces inside the bowel is an infallible guide. The surgeon 
ought, from practice on the dead body, to be familiar with the 
sensation that colon gives when pinched up between the fingers 
through a lumbar incision ; and this sensation is more trust- 
worthy than any other guide, or any combination of guides. 

In a very few cases* no colon has been found, on account of 
the existence of congenital abnormality. In others, the small 
intestine has been opened by mistake for the colon. We have 
it on the authority of Ballf of Dublin that one of the most 
experienced of living colotomists has candidly admitted that he 
opened the duodenum on the right side, believing it to be the 
colon. 

If, during the manipulations, the peritoneum has been torn 
through, it must be closed at once. This may be done by 
catching the edges of the laceration in forceps, pulling it into 
the wound, and surrounding it with a ligature. This produces 
perfect closure, with apposition of serous surfaces. I have, on 
one occasion, seen this done, and no harm result. If the rent 
in the peritoneum is large, the bowels may prolapse into the 
wound. After reducing the bowels, advantage may be taken of 
the presence of the fingers in the cavity to search for the colon 
and make it bulge into the wound. A forceps may then be 
placed on its wall as a guide, and the rent in the peritoneum 

* See Lockwood, St. Davt.'s, IIosp. Rep., vol. xix. 
t Tlie Rectum and Anus, Lond. 1887, p. 357. 



458 



COLOTOMY. 



closed. Thereafter the operation is proceeded with as if nothin 
had happened. 

If the bowel is distended with faeces, the ends and deep parts 
of the parietal wound should be closed before opening it. 

There is always some risk of burrowing suppuration ; and 
accurate apposition of deep as well as superficial parts ought to 
be secured. The best way to do this is by continuous buried 
sutures of catgut carried from the deep parts of the wound to 
its surface ; but deep silver button-sutures answer fairly well. 
A drainage-tube is placed deeply at the end of each half of the 
wound. To provide against the contact of faeces, the wound 

must be protected by 
lint soaked in some 
antiseptic material, of 
which there is nothing 
better than boro- 
glyceride. 

If there is much 

difficulty in seizing an 

un dilated colon, a 

Lund's insufflator 

(Fig. 56) may be used, 

to cause its distension 

by air or fluid. Some 

surgeons recommend 

that the operation be 

begun by artificially 

distending the colon. 

If there is complete obstruction in the rectum, this is, of 

course, impossible; and, in any case, it need not be done till 

the necessity for it has become apparent. 

The bowel may at once be opened and fixed to the edges of 
the wound ; or, if there is no urgency, it may be fixed, and the 
opening delayed for a few days till the wound has united and 
the bowel has become adherent in its new situation. Delay in 
opening the bowel greatly diminishes the risk of unhealthy 
action in the wound, and permits the employment of antiseptic 




Fig. 56. 

Lund's Insufflator. 

A. Hollow Rubber Ring which is pressed against the 
Tissues around the Anus ; a. Rectum Tube ; C. Longer 
Rectum Tube ; B. Ball-syringe attached to Instrument. 



THE OPERATION ''SO 

treatment. On the other hand, if there is obstruction, the bowel 
musfTe openecr"aT'Tjnce,^^crn3r *Wa-««iiind^jarotected as well as 
possible by boracic ointment, or carbolised oil, or boro- 
glyceride. The experience of Davies-Colley in the operation 
a deux temps has shown that symptoms of intestinal strangulation 
may be induced by the retention of a loop of bowel in the 
wound. To obviate this objection he has devised a clamp 
which holds the bowel between ivory studs, while it does not 
strangulate it. 

To fix the bowel in the wound, if opening is to be delayed, 
Howse's plan of fixation by forceps is the best. Two pairs of 
catch-forceps are made to grasp small folds of the muscular 
coats of the colon with just sufficient force to hold and not to 
cause sloughing. They are placed about half an inch apart, 
and at right angles to the hne of incision. The forceps are laid 
flat on the skin, and kept in position by broad strips of plaster. 
At the end of a week, or less, the bowel may be incised between 
the points where the forceps are attached. Sutures placed in 
the bowel are liable to produce small fistulae, through which the 
faeces escape. 

If the bowel is to be opened an once, it must be fixed to the 
edges of the wound by sutures. For catching the bowel and 

drawing it out of the 



__^^ 



wound, Lund--' has in- 
vented handled needles 
with points set at right 
angles to the shaft, and 
Pi(,_ ^7^ sharplycurved. (Fig. 57.) 

Ordinary curved needles 
Lund's Hooks for picking up the Bowel ,, ^ 

in Colotomy, ^o very well. Two pieces 

of thick silk, with needles 

at each end, are inserted in the bowel at the four corners of an 

area about an inch square. While these stitches, grasped 

in the two hands of an assistant, are made to pull the bowel 

outwa'rds, the surgeon makes a small opening with a tenotomy 

knife. A blunt hook passed through the opening pulls out 

* Laneet, vol. i., 188^. 



460 



COLOTOMY. 



the threads inside the bowel, which are cut in the middle, 
and thus make four points of Qnppor*. e^^u ^^<.lxxc la mcu 
can led through the skin at the margins of the wound by 
the needle attached, and there tied. Around the opening 
in the bowel there will thus be placed four sutures — two 
on each lip of the wound. Additional security will be 
afforded by placing two more stitches, each passing through 
the edges of the parietal incision, and hooking up the corner of 
the opening in the bowel. I prefer silk to silver as sutures, 
simply because, in the subsequent frequent cleansing of the 
wound, the ends of the silver sutures will catch in the wool or 
sponge and so far interfere with the manipulation. 

In most cases there is an immediate discharge of faeces 
through the wound ; but sometimes this discharge does not 
take place for hours, or even for days. If the fasculent matter 
is hard or in lumps, its escape may be impossible, or it may 

cause considerable pain. 
In this event Lund's for- 
ceps-'' (Fig. 57) will be found 
useful. If the discharge is 
frequent and abundant, very 

frequent dressings of the 
LuM'sFovcepsfov removing Hardened ^^^^^^ ^^j^ ^^ necessary. 
ticces in Colotomy. "^ 

Large pads of absorbent 

of absorbent antiseptic and deodorising material, kept in position 

by a square of mackintosh cloth, to each corner of which a piece 

of strapping has been fixed by a safety-pin, is a convenient 

form of dressing. Bandages carried round the body are clumsy 

and inefficient as a means of fixing the dressing. The piece 

of adhesive plaster at each corner of the square of mackintosh 

will be found efficient enough in most cases ; if not, extra pieces 

may be pinned on along the borders. 

The position of the patient is not a matter of great impor- 
tance. Comfort will be increased by changing the position 
slightly at each dressing. 

Primary healing may be anticipated with considerable con- 
* Lancet, vol. i., 1886. 




Fig. 58. 



THE OPERATION. 461 

fidence in every case, provided the wound is properly attended 
to. The disadvantages of suppuration in a wound constantly 
brought into contact with faeculent fluids and gases are evident 
enough. 

When the wound is perfectly healed, and the artificial anus 
is established, an apparatus of some form or other must be worn, 
to collect any faeces that may escape. Ivory and rubber plugs 
attached to an abdominal belt are made for this purpose. I 
have used a soft rubber bag attached to a ring pessary of copper 
wire surrounded by wire tubing, and fixed by tapes carried 
round the waist. After tr3'ing most of the apparatus recom- 
mended for this purpose, I have come to the conclusion that 
nothing is more efficient and more comfortable than clean linen 
rags nicely folded, and kept in position by a well-made linen 
binder. Patients themselves often devise ingenious contrivances. 

Occasionally faeces collect in the part of the bowel below the 
opening and give trouble. Bryant has seen symptoms of intes- 
tinal obstruction produced in this way, in spite of the presence 
of the opening in the bowel. To prevent the passage of faeces 
into the lower segment of gut, various means have been suggested 
and adopted. To increase the acuteness of the flexion of the 
bowel, sutures have been placed so as to take in the greater part 
of the calibre, or even (although this involves transfixion of the 
peritoneum) the whole circle. Mr, P. Jones" has succeeded in 
preventing the downward passage of faeces by turning inwards 
and suturing the mucous membrane around the prolapsing 
portion. 

The most thoroughgoing proceeding of this sort is that of 
Madelung.f He recommends that the bowel be cut completely 
through, that the lower opening be closed and dropped inside, 
and the upper opening be sutured to the wound to form the 
artificial anus. The irritation of faeces on the cancerous rectum 
is thus done away with, and prolapse of the gut through the 
wound is less likely to take place. There is one risk attached 
to Madelung's proceeding which has not been pointed out ; and 
that is the accumulation of cancerous discharges above the 
* Brit. Med. Journ., i836, i., p. 782. [f Centralbl. fiir Chii'., No. 23, iS8.\. 



462 COLOTOMY. 

stricture, which, unable to escape downwards, would certainly 
cause pelvic cellulitis. I have, in one case on which I had per- 
formed colotomy, seen sudden stoppage of all discharge by the 
anus, and appearance of it at the artificial opening. This alone 
would deter me from adopting Madelung's suggestion, even if 
the advantages to be secured were greater than he claims. Ball 
of Dublin has] closed the divided lower segment of bowel after 
laparo-colotomy, and dropped it inside the abdomen, with good 
result. 

LAPARO-COLOTOMY. 

Here the colon is opened by an incision through the parietes, 
in the inguinal region usuall3\ If performed on the left side, it 
is Littre's original operation. It may, however, be performed 
on either side — on the left, when it is desired to open the sig- 
moid flexure ; on the right side, when it is desired to open the 
caecum or ascending colon. The operation may also be carried 
out through a median incision : in such a case the term "inguinal 
colotom}^" generally used for the operation, is wrong. Recent 
experience has made it necessary to review the position which 
extra-peritoneal colotomy holds as compared with intra-peri- 
toneal. Laparo-colotomy is steadily and surely coming into 
favour, and properly so. Verneuil, Ball,* Allinghani (junr.),f 
Harrison Cripps,| are among the most conspicuous support- 
ers of the operation, and have introduced various important 
modifications and improvements. 

Among the most important advantages of laparo-colotomy, 
the following may be mentioned. The large intestine can easily 
be found, and can scarcely be mistaken for any other portion of 
bowel. The operation permits thorough exploration and accu- 
rate diagnosis : thus, not only may it be possible to proceed to 
a radical operation b}^ excision, but there is absolute certainty 
that the opening will be made above tlie stricture. The opera- 
tion is a smaller affair altogether ; may be performed through a 
short abdominal incision, and with more expedition and less 

* The Rectum and Anus, Lond., 1887, p. 362. 
t Brit. Med. Jonvn., Oct. 22nd, 1887. \ Brit. Med. Joiirn., April, 6, 1889. 



LAPARO-COLOTOMY. 463 

shock to the patient. The position of the _wound renders it 
possible for the patient to dress and look after it. The only 
drawback is the necessary opening of the peritoneum ; and this, 
now-a-days, is a very small one. As Ball points out, the 
peritoneum is opened in the lumbar operation by no means 
infrequently. 

The original operation was performed through an incision 
made parallel with Poupart's ligament, about an inch above it, 
starting at the iliac crest and running inwards about two or 
three inches. But other lines of parietal incision may be em- 
ployed. Luke and Adams employed a vertical incision external 
to the epigastric arter}- , and most other surgeons have their own 
favourite sites of operating. As experience has not yet settled 
the best general mode of operation, it will be advisable to 
speciall}^ describe the operations of Verneuil, Ball, AUingham, 
and Cripps. Professor Verneuil, who has for some time advo- 
cated the inguinal mode of performing colotomy, has introduced 
important modifications. To obviate the disadvantage of 
having no spur or heel below the artificial anus to prevent the 
downward passage of faeces, and to provide against the con- 
traction of the opening, are the main purposes of his operation. 
The incision, two inches in length, starts about two inches to 
the inside of the iliac spine, and is directed upwards to the 
umbilicus. He catches the edges of the abdominal opening in 
six pairs of haemostatic forceps, to distend the wound and pre- 
vent the peritoneum from being peeled off". Enough intestine 
is pulled out to make a protuberance as large as a pigeon's egg ; 
this is transfixed with two acupuncture needles, which lie on 
the parietes and keep the intestine in place. About fifteen 
metallic sutures are placed between intestine and abdominal 
wall, and the protruding piece of gut is resected. The thermo- 
cautery is used to check bleeding. The intestinal wall, bulging 
into the large opening, blocks the downward passsage ; the 
magnitude of the opening obviates the risk of stenosis; pro- 
trusion is prevented by the longitudinal direction of the parietal 
opening, and its comparatively small size. 

Ball's mode of operating may be given in his own words 



464 COLOTOMY. 

" An incision about four inches long was made in the left linea 
semilunaris, this position being selected for the following 
reasons : it freely exposes the sigmoid flexure ; it is made 
without cutting muscle; the parietes are thinner here than 
elsewhere ; and no vessels of importance are wounded. The 
deep epigastric artery is quite safe from injury if the lowest 
limit of the incision does not pass below a line drawn from the 
umbilicus to the middle of Poupart's ligament. The upper limit 
of the cancer having been determined, the gut was emptied 
upwards by careful pressure, and a loop of bowel drawn out ; a 
narrow-bladed clamp was now applied to the intestine, so as to 
prevent any faeces coming down, and a similar one applied to 
the distal extremity of the loop. In the present case, Ricord's 
phimosis forceps, covered v/ith rubber tubing, and closed b}' 
means of elastic umbrella-rings, were used for clamps. (He has 
since had a clamp made, which has the advantage of allowing 
the blades to move quite parallel. By means of a screw the 
exact amount of pressure necessary to retain the loop of intes- 
tine in the grasp can be applied, and bending at a double angle 
permits of the blade portion lying easily within the peritoneal 
cavity.) The clamps being applied, a number of sutures were 
passed through the abdominal wall, including peritoneum, on 
one side, through the intestine in front of the damp, and through 
the peritoneum and abdominal wall on the opposite side. 
Eleven sutures were in this way passed, five perforating each 
portion of intestine, and one passing through the meso-colon. 
The bowel was now opened between two aseptic sponges, and 
the interior carefully cleansed of mucus and faeces. The loops of 
the sutures were hooked out from within the lumen of the bowel, 
cut, and the central ones tied on each side ; the suture through 
the meso-colon was also tied ; the sutures through the angles of 
the abdominal wound and outer borders of the bowel alone 
remaining unclosed. A number of superficial sutures were now 
put in, so as to render the application of the mucous membrane 
to the skin extremely accurate all round, except at the angles 
where the handles of the clamps lay. The clamps were now 
withdrawn one by one, and the remaining sutures at either 



ALLINGHAM'S OPERATION. 465 

angle simultaneously closed, thus shutting off the opening into 
the peritoneal cavity at the moment that the clamps released the 
bowel. The single suture through the meso-colon is, I think, of 
use in ensuring a larger surface of peritoneum being in appo- 
sition to the abdominal wound, and the second clamp on the 
distal extremity of the bowel, although not as essential as the 
other, facilitates the operation considerably." 

In Allingham's operation the bowel is kept forward in the 
wound by a suture passed behind the gut and through the mesen- 
tery, and fixed in the edges of the parietal wound. He makes the 
parietal incision, two inches in length, about one inch inside the 
anterior superior spine of the ilium, and parallel with Poupart's 
ligament. The divided peritoneal margins he at once sutures 
to the skin. The sigmoid flexure is then searched for with the 
fingers, and the intestine pulled to the surface. A piece with 
long mesentery is then fixed upon, and " a needle threaded with 
carbolised silk is passed through the mesentery, close to the 
intestine on both sides, then through the abdominal wall on both 
sides, nearer to the lower than the upper angle of the wound, 
and these are tied tight." The bowel is, in fact, hung up over 
the silk thread. The protruding bowel is then carefully sutured 
to the parietal opening all round. Antiseptic dressings are 
applied, and the wound is not disturbed for a few days. 

At the end of two or three days the dressings are removed, 
the whole exposed bowel being found covered with lymph, and 
the opening made. To open the gut he uses scissors, " cutting 
the intestine from above downwards to the extent of about an 
inch and a half ; through the incision can be seen two orifices 
separated by a well-formed spur, the upper opening being the 
larger, the lower the smaller," on account of the supporting 
thread being placed nearer to the lower than the upper end of the 
wound. The superfluous gut by the edges of the wound ma}^ be 
cut away. Such operations on the gut are quite painless, and 
require no anaesthetic. 

Allingham's method of operating is clearly a valuable one. 
He supports its recommendation by records of six very suc- 
cessful operations. I would suggest that the supporting thread 

31 



466 . COLOTOMY. 

passed under the gut should not be tied close to the edge of the 
wound, but should be carried through the parietes under the 
skin for a distance of two or three inches, and the ends fixed in 
buttons. The risk of contamination of peritoneum through the 
suture-holes would thereby be done away with. He does not 
recommend it for cases in which immediate opening of the gut 
is necessary. As regards the mere opening of the gut, I think 
he unnecessarily restricts its applicability ; but in cases where 
the bowel is greatty distended with faeces, and there would be 
difficulty or danger in placing the thread under it, then his 
restriction should be enforced. For enterotomy the proceeding 
seems equally well adapted. The chief drawback to Allingham's 
mode of operating would seem to be the tendency of the bowel 
to prolapse, which is sometimes very great. To obviate this 
tendency he recommends the removal of all superfluous bov/el 
with its mesentery after it has been pulled out into the wound 
as far as possible. As much as seven inches of gut have thus 
been removed. This seems to be a somewhat severe proceed- 
ing, and v.'ill prove detrimental to the favourable acceptance 
which his mode of operating seemed likely to receive.* 

The operation as performed by Harrison Cripps may also 
be given in his own words. " The patient has a warm bath the 
night previous to the operation, the abdomen being thoroughly 
cleansed with soap and water, and afterwards covered with a 
light antiseptic dressing. This is important ; for, since the 
operation is usually undertaken for cancer of the rectum, the 
part is liable to become contaminated with the fetid dis- 
charge. I make my incision higher than most operators. The 
branches of the epigastric artery are thus avoided, and there is 
subsequently less pressure on the wound than when lower down. 
As a guide I take an imaginary line from the anterior superior 
spine to the umbilicus ; the incision, two inches and a half long, 
crosses this at right angles, an inch and a half from the 
superior spine. Half the cut is above, and half below the 
imaginary line. ... In making the incision the skin should 
be drawn a little inwards, so as to make the opening somewhat 
* See Bvit, Med. Journ., April 27th, 1889. 



CRIPPS' OPERATION. 467 

valvular. The peritoneum being reached, it is pinched up by 
fine forceps and an opening made sufficient to admit the finger. 
The intestines being protected by the finger, the peritoneum is 
divided by scissors to nearly the full length of the cutaneous 
incision. The colon may now at once show itself, and can 
easily be recognised by its longitudinal bands, its glandulas 
epiploicae, and by its regular convoluted surface. 
Sometimes it can be detected by the hard scybalous masses 
within it, or it can be traced up after passing the finger into the 
pelvis and feeling for it as it crosses the brim. 

" The colon being found, a loop of it is drawn into the wound. 
In order to avoid the prolapse which is likely to occur if loose 
folds of the sigmoid flexure remain immediately above the open- 
ing, I gently draw out as much loose bowel as will readily come, 
passing it in again at the lower angle as it is drawn out from 
above. In this way, after passing through one's fingers, an 
amount varying from one to several inches, no more will come. 
Two provisional ligatures of stout silk are passed through the 
longitudinal muscular band opposite to the mesenteric attach- 
ment. These provisional ligatures, the ends of which are left 
long, help to steady the bowel during its subsequent stitching to 
the skin, and, moreover, are useful as guides when the bowel is 
ultimately opened. They should be about two inches apart. 

" The bowel is now temporarily returned into the cavity. 
With a pair of fine forceps the parietal peritoneum is picked up 
and attached to the skin on each side of the incision, the 
muscular coats of the abdominal wall not being included. Four 
sutures of fine Chinese silk are sufficient : two on each side, an 
inch and a half apart. 

" The bowel is again drawn out, and fixed to the skin and 
parietal peritoneum by seven or eight fine ligatures on each 
side, the last suture at each angle going across from one side 
to the other. The bowel should be so attached as to have two- 
thirds of its circumference external to the sutures. By turning 
the bowel slightly over the lower longitudinal band can be 
clearly seen ; and it is best to pass the sutures for the lower side 
through this, since it is a strong portion of the gut. The upper 

31 * 



468 COLOTOMY 

longitudinal band, through which the provisional ligatures have 
already been passed, is seen in the middle line of the wound. 
The bowel being now turned downwards, the opposite line of 
sutures are inserted close to its mesenteric attachment. The 
sutures, of the finest Chinese silk, are passed by small, partly- 
curved needles, the needle passing through the skin one-eighth 
of an inch from the margin, then through the parietal layer of 
peritoneum, and, lastly, partly through the muscular coat of the 
bowel, great care being taken to avoid perforating the mucous 
membrane. It is easier to pass all the threads before tying 
them up." 

The wound is cleansed thoroughly and the bowel is either 
opened at once if the case is urgent or covered up and opened 
after a few da3-s. It is necessary to place a bandage or strapping 
firmly over the wound to prevent protrusion in the case of 
sickness. 

The bowel is opened without an anaesthetic for the whole 
length between the provisional ligatures, and the superfluous flaps 
trimmed off to the level of the skin. 

In this way a satisfactory artificial anus is usually formed. 
Occasionally the opening contracts too much, forming a fistula 
which permits dribbling of intestinal contents : to prevent con- 
tractions, Cripps uses a special spring dilator. Prolapse of the 
bowel after this mode of operating would not seem to be a 
frequent result ; and when it occurs, it is said to be easily con- 
trolled by a compress and bandage. 

My experience of enterotomy and colotomy by abdominal 
section leads me to believe that certain modifications in the 
operations described may be advisable. I have never fully 
appreciated the so-called advantages of the inguinal incision ; 
and I should, unless there were contra-indications, prefer to 
operate through the linea alba, and make the artificial anus 
there. There is practically always sufficient length of bowel 
and mesenter}^ to reach the middle line : the experience of 
operators would seem to prove that for the inguinal route there 
is too much length of mesentery and bowel ; Allingham, indeed, 
gives this as the chief or only cause of prolapse. Also bringing 



MODIFICATIONS. 469 

the bowel to the middle line causes a more acute flexure of its 
calibre than bringing it out at the inguinal opening ; and this 
acute flexure is one of the most efficient ways of forming a spur. 
In lumbar colotomy, as a rule, there is a more acute flexure and 
more traction than in inguinal colotomy ; and here there is, 
probably, less tendency to prolapse. 

I do not consider it advisable to stitch the parietal peri- 
toneum to the skin, but prefer to leave the bowel free in the 
incised opening. Although the union of skin and peritoneum 
insures the apposition of serous surfaces and rapid agglutination 
between bowel and peritoneum, it does not secure a strong 
permanent fixation. The subperitoneal fat glides easily, after 
a week or so, over the parietal incision, and the adherent 
bowel falls back with it, as is often seen and described in this 
mode of operating. The peritoneum joins to the bare incised 
margins quite quickly enough ; its junction is over a broader 
surface, and it is more firm and more permanent. The muscles 
surrounding the bowel take a direct grip of it, and there is no 
intervening subserous layer to permit slipping or gliding away 
from its grasp. A direct implantation of the bowel by a broad 
surface on muscle, fat, and fascia is not so likely to lead to 
prolapse as an indirect and comparatively loose attachment 
through lax subperitoneal areolar tissue. 

I believe, therefore, that experience will show that the best 
mode of performing peritoneal colotomy will be by a median in- 
cision below the umbilicus ; that direct implantation of the bowel 
on the raw incision will be found most effectual in securing per- 
manent adhesion, and that the use of the supporting loop of 
thread as practised by Allingham will be found of value in many 
cases. In the actual operation every experienced surgeon will 
adopt modifications of, and departures from, any set method. 



Resection of Intestine. 
Entereetomy; Colectomy; Csecectomy. 

Removal of a piece of small intestine is known as enteree- 
tomy ; the same operation applied to the large intestine is 
called colectomy. Caecectomy, or excision of the caecum, 
usually involves the removal of part of the ileum and part of 
the ascending colon as well. The operations may be considered 
conjointly. 

Histoiy. — It would seem that this is by no means a novel 
proceeding. According to Dr. E. J. 111,"-^'- Randohr, in 1727, 
successfully removed two feet of gangrenous intestine from a 
hernia. Up to 1836, the same writer tells us the operation had 
been performed at least ten times by French, German, and 
English surgeons. Of these cases, 5 were cured, 2 were left 
with artificial anus, and 3 died. Such operations, however, 
were rather timorous removals of sloughs, than deliberate 
resections of bowel. Such a case is one where Mr. Cookesle}-,! 
a surgeon of Crediton, in 1731, removed six inches of gangrenous 
bowel in a case of strangulated hernia, and the patient com- 
pletely recovered.]: 

* Neiu York Med. Rec, Sept. 22nd, 1883. 
t Med. Essays and Observations, Edinburgh, 1752, p. 357. 

\ The following interesting record is from Cheselden's Anatomy, p. 151. 
Lond., 1730 : — 

" Thomas Brayn of Yeaton, in the parish of Baschurch, and county of 
Salop, a doctor for cattle, maketh oath, that about ten or twelve years agone, 
he was sent for by a farmer or husbandman, who lived near the village called 
Maesbrooks, and very near to the river Verney, in the said county of Salop, 
to have his advice about an ox he had, which was then sick by reason he 
could not dung ; he had been drenched by several beast doctors before this 
deponent came to him. This deponent seeing this ox in the condition he was 
in, told the owner, that if he would venture his ox, he would do him what 
service he could, in the curing of him ; which the owner consented to, and 
thereupon this deponent opened the ox in the flank, and took great part of his 
bowels, upon searching which he found there was a perfect stoppage in the 
guts ; and the gut was about the stoppage putrified for about three-quarters 



HISTORY. 471 

The removal of a diseased portion of colon was first sugges- 
ted by Littre, in 1710; but it was not till 1833 that the first 
operation was performed. According to Marshall," Reybard of 
Lyons, who made claim to having performed the first colectomy, 
presented his paper to the French Academy of Medicine in 1844; 
but it was rejected for publication in the Memoirs of that body, 
on account of some want of definiteness in the record. It seems 
almost certain, however, that he did excise a tumour from the 
sigmoid flexure, along with some portion of bowel ; that he 
sutured and returned the divided gut ; and that the patient lived 
for ten months afterwards, passing faeces per anum. The next 
operation is credited to Gussenbauer of Liege in 1877. In his 
case, a primary median incision was supplemented by a trans- 
verse one: his patient died in 15 hours. In 1879 he attempted 
another operation, but had to finish it as a lumbar colotomy. 
In 1878 Baum of Dantzic supplemented a vertical incision for 
enterectomy by a transverse one, and removed a growth in the 
ascending colon, with some inches of bowel above and below. 
Faeces escaped through the wound, and the patient died on the 
seventh day. In 1879 Martin of Hamburg had a brilliant 
success after a most difficult operation, in which he removed a 
large growth with a portion of the sigmoid flexure and some 
glands. In 1880 Czerny had a partial success after a difficult 
operation, the patient dying seven months afterwards from a 
recurrence of the disease. In 1881 Bryant finished a lumbar 
colotomy by removing the diseased bowel ; and in 1882 Marshall 
unsuccessfully removed a growth from the descending colon by 

of a yard, whereupon this deponent cut off so much of the gut as was 
putrified, and took it quite away, and then drew the ends of the guts which 
remained sound after what was cut off, together upon a hollow keck, which 
was about three or four inches long, and sewed the said ends of the guts 
together upon the said keck, leaving the keck within the guts, and then 
sewed up the hole cut in the hide upon the flank of the said ox ; and 
this deponent further saith, that within the space of one hour after this 
operation was performed, the ox dunged ; and the piece of the keck which 
the said ends of the guts were sewn upon and left within the guts, came 
away from the ox with the dung, whereupon the ox recovered, and lived 
to do the owner service several years." 

* Lancet, May 13th, 1882. 



472 RESECTION OF INTESTINE. 

lumbar incision, after having failed by median section. Since 
then a number of cases have been recorded. 

Whitehead of Manchester* has resected the caecum through 
an incision made along the side of the rectus muscle. The 
ileum was stitched to the lower part of the wound and the 
colon to the upper part, an artificial anus being left. The 
patient died. 

Resection of the intestine did not, however, assume the 
position of a recognised operation till 1875, when Langenbeck 
revived it, to be followed in 1877 by Kiister. Since then the 
proceeding has made rapid strides in public estimation, and is 
now regarded as one of the most successful of heroic operations. 

Conditions for which Resection of Intestine may he Performed. Indi- 
cations and Contva-indications. — Resection of bowel is usually called 
for in one or other of three distinct conditions ; namely, gangrene, 
stricture, and artificial anus. 

Gangrene is usually associated with some form of ob- 
struction of the bowels. In this case resection is most often 
a necessary termination to an operation designed merely to 
relieve obstruction. It may require to be carried out at 
any of the ordinary sites of hernia, or through an abdominal 
incision. 

McCoshf has collected and tabulated 115 cases of resection 
of gangrenous strangulated intestine where immediate suture 
was carried out. Of these one half recovered. Resection with- 
out suture and simply followed by fixation of the divided ends in 
the wound so as to form artificial anus, will frequently be the 
better operation to perform. Great weakness of the patient, 
and consequent inability to bear a long operation, and the ab- 
sence of a line of demarcation, would be the chief reasons for 
making artificial anus. On the other hand, resection with 
enterorraphy would be preferred if the patient's condition were 
fairly good, and if the gangrene were so high up in the small 
bowel that the patient would suffer from starvation if an artificial 
anus were left. 
* Brit. Med. Jouyn., Jan, 24th, 18S5. f N.Y. Med. Joimi., Mar. 16, 1S89. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 473 

In cases of stricture, simple or malignant, resection is prac- 
tically the only means of cure. The formation of an artificial 
anus above the stricture is only a palliative measure, intended 
to tide the patient over danger of death from obstruction. 
Cancerous stricture is found almost uniformly in the large intes- 
tine. Of 35 cases of resection of cancerous bowel tabulated by 
Weir," all save one involved the large bowel. Butlin.t after a 
critical examination of Weir's cases, eliminates two in which the 
operation was incomplete. To the 33 remaining he has added 
4 : of this total of 37, 32 were of the large intestine, 3 of the 
small intestine, and 2 uncertain. The parts of large intestine 
involved were: caecum, 7; ascending colon, 4; transverse 
colon, 3; descending colon, 7; sigmoid flexure, g; "colon," 2. 
Simple stricture is most common in the small bowel. 

It may occasionally happen that, in cases of obstruction 
produced by peritoneal adhesions, it is impossible to disentangle 
the coils. In such cases the choice lies between enterotomy as 
a palliative measure, and resection as a means of care. The 
decision will be guided by the condition of the patient, and 
the length of intestine involved. Koeberlej on one occasion 
did not hesitate to resect more than six feet of small bowel 
entangled in adhesions. 

In cases of intestinal fistulae where all minor modes of treat- 
ment have failed, and where the patient is steadily losing 
ground, resection may be called for. 

In small irreducible intussusceptions, resection may be the 
best plan of treatment. Here the formation of an artificial 
anus, though it removes the dangers of obstruction, leaves 
untouched the equally dangerous condition of intussusception. 
Both risks are avoided by resection. 

Removal of portions of bowel may be called for in cases of 
perforating ulcer arising from constriction by bands, or the 
presence of a foreign body, or in examples of multiple or 
lacerated wound which cannot be perfectly sutured. 

The operation is contra -indicated according to ordinary 

* Nezv York Med. Journ., Feb. 13th, 1886, t Opcr. Surg, of Malig. Dis., p. 231. 
I Mem. de la Soc. de Chir. dc Paris, 1881, p. 99. 



474 RESECTION OF INTESTINE. 

surgical rules. Where the strength of the patient is so under- 
mined that a prolonged operation would be likely to cause death, 
no operation is to be thought of. In malignant disease, symp- 
toms of obstruction are considered by Schede to contra-indicate 
resection. I should be inclined rather to say that it contra- 
indicates intestinal suture, or, in more general terms, a greatl}^ 
prolonged operation. The disease may be very quickly removed 
and the divided ends of bowel fixed in the wound, almost as 
speedily as the simple intestinal opening. Unfortunately, too 
many of the cases are complicated by symptoms of obstruction. 
In every case a minute examination of the parts should be made, 
to make certain that the whole of the disease can be removed. 

Mortality and Appreciation. — The most complete statistics of 
enterectomy have been furnished by Reichel.*-' Of 121 cases 
of resection of the bowel, with suturing of the divided ends, 
58 died and 58 were cured, and 5 recovered with faecal fistula. 
Ill collected 47 cases, with 25 deaths. The most frequent cause 
of death is peritonitis, started by some defect in the operation ; 
more than one-half of the deaths are so caused. The best 
results are got after the operation for artificial anus. From 
the elaborate tables of Makins,! which give many valuable 
facts for which I have not here space, we gather that of 39 
cases of resection for artificial anus 15 died, 3 were left uncured, 
and the rest — 21 — were cured. Weir's statistics of 33 com- 
pleted resections of cancerous intestine give a mortality of 
51.5 per cent. Mr. Kendal Franks ;|: has collected 51 cases of 
colectomy for cancer, with a mortality of 40.8 per cent. 

There would seem to be no doubt that, in cases of obstruction 

at least, the best results are got after the formation of artificial 

anus. This is as might be expected. But it is doubtful if the 

double mortality from the double operation would be much less 

than the simple mortality from the single operation. If the 

artificial anus is cured by measures short of resection, which 

can usually be done by methods to be described presently, then 

the mortalit}' would be much smaller. 

* Deutsche Zeitschrift filv Chirurgie, 1883, p. 230. 

t St. Thomas's Hosp. Rep., vol. xiii., 1884, p. 81. 

\ Brit. Med. Journ., March 2, 1889. 



THE OPERATION. 475 



THE OPERATION. 

Special names are given to the operation, as one or other 
part of bowel is involved. Colectomy means removal of por- 
tions of the colon ; csecectomy usually involves, not only removal 
of the caecum, but parts of the ileum and colon as well ; enter- 
ectomy, the best known term, is usually applied indiscriminately 
to any part of bowel, but it will be convenient to limit its 
meaning to resection of the small bowel. 

In its main features, the operation is the same, whatever part 
of the bowel is involved, wherever the opening may be, and 
whatever the disease. Special descriptions will be given where 
it is necessary to specify departures from the routine method. 

The proceeding may be described in three stages : (i) Isola- 
tion of the bowel, (2) Resection, and (3) Suturing of the divided 
ends, or Enterorraph}'. 

Isolation of the Portion to be Resected. — In every case it is neces- 
sary to make a full and particular examination of the diseased 
part before proceeding to remove it. 

In the case of gangrenous bow'el protruding through a hernia, 
gentle traction is emplo3'ed to bring healthy bowel into view, 
and to make certain that the healthy portion can be brought far 
enough outside to permit of its being resected and sutured. If 
simple traction will not suffice, on account of the smallness of 
the opening, or the presence of adhesions, or great distension 
of the abdominal portion of gut, then the simple herniotomy 
must be enlarged into abdominal section. 

When the gangrenous bowel lies inside the abdominal cavit}', 
we must carefully examine, and see that the healthy bowel 
beyond the gangrene is free and sufficiently movable to be 
brought to the surface. I have found a gangrenous portion 
of bowel under a peritoneal band so firmly adherent in the 
neighbourhood of the pancreas that resection was impossible. 

In the case of malignant disease, not only are the upward 
and downward limits to be accuratel}' noted, but the mesenteric 
folds in the neighbourhood must be explored to make sure that 



476 



RESECTION OF INTESTINE. 



the glands are healthy. One or two glands in the area of 
mesentery attached to the bowel may be removed, and this need 
not contra-indicate operation ; but if glands are infected beyond 
this area, the operation must be abandoned. Adhesions to 
neighbouring bowel ought, in my opinion, to contra-indicate 
resection. 

In artificial anus, the mode of isolating the bowel is some- 
what peculiar; and this, coupled with other peculiarities, will 
render necessary a special description. 

The lines of resection being fixed upon, the portion of bowel 
to be removed is isolated as perfectly as possible from the 
general peritoneal cavity. Soft sponges, of suitable size and 
shape, are packed all round the abdominal opening, for the 
double purpose of preventing unnecessary exposure of bowel, 
and excluding foreign matter which might 
escape from the divided intestine. 



Resection of the Diseased Bowel, — I have 
already insisted on the importance of never 
closing an abdominal incision over distended 
bowels. If the case is one of obstruction, 
there will, of course, be accumulation of in- 
testinal contents above the seat of obstruc- 
tion ; and in many cases of malignant disease 
there is an accumulation of faeces, though 
there is no obstruction in the proper sense 
of the word. In either case I should en- 
deavour, as part of the proceeding of resec- 
tion, to empty the bowel above as thoroughly 
as possible. 

This may be done easily enough in the 
case of gangrene. Two Makins' forceps- 
clamps (Fig. 59) are placed, one on each side 
of the site of resection, at the lower limit 
of the disease. The bowel is divided between 
them, and before doing anything else the 
lower portion of divided bowel is carefully 



Fig. 59. 

Makins' Clamp jor 

Resection 

of Intestine. 



CLAMPS. 477 

cleansed. Then the gangrenous bowel is rapidly divided by- 
scissors from its mesentery for the whole distance contemplated, 
catch-forceps being placed on bleeding points. The gangrenous 
tube thus set free is used as a conduit to carr}^ the faeces as far 
as possible away from the abdominal wound into a suitable 
receptacle. The escape of fluids may be encouraged by knead- 
ing the abdomen. When the flow ceases, a clamp is placed 
above the line of the upper incision, and the gangrenous bowel is 
removed by scissors. 

If the disease is stricture, it will not be possible to make use 
of the partly resected tube to convey the faeces away from the 
abdominal opening. Nevertheless, if there is much distension, 
I should make an effort to relieve it through the incised upper 
end of bowel. This may be safely done after careful packing 
with antiseptic cloths. 

In the preceding description the gut is said to be closed, 
above and below the lines of resection, by clamps. There are 
several intestinal clamps, those of Treves* and Bishop f being 
best known. Dr. Abbe of New York has invented an excellent 
clamp in which the blades are covered by flannel, as being less 
likely to slip than rubber, and in which compression is main- 
tained by elastic. Objection has been taken to these instru- 
ments that they are cumbersome, interfering with facility of 
manipulation and suturing, and that their unyielding compres- 
sion is likely to be injurious to the intestinal walls. Many 
surgeons content themselves with the soft dexterous fingers 
of an assistant ; and if these can be trusted, nothing is better. 
The nearest approach to the fingers is the simple spring forceps- 
clamp recommended and used by MakinsJ (Fig. 59), and found 
perfectly efficient. It is made on the principle of Dieffenbach's 
spring catch-forceps, with the addition of a screw, and has 
blades long enough to compress the whole width of the bowel, 
while it may be applied without perforating the mesentery. 
The blades are covered with rubber tubing, to minimise the 
risk of injury to the intestinal coats. Four clamps are used, 

* Med.-Chir. Trans., vol. Ixvi., p. 5j. t Brit. Med. Journ., Nov. 3rd, 1883. 

+ St. Thomas's Hosp. Rep., 1884, p. 81. 



478 RESECTION OF INTESTINE. 

one being placed on each side of the Hnes of incision. Between 
each pair the bowel is divided by scissors. Two clamps will 
usually be quite sufficient ; indeed, as already remarked, the 
operation may be performed without clamps at all. 

The gut may be removed either with a triangular piece of 
mesentery or along the mesenteric border. To remove a wedge- 
shaped piece of mesentery, and stitch up the divided margins, 
gives a surgical finish to the operation which, I think, is of 
apparent rather than of real value. It involves less division 
of vessels, and so induces a smaller risk of subsequent gangrene, 
to leave as much mesentery as possible. It may be gathered 
together in a continuous suture under the line of intestinal 
junction ; and if a few superficial sutures are placed between 
the broad base so formed and the intestinal walls, it affords 
increased breadth and security of apposition. Especial care 
must be taken that no portion of bowel be left without attached 
mesentery. In experiments on animals, Ryd3^gier and Madelung 
showed that gangrene was liable to occur in pieces of bowel 
protruding beyond the mesenteric attachment. Zesas,''-' con- 
tinuing and extending these experiments, found that gangrene 
always followed separation of the mesenter}'- close to the un- 
divided bowel, but that no such result followed when the 
separation was made at a distance. 

If the bowel is much congested, bleeding from the divided 
vessels is likely to be rather sh_arp. The use of a blunt scissors 
will lessen this. Forci-pressure must be used with discretion: 
the intestinal walls must not be crushed — only the bleeding 
point must be seized. Tait's sharp-pointed forceps are the 
best for this purpose. 

If a triangular area of mesentery is removed, the gap must 
be carefully closed by suture. A good method of suturing is 
the continuous overlapping or over-edging stitch, applied over 
the cut ends while the peritoneal planes are held in apposition 
by the fingers. A double row of continuous sutures, in reversed 
order, will give additional security. Catgut would be quite 
efficient. Treves lays particular stress on the accurate suturing 
* Arch. f. Klin. Chir., 1886, Bd. xxxiii., Heft 2. 



ENTERORRAPHY. 479 

of the mesenteric gap, so as to prevent occlusion by kinking 
at the line of junction. For the same purpose, and also to 
minimise the risk of gangrene at the free edge of the bowel, 
IMacCormac recommends an oblique division of the gut, more 
being removed from the free than from the mesenteric side. 

Enterorvaphy. — Attention is now turned to the suturing of the 
divided ends of bowel — Enterorraphy, as it is called. This is a 
proceeding as delicate and tedious as it is important. On the 
accuracy with which the suturing is completed depends, more 
than on any other detail, the success of the operation. 

Of modes of suturing there is quite a formidable variety. 
Bishop, in a valuable paper on Enterorraphy, ••' has collected no 
fewer than thirt3^-three distinct methods. Some of these are 
simply fantastic ; many of them are obsolete ; but not a few are 
brought forward with the authority of great names, and at least 
half a dozen are stamped with the imprimatur of success. 

The most successful method will be in harmony with the 
pathological processes of union. Though it would be erroneous 
to deny to the muscular coat all power of exuding plastic 13'mph, 
there is no doubt that the serous coat provides adhesive material 
in far greater abundance and with greater rapidity. As a me- 
dium of union, the mucous coat may be ignored ; but as a 
passive plug which, when it falls into apposition, prevents the 
escape of intestinal secretion, it may be of great use. Apposition 
of serous surfaces, as continuous as possible, and inclusion of the 
muscular coat, not only to strengthen the basis of attachment, 
but to prevent the retraction which takes place after division, 
are primary elements of success. More in detail, the essentials 
of an intestinal suture are : (i) That it shall secure and keep up 
perfect closure of the wound through its whole extent. The 
slightest imperfection in apposition will permit of extravasation 
of intestinal contents ; every stitch, therefore, must be perfect. 
(2) That it shall be of material which is unirritating, and that 
it shall have a known and durable period of existence in the 
living tissues. Sutures that are not absolutely pure and un- 
* Med. Chronicle, Sept., 1^85. 



480 



RESECTION OF INTESTINE. 



irritating will cause suppuration, as will tying them too tightly. 
Certain forms of prepared catgut, although durable enough, are 
not ver}' pliable or very smooth ; unprepared gut is liable to be 
too speedily absorbed. Fine Chinese twist is on all hands 
admitted to be the best suture-material for divided intestine. 

(3) No suture passing through the peritoneum must penetrate 
the mucous membrane. This would practically be to insert a 
seton, to be followed by a fistula between the cavity of the gut 
and the peritoneum. A suture involving the mucous membrane 
should alwa^'s be tied on the inside of the gut ; if it suppurates, 
the pus passes into the lumen of the gut, where it is harmless. 

(4) An intestinal suture should be capable of being rapidly 
inserted. 

Several varieties of suture satisf}^ these requisites, and the 

most useful may be referred to. They are either continuous or 

interrupted, or mixed — that is, partly continuous and partly 

interrupted. 

The continuous suture has its advocates, and much may be said 

in favour of it. It affords very perfect apposition, it is quickly 

applied, and it prevents distension of the bowel and so opening 

of the spaces between the stitches. The continuous suture has 

been objected to because it remains firm only so long as each 

stitch remains secure, and that, when it is cast off inside the 

bowel, a long thread remains to conduct septic material into the 

holes in which it still lies. The second objection does not hold 

if the suture is placed outside in the serous and muscular coats ; 

and the first is not a strong one if the suture is properly placed. 

The best continuous 

sutures are, in my 

opinion, those of 

Dupuytren (Fig. 60) 

and Appolito (Fig. 61), 

the latter modified as I 

suggest. Dupuytren's 

^ ^ suture gives perfect 

Fig. 60. ... 

apposition of serous 

Diifuytyen's Continuous Intestinal Suture. surfaces, and is the 




ENTERORRAPHY. 



481 



most easily and quickly inserted of all. The suture of Appolito, 
modified as shown in the diagram to avoid the necessity of 
placing a body in the intestine to which the end of the ligature 
is attached, can also be inserted with great rapidity after a little 
practice, and gives wonderfully accurate apposition. 

There is one objection to the continuous suture, and that is, 




+ 3 




8 7 

Fig. 6i. 

The Intestinal Suture of Appolito modified. 

that, if the bowel contracts, it is loosened and may permit the 
wound to gape. As a sole means of closing the ends of com- 
pletely divided bowel, the continuous suture must be condemned ; 
but as an extra suture, applied over specially dangerous parts, 

32 



482 



RESECTION OF INTESTINE. 




Fig. 62. 

Lembert's Intestinal 
Suture. 




Fig. 63. 

Czerny's Intestinal 
Suture. 




Fig. 64. 



Gnssenbaur' s Intestinal 
Suture. 



to give additional strength arid security, 
it is of great value. Its chief virtues 
are, that it can be quickly applied, 
and that it prevents distension of the 
sutured gut and possible gaping be- 
tween the interrupted sutures. 

Of internipted sutures, the best known 
are those of Lembert (Figs. 52 & 62), 
Czerny (Fig. 63), and Gussenbauer 
(Fig. 64). In Lembert's method, all 
the sutures are placed outside the 
bowel : this, always the favourite 
method, I believe to be still the best. 
Czerny's 



method 
combines 
Lembert's, 
with the 
addition of 
a second 
row pass- 
ing tiirough 
the whole 
thickness 
of the gut 
and tied in- 
side. Gus- 
senbauer' s method combines the 
Czerny and the Lembert in one 
suture, but does not, like the for- 
mer, traverse the mucous membrane. 
Bishop (Fig. 65) has introduced 
and successfully employed in the 
lower animals an ingenious and 
satisfactory suture. It is a sort of 
interrupted shoemaker's stitch intro- 
duced on the mucous aspect, each 



m. 



/ffiSJ 



=.^.y^ 



'"^ 



m. 



fe^ 




Fig. 65. 

Bishop's Intestinal Suture. 




ENTERORRAPHY. 483 

suture-loop being tied on alternate sides of the line of junction. 
It is not a rapid method of suturing, nor is it very easy of 
application ; and it is open to the further objection, that the 
sutures are all on the mucous aspect, and that they, by their 
series of transverse constrictions, necessarily cause narrowing 
of the calibre. I believe that, as a subsidiary suture to be 
applied at weak parts, Bishop's is of great value ; but as a 
complete suture for the whole, I 
think it might be excelled by others. 
Special mention must be made 
of the "quilt" suture of Halsted."^' 
(Fig. 66.) In his numerous experi- 
ments he found it the best of all. It 
takes a very powerful hold of the 
tissues, and will bear a great strain ) 

without causing tearing : on this Fig: 66. 

ground, I would advise its use in nr » . j. n? • ^ i^ o . 

° _ Halsteaa s Plain Qmlt-Siituve. 

putting the parts on the stretch 

for the application of the Lembert suture, even where it 
is not employed throughout. The "plain-quilt stitches" do 
not produce such deep apposition as the " buried-knot half 
stitches." Although it has not yet been proved that they are as 
good as the Lembert for operations on the human subject, still 
there can be no doubt that they provide us with a very strong 
and easily applied method of suturing which may he employed 
to supplement other methods. 

The suturing may be carried out either while one or other of 
the clamps mentioned is on the ends of intestine ; or by the aid 
of the fingers alone, small sponges being placed in the open 
ends to prevent escape of the intestinal contents ; or while 
its walls rest on a cylinder, over which the ends of bowel are 
drawn. 

Of such cylinders a great variety has been suggested and used. 

The trachea of an animal ; a cylinder of tallow, or cacao butter, 

or dough, or isinglass, or such liquefiable material ; a decalcified 

hollow bone ; a roll of oiled cardboard, and other materials of 

* Internat. Jotmi. of Med. Sc, Oct., 1887. 

32 =•■• 



484 RESECTION OF INTESTINE. 

allied nature, have been mentioned or used. For this purpose 
the sausage-shaped soft rubber bag invented by Treves is un- 
doubtedly the best. The bag, when empty, is placed in the open 
ends of the bowel and inflated ; when the last stitches are about 
to be inserted the air is allowed to escape, and the bag is removed 
collapsed and empty. Most surgeons, however, Treves himself 
among the number, regard all such devices as unnecessary, and 
place the stitches without the introduction of any foreign body. 

Whilst endeavouring to do full justice to everj^ good method 
of suturing the bowel, I may be permitted to describe in detail 
one method which, for ordinary cases of resection, is, in my 
opinion, the most perfect. This method will most easily be 
comprehended by a reference to the accompanying drawing, 
made to life-scale. (Fig. 67.) The Lembert suture is employed. 

The diseased intestine has been cut away, the mesentery 
being divided as close to the bowel as is deemed desirable, and 
no wedge-shaped portion being removed. Two Makins' clamps, 
covered with rubber-tubing, have been applied, at a distance of 
about half an inch from the divided ends of bowel. A purse- 
string stitch has been so arranged along the divided margin of 
mesentery that it draws together the gap of cellular tissue 
and the attached margins of gut, while it leaves free small flaps 
of peritoneal membrane which may, if deemed desirable, be 
grafted on to the base of the line of union. Four quilt-sutures 
have been inserted on the opposite sides of the divided gut, in 
the exact line in which the Lembert sutures are to be placed ; 
the two on each side are gathered together in the blades of catch- 
forceps, and gentle and steady traction made on them by an 
assistant. This raises a well-defined fold along the edge of the 
bowel ; into this fold the sutures are inserted. The insertion of 
these quilt-stitches makes certain that equal distances of the 
bowel are arranged for suturing, and also by raising a fold makes 
the insertion of stitches more easy, and ensures their being 
placed in a straight line. The whole operation is carried out 
while the parts are resting on a warm sponge-cloth lying on the 
abdominal wall, and while several sponges packed into the 
cavity keep back the bowels. The assistant, with one hand, 



ENTERORRAPHY. 



485 



holds one pair of forceps, and steadies the clamps by their 
extremities ; with the other he holds the other pair of forceps. 
About a dozen ordinary milliner's needles are threaded with 




Fig. 67. 

Drawing to show method 0/ Intestinal Suture. 
(For description see Text.) 



486 RESECTION OF INTESTINE. 

the fine silk selected for the purpose. Each needle carries 
sufficient silk to make three sutures — say, eighteen inches in 
length altogether. Three stitches may be placed as a continuous 
uture with one thread eighteen inches long ; the loops are 
divided, and another threaded needle is taken up. If the needle 
is not too sharp, the insertion of the sutures may be carried out 
with great practical facility and almost physiological precision. 
Halsted's statements as to the resisting nature of the strong 
fibrous coat are verified at ever}^ stitch : it is scarcely possible 
to ignore them. The needle passes readily through the serous 
and muscular coats, then it is checked ; a rapid change from the 
vertical to the horizontal position picks up a few threads of the 
tough fibrous coat, and the needle emerges, to be inserted in the 
same way on the other side. 

Thus the sutures are placed along one side of the bowel 
between the quilt-sutures. They are then gathered together in 
the hand of the assistant, as in closure of the parietal wound in 
abdominal section, and systematically tied from one end to the 
other. Finally the quilt-sutures are tied, the four threads being 
either tied in one knot or in two. The same process is now 
carried out on the other side, and the operation, so far as the 
bowel is concerned, is completed. The gathered-up layers of 
mesentery are finally inspected ; and if there is any redundant 
tissue, this is raised as far as possible up the line of union on the 
intestine and fixed there by a suitable stitch. This will add to 
the strength and security at a point where experience has shown 
it to be specially wanted. 

Senn's mode of using grafting or transplantation of the 
omentum is clearly a most valuable suggestion, and one which, 
as grafting especially, I should certainly employ where possible 
in every case of resection. Indeed, wherever a wound of a 
hollow viscus has to be closed, it will add to the security if we 
fix the omentum by a few stitches over the sutured wound. I 
have done this for the wound in the stomach made for dilatation 
of the pylorus. 

The clamps being removed, the intestinal contents above 
them are permitted and encouraged to pass downwards, and the 



ENTERORRAPHY. 487 

security of the suture carefully tested. At any point which 
seems weak, a continuous Dupuytren's suture may be inserted. 
The bowel is finally cleansed by a stream of warm lotion, and 
may now be treated in one or other of three ways : 

(i) It may be returned into the abdominal cavity, the 
abdominal wound being closed over it in the ordinary way. 

(2) The bowel, carefully protected, may be left outside for a 
few hours till adhesive inflammation has sealed up the lines of 
incision. The sutures in the parietes are placed in position, but 
not tied till the bowel has been returned. Schede suggested this 
plan ; but the risks of distension of the extruded bowel, and of 
extrusion of more bowel, are so great, that it has not generally 
been adopted. 

(3) The sutured bowel is returned, and fixed by a stitch or 
two to the parietal peritoneum. The abdominal wound is left 
open at the point of fixation, but closed above and below. 
A good m.an}^ cases which have recovered have done so after 
faeces had burrowed an opening through the closed parietal 
wound ; and some have died, apparently because free exit was 
not given to extravasated intestinal contents. There is no 
strong objection to this plan ; if there is any doubt as to the 
perfection of the suturing, it ought to be followed. 

When, however, there is no strong reason to the contrary, 
most surgeons prefer to completely return the sutured bowel 
into the cavity, and close the abdominal wound over it. 

Where suture of the divided ends is rejected, on account of 
the great weakness of the patient forbidding prolongation of the 
proceeding, or on account of practical difficulties, an artificial 
anus is formed. This is done by bringing both ends of the 
bowel out through the abdominal wound at a convenient point, 
and suturing them to the wound-margin and to each other 
where they are in contact. Great accuracy must be observed in 
effecting closure of the openings into the abdomen ; and when 
they are closed, they ought to be liberally smeared with some 
oleaginous antiseptic preparation. 

In excision of the large bowel a few points demand special 
notice. It is rarely possible with complete satisfaction to re- 



488 RESECTION OF INTESTINE. 

move a piece of ascending or descending colon through a median 
incision. In several cases where the median incision has been 
adopted, a supplementary transverse incision has been requisite. 
As it matters little where the abdominal incision is made, this 
ought to be always over the tumour. For purposes of diagnosis, 
where the tumour cannot be felt through the parietes, a small 
median incision a little below the umbilicus may be made for 
the insertion of the forefinger. When the site of the tumour is 
made out, a resection incision may be made at a suitable spot 
and the exploratory incision closed. The incision for lumbar 
colotomy is not a satisfactory one for resection of colon. It is 
too deep and confined ; the wound made is of very large dimen- 
sions, and through a lumbar wound it is not easy to delimit the 
amount of disease. 

The after-treatment of these cases requires no special com- 
ment. The intestinal movements are subdued by the adminis- 
tration of opium. The patient is nourished by artificially 
digested foods, which are absorbed by the stomach and upper 
bowel, and which leave no residue. If the intestinal wound is 
high up, rectal feeding may be instituted. For the rest the 
treatment is as in ordinary cases of abdominal section. 



The Formation of Intestinal Anastomosis. 
Ileo- colostomy ; Colo colostomy. 

As an extension or outcome of Wolfler's operation of Gastro- 
enterostomy, similar proceedings have been carried out for the 
estabhshment of fistulse between different parts of the intestines. 
The indication in all is the same, an obstruction which cannot 
be removed, and the aim is to maintain the perviousness of the 
intestinal tube by excluding the occluded portion. Billroth and 
V. Hacker* have performed the operation of Entero-colostomy 
for cancer. Langef of New York has joined the ileum to the 
sigmoid curvature for irreducible invagination in an infant. W. 
Meyer,| surgeon to the German Hospital of New York, has, for 
cancer at the hepatic flexue of the colon, made anastomoses 
between the ascending and the transverse colon. The cases 
of V. Hacker and of Meyer were successful ; the latter most 
strikingly so. Abbe§ of New York, in a most successful case of 
operation for complete obstruction caused by stricture, performed 
Colo-colostomy by using Senn's decalcified bone plates. It is 
probable that all operations for the formation of intestinal amas- 
tomosis will in future be carried out by the use of absorbable 
discs or plates for causing approximation. The difficulty of 
getting plates of bone large enough for use in the human sub- 
ject ; the trouble necessary for their preparation, and their 
tendency to warp and bend, are in Abbe's opinion somewhat 
serious drawbacks to their general employment, and he suggests 
rings made of several threads of thick catgut wound over by a 
spiral of the same material as substitutes. These would not give 
apposition over such a broad surface, but they would certainly be 
easily prepared. I have found the same difficulty with the bone 
plates as Abbe has. I am inclined to believe that the plates 
would be more easily managed and equally efficient if they were 
not dried at all, but placed after decalcification directly in car- 
bolic solution and keeping them there till they are required. 

Scratching the serous surfaces with a needle prior to approxi- 
mation was found to promote rapid healing. 

* IVien. kUn. IVoch., No. 17, 1888. t N.Y. Med. Rec, Nov. 24, 1888. 
I N.Y. Med. Rec, Nov. 24, 1888. § N.Y. Med. Journ., Mar. 23, 1889. 



Operations for Artificial Anus and 
Faecal Fistula. 

The treatment of the artificial anus, which may result from 
any of the above operations, demands separate consideration. 
In those cases where the formation of artificial anus is all that 
was intended by way of prolonging life, all that can be done is 
to attend to the hygiene of the opening. In others, the forma- 
tion of false anus was simply one step towards the permanent 
cure ; and the cure of this fistula is attempted at the proper 
time. In other cases, a false anus, or rather a faecal fistula, may 
result from the yielding of stitches after enterorraphy, and an 
operation to cure this fistula may be forced upon us. 

A false anus may be described as an opening in the bowel 
which forms a communication, through the parietes, between 
the intestinal canal and the open air. The bowel around this 
opening is adherent to the parietal peritoneum over a varying 
extent and by tissues of varying thickness and density, according 
to the amount of original inflammation and the standing of the 
case. The opening in the parietes to which the gut is adherent 
is of varying depth and size, according to the thickness of the 
parietes and the position where the bowel has become adherent. 
Its margins are puckered and depressed, and the skin around it 
is red and excoriated. Sometimes there are two such openings 
lying close to each other. The conditions of greatest practical 
importance are, the amount of bowel which has been lost, and 
the degree of flexure of the two intestinal tubes upon them- 
selves. In cases where artificial anus has been made after 
resection of bowel for gangrene or disease, two pieces of intesti- 
nal tube lie parallel, and separated from each other by their 
double adherent walls. The end through which faeces pass will 
be dilated ; the lower end will be collapsed, shrivelled, and 
empty. Between this condition of parallelism with destruction 
of bowel, and mere slight bending with a hole in the side of the 



VARIETIES OF ARTIFICIAL ANUS. 



491 





gut, there are many varieties. The accompanying diagrams 
(Fig. 68) give some idea of these varieties. In most cases, the 
continuity of the bowel above and below the fistula is in- 
terrupted by a spur or septum [eperon of Dupuytren), formed 
by the intestinal walls bent inwards. This spur varies in 
dimensions from a mere elevation or flap (Fig. 68, II.), to a 

complete barrier to 
the passage of faeces. 
(Fig. 6S, III.) It in- 
creases in size with 
the duration of the 
case, being dragged 
down by the faeces 
and pushed over 
the lower collapsed 
bowel. The upper 
bowel itself, from 
its constant dis- 
charge of function, 
becomes increased 
in size and more 
vascular ; while the 
lower portion may 
become shrivelled 
to the size of fcetal 
life. Hence, it 
is important that 
any operative pro- 
cedures should be 
done early. The 
exi stence of this 
spur is the chief practical difference between false anus, 
which discharges the whole of the intestinal contents, leaving 
nothing to pass into the lower gut, and faecal fistula, which 
may be a mere opening in the gut without flexure upon itself, 
and permitting extravasation of only parts of the contents. In 
the cure of false anus, this spur is the chief obstacle : if fjecal 




Fig. 68. 

Diagrams to show varieties of Artificial Anus. 

U. Upper Bowel. L. Lower Bowel. I. Pascal Fistula, 
there being no Spur. II. Faecal Fistula with Spur. III. False 
Anus with Spur, which completely shuts off the Upper from 
the Lower Bowel. IV. Double Faecal Fistula. 



492 OPERATIONS FOR ARTIFICIAL ANUS. 

fistula does not spontaneously heal, suturing or even resection 
of the bowel is necessary. 

The indications for operation in faecal fistula may be much 
stronger than a mere desire to get cured of a worrying or loath- 
some complaint. If the opening is high up in the bowel, rapid 
emaciation from escape of the chyle, and death from inanition, 
may be apprehended. The urgency of symptoms arising from 
escape of nourishment will depend upon the situation of the 
opening ; but it seems to be a very general rule, that wasting 
is to be expected if the opening is anywhere in the jejunum 
or top part of the ileum. Besides this danger, patients 
with false anus are liable to prolapse of the bowel through 
the opening, or even to ordinary hernia. 

As an aid to the diagnosis of the situation of the intestinal 
opening, Senn's method of inflation by hydrogen gas may be 
employed with advantage. If the gas escapes quickly, and 
there is no audible gurgling in the csecal region, the fistula 
probably enters the large bowel. If the gas does not escape 
till after an interval, and if gurgling is heard as it passes 
the ileo-cffical valve, the opening is probably in the small 
bowel. 

Treatment. — The mode of treatment first adopted will depend 
upon the nature of the case ; and the simpler methods, which 
promise a chance of cure, are put into use before the more 
severe plans. The modes hitherto recommended may be 
classified as — 

(i) Plastic Closure, by pressure or plastic operation on the 

faecal opening. 
(2) Depression, division, or removal of the spur, to restore 

the patency of the canal. 
3) Resection of the fistulous portion of bowel, and suturing 

of the free ends. 

(i) The mode of treatment by closing the f cecal opening is em- 
ployed only in those cases where there is no spur, or where it 
has been removed, and where there is free communication 



OPERATIVE METHODS. 493 

between the upper and lower segments of bowel. It would 
be most suitable in cases of fascal fistula. 

Pressure exerted by an elastic truss, or strapping laced 
tightly over it, so arranged as to bring the granulations around 
the fistula into apposition and keep them apposed, has in some 
cases effected a cure. The use of the actual cautery, or of 
some caustic material, is occasionally effectual. Fixing the 
edges in apposition, after paring them, by harelip pins or silver 
wire has been effectual. If all these fail, an attempt to close 
the opening by a plastic operation may be made. What form 
this plastic operation will take must depend on the nature 
of the opening to be closed ; but I believe that the best plan, in 
most cases, would be by two flaps — one turned on its face over 
the opening, and the other laid by its raw surface over the 
surface of the first. The fistula should be drawn as closely 
together as possible by catgut sutures under the flaps, so as to 
prevent extravasation of faeces into the uniting portions ; and 
the under flap should be fixed all round the opening, also by 
catgut sutures. 

(2) By removing the obstructing spur caused by the infold- 
ing of the mesenteric aspect of the bowel, and so permitting 
the free passage of the intestinal contents, a spontaneous closure 
may take place. This may be done in various ways. 

The simplest and perhaps the best method is by the inser- 
tion of a piece of thick rubber tubing into the two openings 
which pushes downwards the spur by its continuous efforts to 
become straight. A string attached to it, and carried out of the 
opening, prevents its getting out of reach. Mitchell Banks has 
had several very gratifying successes by this method. It is 
evidently superior to the older methods, by tangle tents and such 
like. A silver tube has been used ; but it may be very difficult 
of introduction, and may even produce some risk of perfora- 
tion. The ends of the rubber tubing may be cut obliquely, to 
facilitate introduction and diminish irritation by its sharply cut 
ends. The method by rubber tubing is exceedingly simple, 
quite harmless, and, if employed early enough in the case, full 
of good promise. 



494 OPERATIONS FOR ARTIFICIAL ANUS. 

Gradual division of the spur by ligature has been recommended 
and practised by several surgeons. A ligature is passed through 
the base of the spur, and made to cut its wa}^ through. As 
we cannot always be certain that peritoneal surfaces are in 
adhesion at the base of the spur, this thread may be carried 
into the peritoneal cavity and set up peritonitis. Dupuytren 
lost a patient through peritonitis, after the use of the scissors to 
complete a cure by ligation, and he abandoned this method. It 
is not a plan to be recommended. 

Destruction by the Enterotome. — Since the introduction of this 
instrument by Dupujrtren, and the great success that followed 
its use, the mode of destroying the spur by slow crushing has 
enjoyed a considerable amount of favour. Dupuytren's well- 
known instrument has been modified and improved by Blasius, 
Delpech, Reybard, Gross, and others. Probably the best of 
these is Gross's enterotome, which not only divides the spur, 
but removes it. Its structure is simply that of a large torsion 
forceps, the points of which are transformed into two circular 
opposing rings. These are made to include the spur, and are 
left till the compression of the blades cuts their wa}^ through, 
removing the greater part of the spur between them. As the 
compressed portion sloughs away, protective inflammation is 
set up in the neighbouring peritoneum. In a very few cases, 
however, perforation has been caused by the enterotome, and 
death has resulted. This ought to make us careful in ascertain- 
ing that there is a spur with at least some amount of adhesion 
between its parts. The results of Dupuytren's method of opera- 
ting are very favourable. Herman* has collected records of 84 
cases, with a mortality of only 8.5 per cent., a complete cure in 50 
cases, and in 26 considerable improvement. The mortality 
is so small, and the results (if trust woi thy, which is just 
doubtful) so good, that the method of treatment ought to be 
adopted, where feasible before having recourse to more hazardous 
proceedings. 

After any of the above proceedings it may be necessar}' to 
close up the opening by a plastic operation. 
* Lond. Med. Rec, 1883, p. 187. 



RESECTION OF INTESTINE. 495 

(3) Resection and Suture of the Intestine is a grave and difficult 
proceeding, to be adopted only when all other methods fail, and 
when the patient is losing ground from the effects of the com- 
plaint. It may be indicated in cases where there are several 
faecal fistulas, with several openings in the bowel which cannot 
be closed by the ordinary modes of treatment. In cases of large 
loss of substance of one side of the bowel, without flexure and 
without the existence of a spur, resection may from the first 
afibrd the only prospect of cure. Again, when there is extensive 
prolapse of the mucous membrane which cannot be controlled, 
and which is causing ulceration or inflammation of the bowel, 
resection may be indicated. 

Mr. G. H. Makins* has made a laborious and complete list 
of all the recorded cases of enterectomy for artificial anus. Out 
of 39 cases where the operation was performed for this purpose, 
15 (38.4 7o) died of the operation. Of the fatal cases, 9 died of 
septic peritonitis — 5 of which were from faecal extravasation, in 
3 cases from the mesenteric border. Of the 24 that recovered, 
3 were left with artificial anus. These results are sufficiently 
encouraging, and more than justify the proceeding in cases such 
as those indicated. 

The proceeding so carefully planned and so skilfully carried 
out by Makins, seems to me to fulfil, as far as possible, the 
best principles of surgery, and the following description is based 
on his account of his case : 

Preliminary proceedings, to permit of operation with an 
empty bowel and a pure wound, will be instituted. For a couple 
of days or so before operation the patient is to be fed upon 
nutrient enemas, all food by the mouth being withheld. Just 
before the operation the bowel may be irrigated with warm 
water till the fluid returns clear. If it is possible to wash out 
the lower bowel as well as the upper, this had better be done. 
The fistula and the parts surrounding may be kept soaking for 
twenty-four hours or so before operation in carbolic lotion, as 
strong as can be borne without causing smarting — probably 
about 1-30. When the patient is anaesthetised, the surrounding 
* St. TJios. Hos. Rep., vol. xiii., 1884, p. 181. 



496 \OPERATIONS FOR ARTIFICIAL ANUS. 

skin is to be scrubbed, first with turpentine and then with 1-20 
carboHc lotion, by means of a nail-brush. All granulations 
are to be scraped off or scrubbed off, and their site thoroughly 
purified. The spray may now be turned on, and the opera- 
tion proceeded with, in the expectation of its being an aseptic 
one. 

An incision, vertical by preference, is made through the 
abdominal walls for about an inch and a half on each side of the 
fistula — more or less, as circumstances render expedient. The 
cavity being opened, the condition of the entering and returning 
bowel is inspected — their relations, the amount and nature of 
the adhesions present, and so forth. The ends are now care- 
fully dissected away from their adhesions, liberated, and drawn 
through the wound. After the abdominal cavity is opened, the 
chance of extravasation of the intestinal contents may be pre- 
vented by the insertion of a sponge, or the placing of two clamp- 
forceps round the wound, or, perhaps best of all, by grasping 
the bowel around the opening by a Nelaton's or other suitable 
forceps and leaving it attached there. When the bowel is pulled 
out so far as to give freedom for the application of the sutures 
after it has been resected, the abdominal cavity is to be closed 
as far as possible by the packing in of sponges. A large sponge 
would with difficulty be inserted ; but several strips of flat 
sponge, or several small sponges tied together, will serve the 
same purpose. When the opening is satisfactorily closed, the 
clamp-forceps are put on — one on each side of the two incisions 
— and the bowel, with the fistula in it, is cut away with scissors 
beyond the site of the old adhesions. The mesentery being 
united by a double row of continuous suture if a triangular 
piece has been removed ; or by a purse-string suture if no 
mesentery has been removed, the suturing of the divided ends is 
now proceeded with. If the two ends of bowel are of very 
different calibre, as is frequently the case, some difficulty in 
getting apposition may be apprehended. The lower opening 
may be gently dilated to a slight extent by the fingers, and this 
may suffice ; but it may be necessary to cut the lower bowel 
obliquely away from its mesenteric attachment, so as to increase 



THE OPERATION. 497 

the area to be sutured. The suturing is carried out exactly as 
for ordinary enterectomy, already described. 

If, after the bowel has been sutured, it is found impossible 
to bring together the edges of the fistulous opening, it may be 
wise to complete the closure of the abdominal wound by a 
plastic operation. As to dressing, nothing need be added to the 
accounts already given. 



33 



Section VIII. 



OPERATIONS ON THE KIDNEYS. 



The surgery of the kidneys might be arranged under the three 
heads of incision, renioval, and fixation. Incision is performed 
for the evacuation of cystic and purulent collections, and for the 
removal of stone : the first class of operations is known by the 
name Nephrotomy (i/e0yoo's — kidney, and Tojur] — incision) ; the 
second is specialised as Nephro-lithotomy {ve<pp6^, X/i9os- — stone, 
Tojut'i). The kidney may be removed for any of the conditions 
which justify nephrotomy, and specially for solid new growths. 
The operation of excision of the kidney is named Nephrectomy. 
Operative fixation of a movable kidney is named Nephrorraphy 
()'G0/>o», pa(p7j — suture). As, however, stitching is not an essen- 
tial part of the operation for fixing a movable kidney, some other 
word, such as Nephropexis {Trijrf,,v^a — fix), would be more exact. 
Nephrorraphy is properly applicable to the stitching up of 
wounds in the kidney. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 49» 



SURGICAL ANATOMY OF THE KIDNEYS. 

The size of the kidney in health is about 4 inches in lengthy 
2^ inches in breadth, and between ij and i^ inch in thickness. 
The right kidney is a Httle shorter and broader than the left. 

The kidneys lie deep in the lumbar regions, embedded in 
capsules of fatty tissue. Each kidney overlies portions of the 
diaphragm, the transversalis aponeurosis, and the psoas muscle. 
Vertically, the position of the kidneys is liable to some variation 
in health and in disease. Morris* says that " the upper edge of 
the kidney corresponds with the space between the eleventh and 
twelfth ribs, and the lower edge is nearly on a level with the 
middle of the third lumbar spine." This is probably correct : 
it certainly corresponds with a good many observations which I 
have made. Braune places them in similar position, the left 
being a little higher. Luschka's observations correspond, or 
place them about half an inch higher still. The ordinary de- 
scriptions in the text-books place them about half a vertebra too 
low. The level of the hilum, the part which concerns us most, 
is practically that of the first lumbar vertebra ; that is, just 
clear of the ribs behind, and overlapped by the floating ribs in 
front. 

The long axis of the kidney is not accurately vertical, nor 
are its surfaces anterior and posterior. This will be best under- 
stood by saying that if the vertical axes were prolonged upwards, 
they would meet near the surface of the body behind at an angle 
of about forty degrees ; while if the transverse axes were pro- 
longed forwards, they would meet in front of the vertebral 
column at an angle of about sixty degrees. The upper end lies 
deeper and nearer to the spine than the lower. It might truth- 
fully be said that the surface known as the anterior has just as 
much right to be known as the exterior. 

The right kidney, on its upper and anterior aspect, is in 
contact with the under surface of the liver. This fact may 
explain its slightly lower position, and its greater tendency to- 
become displaced. In direct contact with its anterior surface, 
* Surg. Dis. of Kidneys, p. 2, 
33 * 



500 



OPERATIONS ON THE KIDNEY. 



where they are uncovered by peritoneum, are the duodenum and 
the junction of the ascending with the transverse colon. The 
top of the left kidney touches the fundus of the stomach : the 
upper two-thirds of its external border is in relation with the 
spleen ; in front, towards the inside, lies the pancreas ; and 
crossing its anterior surface lower down, is the beginning of the 
descending colon. The position of the colon in relation to the 
kidney is of importance in diagnosis, as well as in operation. 
When the kidney becomes enlarged, the colon, bound down to 
it under the same peritoneum, is carried in front of it. Renal 
tumours, of necessity growing downwards, burrow under the 
colon and push it forwards. On the right side the ascending 
colon is usually found to lie vertically on a renal growth; on the 
left side, the transverse and the descending colon pass obliquely 
in curvilinear direction from above downwards and outwards. 
In the layer of peritoneum which passes backwards from the 
colon to the mesentery lie 
the vessels which supply 
the colon; and any serious 
injury to these vessels, 
such as might be caused 
by peeling peritoneum off 
renal growth, is fraught 
with danger to the vitality 
of that portion of bowel. 
The peritoneum which 
passes from the colon 
over the tumour towards 
the abdominal wall may 
be divided without fear 
of injuring the vascular 
supply of the bowel. 

The structures at the 
hilum (Fig. 69) of the Fig. 69. (After Weisse.) 

kidney— the artery, the structures in the Hilum of the Left Kidney 
vein, and the ureter — are viemd from behind. 

of special importance, a, Artery ; V, Vein ; P, Pelvis ; U, Ureter. 




SURGICAL ANATOMY. 501 

because they form the pedicle in cases of extirpation. The 
direction of the vessels from the aorta and the vena cava is 
practically transverse. The right artery ascends a little to its 
kidney, its origin from the aorta being a little lower down than 
the left ; it is also longer than the left, owing to the position of 
the aorta to the left of the middle line. The right artery passes 
behind the vena cava. Just before entering the hilum, where 
the vein is said to lie in front and the ureter behind, the artery 
breaks up into four or five branches, which are distribiited to the 
renal tissue. These branches may occupy any position in front 
of, behind, or by the side of their corresponding veins. Small 
branches are given off to the supra-renal body, the ureter, and 
the neighbouring connective tissue. The renal veins are a good 
deal larger than the arteries, and overlap them. The left vein is 
longer than the right, having to cross the aorta to enter the 
vena cava. Into this vein the left spermatic and the left inferior 
phrenic veins discharge themselves (Fig. 70) : both vessels are 
quite within reach of injury in dealing with the renal pedicle. At 
the hilum the veins branch quite as much as the arteries, and 
the subdivision extends farther towards the middle line. In the 
post-mortem room, in about twenty subjects examined on this 
point, I have been surprised at the frequenc)^ with which two or 
more trunks represent the renal vein, sometimes surrounding the 
artery. Variations in the artery are by no means rare. This 
want of uniformity in the renal vessels is against the possibility 
of ligaturing artery and vein separately. In scratching or cut- 
ting open the pelvis of the kidney, it is quite possible to wound 
a vein. Though the kidney is a very vascular organ, yet, as its 
vessels run in a straight course towards the convex border, and 
do not anastomose to any extent, an incision may be made from 
cortex towards hilum without causing dangerous bleeding. The 
accompanying drawing (Fig. 70) is an accurate representation 
of the photograph of a dissection specially made to show the 
relations of the parts concerned in operations on the kidneys. 
It will be noted that on both sides the renal veins dip behind 
the arteries, and enter the hilum between them and the ureters. 
This is not as the books on Anatomy put the relations; but as 



602 



OPERATIONS ON THE KIDNEY. 



in four bodies in which I have carefull}' looked into this point, 
and in a good many more in which I have made rough post- 
mortem investigations, I have always found it so — that is to say, 
always artery in front and vein behind, — the relations figured 
must be common. The breaking-up of the renal arteries, soon 




F'iG. 70. 

Drawing of dissection made to show- relations of parts in operations 
on the Kidneys. 

R. K. Right Kidney. L. K. Left Kidney. Ao. Aorta. V. C. Vena Cava. Ph. Left 
inferior Phrenic Vein. 2 and 2.' Left and Right Renal Arteries. 3 and 3.' Left and Right Renal 
Veins. 4 and 4.' Leftand Right Spermatic Veins. 5and5.' Left and Right Spermatic Arteries. 
6. Mesenteric Vessels. 7 and 7.' Left and Right Ureters. 

after leaving the aorta on the right side and before entering the 
hilum on the left, is a common arrangement. 

At the lower border of the kidney the ureter begins to expand 
into the funnel-shaped sac known as the pelvis. In the hilum 
the pelvis gives off two or three short trunks, which in their 
turn subdivide and form the catyces or infundibula which open 
over and grasp the papillae. Jordan Lloyd''' has found that 
many of the primary tubes are more than an inch in length, 
* Birm. Med. Rev., Dec, 1886. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 



603 



and no larger than a No. lo catheter ; while the secondary 
tubes run as fine as a knitting-needle. In such cases, it is 
evident that a finger inserted into any part of the pelvis could 
not possibly make a complete examination of the calyces ; and, 
on the other hand, it may be added, that a stone impacted in 
one of the primary tubes could not be removed through a 
secondary tube opened up by an incision confined to the renal 
structure. The accompanying drawing (Fig. 71), which is more 

true to nature than any I have 
seen, shows clearly the truth of 
Mr. Lloyd's contention. 

The pelvis passing downwards 
and inwards from the hilum, 
gradually contracts to form the 
ureter. The ureter is said to 
begin at the lower border of the 
kidney, and passes downwards 
and inwards behind the peri- 
toneum to its insertion into the 
base of the bladder. From 
above downwards, it is in rela- 
tion with the psoas muscle and 
the genito-crural nerve ; at the 
brim of the pelvis, it crosses the 
external iliac vessels on the 
right side, and the common iliac 
vessels on the left ; thence it 
passes in the fold forming the 
posterior false ligament of the 
bladder to its insertion. All 
through its course the ureter 
is very loosely attached to the 
cellular tissue in which it lies. 

The kidney is kept in position 

by its thick packing of fatty 

cellular tissue, known as the tunica adiposa. This tissue varies 

in amount in different individuals ; but it is always of consider- 




FiG. 71, (Heitzmann). 

Pelvis and Calyces of the Kidney pre- 
pared out of the Renal Substance. 



I. Minor Calyces. 
3. Pelvis. .). Ureter 



Major Calyces. 



504 



OPERATIONS ON THE KIDNEY. 



able thickness. In this elastic bed, the kidney enjoys some 
liberty of movement ; when it is opened up, and the kidney is 
exposed, regular movements are seen to follow the respiratory 
acts. When the fat is partly absorbed, or its density is dimin- 
ished, anatomical displacements may be produced. 

In operations upon the kidney, the lowest limits of the pleura 
and its relations to the twelfth rib are of importance. Dum- 
riecher of Vienna, in an operation upon an enlarged kidney, by 
misadventure opened the pleura. Holl of Vienna and Lange of 
New York have made studies on this point, which show that the 
last rib is frequently so short as to be overlooked, and that the 
pleura descends as low as if the twelfth rib were of normal length. 
(Fig. 72.) The lower edge of the pleura passes horizontally 




Fig. 72. (Lange.) 

Hovizo7ital Section of Body between Second and Third Lumbar Vertebrce (surface 
of Upper Section seen from below, i.e. right side to left hand), shoiving relations 
of Kidneys to Peritoneum (marked by dotted lines) and Muscles. 



between the lower boundary of the twelfth dorsal vertebra and 
the lower edge of the eleventh rib, whatever be the condition of 
the twelfth rib. It is peculiarly necessary, therefore, that the 
upper limits of incision should be marked rather by counting 
the ribs before operation, than by feeling the presence of the 
bony rim during operation. 



Nephrorraphy. 

By this operation is meant the fixation of a kidney that is 
movable. It need not be the replacement of a misplaced kidney; 
nor does the operation, as already remarked, of necessity involve 
the placing of sutures. With simple misplaced kidney, congenital 
or acquired, we have here nothing to do : the existence of such 
a condition is usually discovered for the first time in the post- 
mortem room. It is where there is not only displacement but 
want of fixation, and where this mobility begets troublesome 
symptoms, that the operation to be described may be called for. 

Pathological Anatomy of Movable and Floating Kidney. — Two 
forms of displaced and not fixed kidneys are described — 
Movable Kidney and Floating Kidney. In Movable Kidney, 
the movements are entirely sub-peritoneal ; they take place in 
a space artificially created in the areolar tissue which binds the 
peritoneum to the underlying muscles. In Floating Kidney, 
the movements are intra-abdominal ; that is to say, the kidney 
is surrounded by peritoneum, and possesses a meso-nephron. 
The former is acquired ; the latter is congenital. 

Movable Kidney. — A certain amount of mobility, to the extent 
of an inch or an inch and a half, is not v y uncomnjon, espe- 
cially in women with flaccid abdominal walls who have borne 
a large number of children. Here the mobility of the kidneys 
is of a piece with want of stability in the position of other 
abdominal organs, and is of no practical moment. In greater 
degree the mobility may be associated with certain changes in 
the tissues which are in immediate relation with the kidneys, 
and in some instances with changes in the tissue of the organ 
itself. 

The kidney moves behind the peritoneum in a loose bed, 
which, according to Newman, may be formed in various ways. 
The adipose tissue which closely envelops it may become 
loosened all round, and the kidney may move about in the 



606 NEPHRORRAPHY*, 

potential space so created. Or, the fatty tissue immediately 
surrounding the kidney may remain undisturbed, while the 
kidney with its fatty capsule may move in a space formed by 
the separation of peritoneum in front from muscle behind. Or, 
there may be a double mobility inside the capsule and behind 
the peritoneum. In every case there will probably be a notable 
diminution of circumrenal fat. In a considerable number of 
cases lengthening of the renal vessels has been found. 

The amount of mobility varies from an inch or two, to the 
extreme distance which the double attachment of renal vessels 
and ureter will permit. 

The movable kidney is usually perfectly healthy ; but occa- 
sionally lesions are found in an association with mobility which 
can scarcely be regarded as other than one of cause and effect. 
Thus, Dickinson* has found pyelitis associated with movable 
kidney; and Fritz! relates a similar association, both in his 
own experience and in that of Urag. Landau | punctured 
many times a hydro-nephrosis in a movable kidney, which 
ultimately became purulent, and was successfully opened and 
drained. Hickinbotham had a case of death from pyelitis in a 
wandering kidney. Kehrer traces a connection between blocking 
of the ureter of a movable kidney by torsion or kinking, and 
hydro-nephrosis. In this category, as a probable cause of hydro- 
nephrosis, Dickinson places calculus or gravel, and further 
offers the suggestion that temporary dilatations of the pelvis by 
an obstructing calculus, by increasing the size of the organ, 
may, when the swelling disappears, cause loosening of the 
kidney in its bed, and so start the mobility. Pyelitis may thus 
be a cause of mobility. In such cases peri-nephritis may be set 
up : occasionally this is so severe as to cause adhesion to neigh- 
bouring organs, and especially to the liver. 

Tumours, cystic and malignant, have been found associated 
with mobility of the kidney. Menstruation has by several 
observers been noted as a possible cause of temporary increase 
in the size of the kidney. Sawyer, in particular, called atten- 

* Renal and Urinary Affections, vol. iii., 1883. t Archiv. Gen. de Mdd., 1859, vol. ii. 
\ Die Wanderniere der Franen, Berlin, 1881. 



PATHOLOGICAL ANATOMY. 507 

tion to this ; and Newman found an aggravation of the symptoms 
in a movable kidney during menstruation, while he thought he 
also detected an increase in its size. 

The condition usually appears during adult life or middle 
age, and is extreme^ rare in childhood and in old age. Of 290 
cases collected by Newman, 81 per cent, occurred between the 
ages of 20 and 50. It is six or seven times more common in 
women than in men, according to the investigations of Newman, 
Roberts, Ebstein, and Dickinson. The right kidney is affected 
four times more frequently than the left ; rarely are both affected 
at the same time. 

From the fact that movable kidney is most frequently found 
in v.'omen who have borne children, it has been inferred that 
pregnancy is a cause. It would probably be more exact to say 
that laxity of abdominal walls, whether it follow pregnancy or 
not, favours the displacement. Absorption of circumrenal fat 
is another cause : such a case, a very marked one, appeared in 
the post-mortem room of the Bristol Infirmary three years ago. 
In this case cancer of the stomach was the cause of emaciation. 
Dickinson records cases in which accident or severe strain 
seemed to start the mobility. 

Speaking generally, movable kidney is most likely to be 
induced by a combination of circumstances. The most telling 
combination would be found in a middle-aged woman, accus- 
tomed to severe manual labour, who has borne several children 
in rapid succession, and who is losing flesh. When once the 
kidney is started from its bed, repeated movements or jerks in- 
crease the mobility. The influence of suck jerks is cumulative : 
every inch gained adds to the ease with which another inch is 
gained, till its limits of mobility are reached, when it drags upon 
its own vessels and ureter. 

Floating Kidney. — A floating kidney has been defined by 
Jenner'^' as one " that has a mesentery, a fold of peritoneum- 
attaching it very loosely to the spine." It is, indeed, probable 
that this definition is too precise. The investigations recently 
carried out under the auspices of the Pathological Society of 
* Brit. Med. Journ., 1869, ^'o^- i-i P- 43' 



508 NEPHRORRAPHY. 

London would seem to show that one variety of displacement 
may merge into another, or rather that a movable kidney may 
so drag out its peritoneal covering as almost to cause the forma- 
tion of a meso-nephron. To surgeons, as Morris very properly 
points out, the main consideration is, whether or not the kidney 
has a meso-nephron ; that is, whether it can be reached by an 
extra-peritoneal operation from the loin. 

Floating kidney is very rare. It is always congenital, and is 
frequently associated with other abnormalities in the disposition 
of the peritoneum. In at least two described cases, malforma- 
tion of the large intestine has been found. The renal vessels 
have been found elongated. General laxit}' of the peritoneum 
has been found in more than one case of true floating kidney. 

Symptoms. — The subjective signs of movable kidney range 
from mere discomfort to intense pain. The symptoms tend to 
vary according to the amount of mobility. Thus, slight degrees 
of mobility may be troublesome only after undue effort or exer- 
cise ; extensive mobility rarely leaves the patient free from pain, 
and is often associated with positive agony. 

The most common symptom is a dull, aching or dragging 
pain in the loin, shooting down the abdomen towards and along 
the thigh. This pain is increased by exertion of any sort, and 
particularly by long walks or rides. The pain is aggravated by 
constipation ; and it is often increased during the menstrual 
period. Occasionally paroxysmal attacks of pain come on, not 
unlike nephritic colic. In these attacks are sometimes found 
symptoms of blocking of the renal artery or ureter : such are, 
suppression of urine, with headache, vomiting, foul tongue, and 
other symptoms of uraemia. Transitory attacks of hydronephro- 
sis may be caused by torsion of the ureter. Very frequently 
there is considerable intestinal or stomachic disturbance, shown 
by dyspepsia, flatulence, colic, sickness, anorexia, and diarrhoea. 
In a few cases transient attacks of jaundice have been observed. 
Frequency of micturition or even tenesmus may be present. 
All such symptoms are relieved by lying down. Pyelitis may 
show itself by the presence of pus in the urine. QEdema of one 



SYMPTOMS OF MOVABLE KIDNEY. 509 

leg,* and jaundice from pressure upon the common duct, f have 
been noted. Those symptoms which may be considered as 
suggesting renal strangulation are found associated with an 
increase in the size of the movable tumour. 

The objective signs are : tumour in the upper abdomen, of 
the shape, size, and consistence of a normal kidney, which, upon 
manipulation, slips away from the examining finger, usually in 
the direction of its proper site in the loin. The patient will 
frequently draw attention to the tumour, and will explain that 
it changes its position. By comparison of the two loins, a want 
of resistance may be detected by the grasping fingers on the 
side to which the movable tumour tends to glide. The abdo- 
minal parietes being usually lax, this sign may be fairly definite : 
the laxity may be so great that the tumour may be bodily 
grasped in the fingers, replaced in the loin, and there palpated 
in comparison with the opposite side. When handled in this 
way, the kidney will show a tendency to slip away from its 
situation in the loin ; and this tendency may be encouraged by 
making the patient turn to the opposite side or stand upright. 
Its range of mobility is characteristic. Between the umbilicus 
and the side of the abdomen laterally, and between the ribs and 
the crest of the ilium vertically, the movable kidney may be 
moved, in varying degree, almost anywhere ; but beyond the 
middle line, or into the pelvis, it will not go. The renal artery 
has been felt pulsating on its concave inner edge ; but this is 
unusual. 

Percussion gives little help. As intestine overlies the tumour, 
the note may be of normal resonance, or but slightly muffled. 
Increased resonance, as compared with the opposite side, may 
be present in the loin. 

During the physical examination, a subjective s5miptom of 
great value is elicited. This is a peculiar sickening and painful 
sensation, analogous to that experienced during compression of 
the testicle in man or the ovary in woman. 

Diagnosis. — A movable kidney may be confounded with 

* Giraud, jfourn. Hebd. de Progirs des Sc, Med., 1836, vol. iv., p. 445. 
t Brit. Med. Jouvn,, Jan. 29th, 1876. 



510 NEPHRORRAPHY. 

tumours of the omentum, the ovary, the parovarium, the gall- 
bladder, and the pylorus. It may be mistaken for impacted 
faeces in the colon. I have removed a hydro-salpinx which was 
at first diagnosed by friends and by myself as a movable kidney. 
A growth in the pancreas I have knov/n to be taken for mis- 
placed and movable kidney. It is probably not necessary to do 
more than mention the fact that these and such growths may be 
taken for movable kidney. 

The diagnosis of movable from floating kidney cannot be 
worked out with certainty. Excessive mobility may suggest a 
floating kidney : but it is just as likely to turn out to be a 
movable kidney with a wide range of mobility. Though it is 
practically of supreme importance that we should be able 
clinically to differentiate the one from the other, it has not yet 
been possible to do so. >. 

Indications for Operation. — Many cases of movable kidney 
require no treatment beyond a properly fitted abdominal sup- 
port. Others, in spite of such support and of other palliative 
measures, are attended with great discomfort, or serious derange- 
ment of health. In a third class there is positive danger to life. 
This last class would include those cases in which there is 
present, along with the mobility, some inflammatory or degener- 
ative condition, such as has already been described. 

The indication to operate is the urgency of the case. The 
operation to be chosen is nephrorraphy. Of i8 cases of this 
operation collected by Gross,* one died. Newman has col- 
lected 5 more cases, all successful. To these a second operation 
of my own may be added, giving a total of 24 with one death. 
The operation cannot be considered as free from danger. It is 
to be undertaken only after a full and fair trial of all known 
palliative measures, and at the desire of the patient. 

Nephrectomy has been performed at least 30 times for 

movable kidney (Newman). Of these, 21 recovered and 9 died. 

For simple movable kidney, the operation is to be condemned ; 

it is altogether an overdoing of surgical proceeding. But not 

* Internat. Joum. Med. Sc, July, 1885. 



THE OPERATION. 511 

all of these extracted mobile kidneys were healthy; at least lo 
of them were diseased. Two were cystic, 2 contained calculi ; 
these 4 recovered : of the others — i containing pus and cheesy 
material, i sarcomatous, i encephaloid, i fatty, all died. 
There were 4 deaths among 20 excisions of healthy movable 
kidneys — a mortality of 20 per cent. It need scarcely be added, 
that nothing less than great danger to life, such as might occur 
from strangulation or diffuse suppuration, would justify the in- 
currence of such a grave risk. 

In the case of floating kidney, when nephrorraphy may be 
impossible, the negation of nephrectomy need not be so emphatic. 
Still, in this case, only failure of a patient and skilful attempt at 
fixation, and the continuation of grave and alarming symptoms, 
would justify the adoption of the major operation. 



THE OPERATION. 

The first recorded operation was performed by Dr. E. Hahn, 
of Berlin,* in April, 1881, and he gave it the name it bears. 
He exposed the capsule of the kidney by an incision in the loin 
between the ilium and the last rib, along the edge of the sacro- 
lumbalis muscle. The perinephric fat was drawn into the 
wound, and sutured to muscle and fascia by half a dozen catgut 
sutures. Having found that after this operation the kidney 
broke loose, he recommended a more thorough proceeding by 
placing the sutures in the incised capsule proper, and fixing 
them to the superficial tissues. 

Many variations on this mode of operating have been 
described, nearly all of them successful. Carrying the sutures 
through fat alone, through both fat and fibrous capsule, and 
through fibrous capsule alone ; simple closure, with ordinary 
drainage ; drainage by a large tube laid along the convex 
surface (Newman), so as to get a considerable growth of granu- 
lation tissue; packing of the wound by gauze or lint (Morris), 
and making it granulate from the bottom, have all been brought 
forward with the recommendation of success. In a case of 
* Centralbl. fur Chir., July 23rd, 1881. 



512 NEPHRORRAPHY. 

mistaken diagnosis, where I opened the abdomen and found a 
movable kidney, I succeeded in fixing it by scratching its 
capsule freely with a needle, while the hand inside the abdomen 
pressed it against the loin. Whatever detail in operating may 
be favoured, there is no doubt that the best plan of fixation is by 
extra-peritoneal incision through the lumbar muscles. 

The best incision is an oblique one, as recommended by 
Bryant for lumbar colotomy. More accurately, it may be 
described as being parallel to the colotomy incision, an inch 
or less behind it, and rising to the same height under the ribs. 
As this lumbo-renal incision will have to be frequently referred 
to, and as it is here performed under conditions most nearly 
approaching the normal, it may now be fully described. 

The patient is placed on the side, resting on a hard round 
pillow, so as to increase to its utmost limits the costo-iliac space 
on the side of operation. The twelfth rib is located both by 
palpation and by counting. The top of the incision is fixed 
upon, at least half an inch below the last rib, and close to the 
outer border of the erector spinae. It is continued downwards 
and forwards towards the crest of the ilium in a direction which 
the eye will suggest as the most convenient, according to the 
conformation of the body of the patient. The length ought not 
to be less than three inches. As the size and the shape of the 
ilio-costal interval vary greatly in different individuals, a fixed 
and definite line for the continuation of the incision cannot 
be laid down. Only the beginning of the incision can be 
fixed. 

After dividing the skin and fat, the superficial fascia is 
exposed. A few cutaneous branches from the lumbar and the 
inter-costal arteries will be divided, and may require forci-pres- 
sure. The fascia being divided by the knife to the extent of the 
skin wound, the outer edge of the latissimus dorsi and the pos- 
terior border of the external oblique will be exposed. At this stage 
of the operation, I think it is best to lay the knife aside, and 
perform all further dissection by means of bent scissors. The 
latissimus dorsi being divided by cutting upwards and the 
external oblique by cutting downwards, the internal oblique and 



THE OPERATION. 513 

the transversalis will now be laid bare. The edge of the erector 
spinae, to which is attached the fascia lumborum, need not be 
divided. The internal oblique and the transversalis aponeurosis 
are divided upwards and downwards by the scissors. Here 
branches of the lumbar arteries may be divided, and require 
forci-pressure. The outer margin of the quadratus lumborum is 
now exposed. The breadth of this muscle, and consequently 
the extent to which it encroaches upon the field of operation, is 
very variable. If it cannot be retracted, the encroaching fibres 
ought to be divided by a stroke of the scissors. Finally, the 
deep layer of the lumbar aponeurosis, often a dense and well- 
marked structure, is divided from end to end of the incision. 
This exposes the circumrenal fat, which probably bulges into 
the wound. 

The dissection will have been aided by the use of broad 
retractors in the hands of an assistant. The retractors are now 
made to gather up the whole of the divided tissues down to the 
fatty capsule, and the opening is stretched to its utmost dimen- 
sions. A second assistant pushes upwards and backwards the 
pendulous abdomen, and specially seeks to force the kidney 
towards the lumber incision. 

Two fingers, carried around the kidney and its capsule, now 
seek to diagnose the exact nature of the conditions associated 
with the mobility. If it is clear that the fatty tunic is closely 
adherent to the fibrous capsule, the former need not be opened. 
But if the kidney has space for movement inside its fatty capsule, 
then this ought to be widely opened along the renal border, and 
the finger, inserted through this opening, moved freely over the 
renal surface, so as to excite plastic inflammation. In every 
case of doubt as to the exact nature of the mobility — and most 
cases will be doubtful — the free border of the kidney will be 
exposed by division of the fatty capsule. Aseptic irritation, 
such as would be produced by the exploring finger, is not only 
not harmful, but positively beneficial, as setting up an inflam- 
mation which may result in plastic adhesion. To facilitate cure 
as well as diagnosis, most surgeons would expose the free border 
of the kidney by division of the surrounding fat. 

34 



514 NEPHRORRAPHY 

Fixation of the kidney is secured by means of catgut, or 
perhaps better, by silk-worm gut sutures carried through its 
fibrous capsule and the margins of the incision. Local irri- 
tation, with drainage, is attained by means of a large rubber 
tube placed along the kidney border, and doubled on itself at 
the extremities of the wound ; the two ends being brought out 
through the incision. This piece of tubing is not to be removed 
till evidences of inflammation appear. 

Newman found, in a case upon which he successfully 
operated, that catgut sutures became absorbed where they 
passed through renal tissue proper more quickly than anywhere 
else. Superficial stitches through the fibrous capsule would 
be quite efficient, and the chances of premature absorption 
are less. Morris, in his most recent operation, has carried 
several sutures through the renal tissues, and fixed them over 
the lumbar wound. 

It is probable that permanency of cure would be more 
certainly secured by general adhesions all around the kidney, 
or by inflammatory condensation of its fatty surroundings, than 
by the temporary and local adhesion produced by sutures. 
Sutures are co-aptating, rather than uniting : they keep the 
tissues in contact while they may adhere ; they only to a slight 
extent promote and secure adhesion. To the end of permanent 
fixation, I should lay much stress on the stirring up of circum- 
renal fat by finger or blunt instrument. 

The closure of the wound and the after-tratment require no 
special description. 



Nephrolithotomy. 

By Nephro-lithotomy is meant the removal by surgical 
operation of a stone situated in the substance or the calyces or 
the pelvis of the kidney. No better definition of the operation 
can be given than that of M. Hevin,* enunciated a hundred and 
thirty years ago : " La Nephrotomie, ou plutot, suivant Schur- 
rigius, la Nephro-lithotomie, est I'operation par laquelle on 
extrait une ou plusieurs pierres au moyen d'une incision qu'on 
fait a la region lombaire, et qui penetre jusques dans la cavite du 
bassinet du rein." 

History. — Up to a very recent date, all operations upon the 
kidney were performed for stone : nephrotomy was practically 
synonymous with nephro-lithotomy. But, in most, if not in all, 
cases of ancient operation, cutting for stone in the kidney was 
as much the evacuation of an abscess, as the extraction of a 
foreign body. Hippocrates himself recommends incision for the 
removal of renal calculus, "should the parts swell and become 
elevated;" that is, if there is an abscess pointing. Neither 
Celsus nor Galen refer to the operation ; so that we may con- 
clude that it had not an assured position among the ancients. 
Arabian authors have casually referred to it. Turner, in his 
Art of Surgery, published in London in 1727, quotes various 
writers to show that surgeons in very early times were familiar 
with lumbar nephrotomy. Avicen f says : "There are some who 
attempt to take the stone out of the kidneys by incision of the 
Ilea, but there is great danger therein." Cardan, lamenting 
over the number of lost operations that were common in the 
days of Hippocrates, mentions, among others, this one of 
removal of stones from the kidney. He quotes AlbertusJ as 
having met with a case where eighteen stones were removed 
from the loin of a woman who was long affected with nephritic 
illness. Caspar Bauhin reports the case of a girl who had an 

* Mem. Acad. Roy., Sec, torn, iii., p. 238. Paris, 1757. 

t Canon., lib. iii. J De Varietat. lib. viii., cap. 44, 

34 * 



516 NEPHRO-LITHOTOMY. 

induration and swelling in the loin, from which a surgeon, after 
incision, removed two stones. 

All these were probably cases of evacuation of an abscess, 
caused by stone ; certainly none of them were operations per- 
formed upon a kidney approximately healthy. The first case in 
which an operation is supposed to have been performed for the 
removal of stone from a kidney that was not suppurating is 
related by Mezerai, in his Abrege Chronologiqtie de I'Histoire du 
France. The doctors, says the historian, having learned that a 
certain archer of Meudon or Bagnolet, who had long been 
afflicted with stone in the kidney, had been condemned to death 
for his crimes, requested the magistrates to hand him over to 
them that they might experiment and see if it were practicable 
to extract the stone without killing him. The experiment was 
successful, and the man is said to have lived for several years in 
excellent health. This occurred about 1680. Pare, Sabatier, 
and others discredit this operation ; and we can scarcely give 
full credence to it. The mere record of it, however, shows that 
it was in men's minds, and regarded as within the bounds of 
possibility. Fare's unbelief or disapproval, it must be noted, is 
by no means disproof or condemnation : great as he was, he 
disbelieved in, or disapproved of, more than one operation 
which was both possible and sound. 

The second case was the well-known one of Mr. Hobson, 
the English Consul at Venice, recorded in the Philosophical 
Transactions for 1696 by Dr. Bernard, to whom Mr. Hobson 
related his experiences ten years after operation. Some dis- 
credit has been cast upon this case also ; but I think there can 
be no reasonable doubt that the operation was performed, 
though it is just possible that suppuration existed. The case, 
related by the patient himself, who was not a medical man, is 
too circumstantial to be purely fictitious. The scholarly and 
accurate M. Hevin,* in his historical and critical researches 
into Nephrotomy, says that he saw and examined the fistula in 
Mr. Hobson's side, and fully satisfied himself as to the reality 
of the operation. In Hevin's paper is given a full account of 
* Mem. Acad. Roy., &c., torn, iii., p. 238, 1757. 



HISTORY. 517 

the life and work of the Marchettis of Milan, one of whom per- 
formed the operation. I have elsewhere quoted my opinion as 
to the reality of this operation ; and Downes has contributed 
an able article to the same purpose. 

The same amount of credence cannot be accorded to the 
case related by Joachim Camerarius,* in which a surgeon, at 
the urgent request of a nobleman who was suffering agonies, 
successfully extracted a stone that was plugging one of the 
ureters. Schurrigius,f using the case of a certain General de 
Birckholtz as a text, fully discusses the whole question under 
the name Nephro-lithotomy. In his case he would not operate, 
because he thought that the stones were blocking the ureter too 
low down to be within reach. 

The practical outcome of these and other cases is fittingly 
summarised by M. Lafitte, in the second volume of the Memoivs 
of the Royal Academy of Surgery. He concludes that nephro- 
lithotomy is not to be reckoned as a justifiable surgical pro- 
ceeding until abscess has formed. Rousselet and Riolan would 
remove a stone that could be felt. Nearly all subsequent writers 
admit the propriety of removing stones, provided abscess has 
formed ; and there is almost equal unanimity in condemning the 
operation in the absence of abscess. In the first volume of 
Medical Essays and Observations, published in Edinburgh in 1752 
(p. 186), Mr. John Douglas relates how he attempted, after 
death, to see whether it was possible to remove a stone that had 
been diagnosed to exist during life. He found that it was im- 
possible. The depth of the incision was three and a half 
inches ; and at this distance from the surface he found it 
impossible to reach the kidney substance. Such a record lends 
weight to the opinion that surgery, in some of its departments, 
has done nothing but retrograde for more than a thousand 
years ; and that, in the last fifty years, we have done little more 
than pick up the clues that were lost when the Alexandrian 
Library was burnt. 

There is no doubt that surgery is indebted to Mr. Henry 
Morris, of Middlesex Hospital, for the invention of the modern 
* Schenck, Observ. Med., lib. iii. f Liikolog. Hist. Med., cap. 13. 



518 NEPHRO-LITHOTOMY. 

operation of nephro-lithotomy. He performed his first operation 
in 1880. Some hundreds of operations have been performed 
since then ; but the operation of to-day practically continues 
as Mr. Morris left it. 



RENAL CALCULUS. 

Pathological Anatomy. — Renal calculus occurs chiefly before 
the age of fifteen and after fifty. According to Mr. Thomas 
Ta3dor, quoted by Morris, each age has ics variety of calculus : 
" The nucleus of renal calculi formed in infancy is urate of 
ammonia ; the nucleus of calculi formed in adult life is uric 
acid ; whereas that of calculi formed after the fortieth year is 
oxalate of lime." Whatever its nature, and wherever it origi- 
nates, the calculus usually arises to pathological and clinical 
importance in a calyx, or in the pelvis, or in the upper extremity 
of the ureter. One or both kidneys may be affected with 
lithiasis ; and one or more stones may be found. The amount 
of mischief set up varies according to the size of the stone, the 
roughness or smoothness of its surface, and the position it 
occupies. A very rough stone, as one of oxalate of lime, may 
lie quietly in a calyx for years ; while a small rounded smooth 
stone, which has not escaped from the secreting substance, may 
set up inflammation or suppuration. A small stone in the pelvis 
which just fits the orifice of the ureter may, by preventing the 
outflow of urine, cause most mischief of all. 

Three types of nephro-lithiasis may be pathologically differ- 
entiated. The first is the small stone, with healthy renal tissue. 
Tlie second is the large, perhaps branched, stone, coated with 
phosphates, and lying in an abscess-sac the walls of which are 
the thickened and suppurating calyces. The third is the small 
movable stone, blocking the ureteric orifice, and causing hydro- 
and pyo-nephrosis, with destruction of renal tissue. Each type 
has its special clinical features ; and for each a variation in the 
operative procedure is called for. Strictly speaking, these types 
are different stages or casual developments of the same disease; 
but they are sufficiently marked to be worthy of differentiation. 



PATHOLOGICAL ANATOMY. 519 

(i) Gravel formed in the uriniferous tubules may either pass 
away in the current of urine without causing symptoms ; or 
may, after increasing in size, be passed with difficulty along 
the ureter, producing symptoms of renal colic ; or may remain 
embedded in the renal tissue, or imprisoned in a calyx. Here 
it may remain for long periods, setting up symptoms indica- 
tive of irritation rather than of inflammation, or pathological 
degeneration. Physically, it may cause bleeding, and set up 
attacks of renal congestion or inflammation, which spontaneously 
subside ; physiologically, it begets a long train of symptoms, 
referable chiefly to the influence of nerve connection. 

(2) In the calyces or the pelvis, a stone may set up catarrh 
or inflammation of the lining membrane, with secretion of pus, 
which passes into the bladder with the urine. As the stone 
grows the calyces are dilated, while their walls are thickened ; 
accretion takes place in the areas where pressure is least, and 
the stone thus comes to be a cast of the dilated calyces which it 
occupies. The stream of urine flows along between the stone 
and the encircling sac ; there is no urinary obstruction ; and 
renal tissue is destroyed by continued suppurative inflammation, 
set up by the foreign body. In this way a renal calculus may 
attain to enormous dimensions, without causing marked symp- 
toms. In the museum of the Bristol Infirmary is an enormous 
stone, which is a perfect cast of the calyces and lobules of a 
kidney enlarged to four times its normal dimensions : this stone 
was accidentally discovered at the post-mortem examination of 
a patient who died of lung inflammation, and who had presented 
no sign of renal calculus. Sometimes the calculus rolls about 
in an abscess sac of its own formation, and increases in size in 
the pelvis or calyces in the same manner as a vesical calculus. 
Suppurative inflammation spreads by continuity of tissue to the 
renal substance, and will ultimately cause its complete destruc- 
tion. The further course of this process is towards the forma- 
tion of peri-nephric abscess, which may burst through the loin, 
forming urinary fistula. 

(3) When a comparatively small stone rolling about in the 
pelvis becomes engaged in the orifice of the ureter, acting as a 



520 NEPHRO-LITHOTOMY. 

sort of ball-valve, the outflow of urine is checked, and, in 
addition to calculus pyelitis, there is set up an atrophic 
degeneration of the kidney, which may ultimately leave it as 
a loculated sac, containing very little healthy secreting sub- 
stance. In the fully developed condition, numerous cavities 
are found containing brown putrid urine, with numerous 
calculi ; and in the bottom of the pelvis, or lying in the orifice 
of the ureter, is found one stone which is presumably the source 
of the mischief. The renal tissue is not destroyed by advancing 
suppurative inflammation, but by compression and distension, 
brought on by obstruction to the flow of urine.* 

Many varieties of calculus are formed in the kidney. The 
most common is uric acid ; next in frequency comes oxalate of 
lime. Other varieties are composed of phosphate of lime, car- 
bonate of lime, the triple phosphate, urate of ammonia, cystine, 
and xanthine. Occasionally the nucleus is formed of a blood- 
clot, or a fibrinous coagulum. Indigo has been found in the 
centre of a renal calculus ; the uro-stealith, or " soap-stone," is 
very rare. 

Symptoms and Diagnosis. — Both kidneys are about equally 
liable to calculus ; in about a fifth of the cases, stone exists 
simultaneously in both organs. It is more common in males 
than in females, and is most frequently found to arise before 
middle age. 

A stone in the kidney will probably first signify its presence 
by pain and haemorrhage. Sometimes the symptoms are slight 
and transient ; frequently they are exceedingly severe and per- 
sistent, so much so as almost to make life unbearable. Other 
symptoms associated with the pain and haematuria are gastric 
disturbances, retraction of the testes, irritability of the bladder, 
pus in the urine, and sometimes suppression of urine. 

The pain is usually felt in the loin, over the kidney affected ; 
though it may be felt in both loins, while one kidney is healthy. 

* Jordan Lloyd (Practitioner, Sept., 1887) has brought his extensive expe- 
rience and study to bear on the further elaboration of these types, mainly 
from the clinical and practical standpoints. To his paper I would refer my 
readers. 



SYMPTOMS. 521 

It is of a dull, heavy, dragging character, and may shoot down- 
wards along the course of the ureter, and be referred to the 
testicle or even to the point of the penis. Sometimes it may 
shoot down the thigh, and be specially referred to the leg, the 
sole of the foot, or even the knee. Apart from the actual pain, 
there is sometimes a curious feeling of consciousness in the 
patient's mind as to the existence of a stone in the kidney. 
Some tenderness on pressure over the affected kidney is usually 
confessed to. The pain is intermittent, and is usually at its 
worst after active or jerking movements. Posture may affect it. 
Thus, a patient who suffers while sitting may be relieved by 
walking or lying down ; pain which may be severe while the 
patient lies on one side, may be relieved by his turning on to 
the other ; and various other positions, known from experience, 
may afford comfort. 

Symptoms referred to the testicle of the diseased side, when 
they exist, are characteristic and valuable. Peculiar sensations, 
varying from tenderness to actual pain of a neuralgic character; 
some degree of swelling, and retraction of it within the scrotum, 
are the most common concomitants of calculus. In the female 
such pain may be referred to the labium, or the orifice of the 
urethra. 

Symptoms derived from the bladder and urine are common. 
Vesical irritation is a common symptom of renal calculus. In 
fact, so common is it, that patients under close observation are 
usually sounded for stone before the diagnosis of renal calculus 
is made. There will be a constant desire to pass water, with 
frequent passing of it. Haematuria, remittent and not very 
profuse, is very frequently associated with the complaint. 
Occasionally it is absent throughout the disease. Sometimes 
it is present only after exercise ; if it exists at other times, 
jarring motion is almost certain to aggravate it. As found in 
the urine, the blood is mixed less intimately than it is in other 
diseases of the kidney, and more intimately than in disease of 
the bladder or prostate. Casts of the ureter are occasionally 
found, and sometimes small rounded clots. Pus may be found 
in the urine from pyelitis that may have been set up. A pro- 



522 NEPHEO-LITHOTOMY. 

bable guess as to the nature of the stone, its roughness or 
smoothness, may be made from the amount of the bleeding. 

Symptoms referable to the stomach are not uncommon. 
There may be nausea, vomiting, and irregular attacks of indi- 
gestion, accompanied with flatulence and colicky pains. 

A presumptive evidence of stone in the kidney is a previous 
history of renal colic, arising from the passage of stone along 
the ureter. If the kidney has formed a stone once, it may do so 
again. Such an attack once borne, is a memory for a lifetime. 
The acute agony of pain in the loins, shooting down the ureter 
into the testicle ; the depressing nausea and ineffectual vomiting; 
the persistent vesical tenesmus, and the final exacerbation as the 
stone passes the narrowed channel before entering the bladder, 
make up a combination of suffering as intense, perhaps, as 
disease can create. If renal colic has existed, the patient is 
sure to know of it. 

A stone has actually been felt in the kidney by the examin- 
ing finger, and a sensation of grating has been communicated 
by the rubbing of several stones together. But such an aid to 
diagnosis is very rarely afforded. Strong pressure or a sharp 
squeeze, as causing an increase of pain of a pricking or stabbing 
character, may be of great diagnostic value. 

As a result of extensive and carefully elaborated clincal 
experience, Bennett May* groups cases of stone in the kidney 
into three classes : (i) Where pain is the only prominent symp- 
tom — that is, where no help is given to the diagnosis by the 
physical examination of the urine or the patient, though consti- 
tutional symptoms may be present. (2) Where pus or blood, 
or both, are found in the urine. (3) Where, in addition to any 
of the above, there is a lumbar swelling or tumour in the region 
of the kidney. This, it will be seen, runs in some respects 
parallel with the division given above from the pathological 
point of view. In women, according to this authority, haema- 
turia may be more misleading as a symptom of stone in the 
kidney than in men ; a peculiarity which may depend on the 
fact, pointed out by Lloyd, that in women the primary and 
* Birm. Med. Rev., Jan., 1887. 



DIAGNOSIS. 523 

secondary tubes are long and narrow, and therefore more likely 
to closely encircle the stone. 

An element of confusion arises in the fact, first noted by 
Thornton and confirmed by others, that stone on one side may 
produce symptoms on the other. Godlee* relates a very inter- 
esting case where, after a stone had been removed from the right 
kidney, there was severe colicky pain on the left side, followed 
by the discharge of several small fragments of stone. 

The differential diagnosis has to be made with malignant 
and villous growths of the bladder ; purpura and haemophilia ; 
and malignant or inflammatory disease of the substance of the 
kidney. In addition to the symptoms already detailed, the pro- 
fuse haemorrhage of the first, with abundant clots and imperfect 
commingling of blood and urine, will help us. For the rest, the 
existence of the characteristic dyscrasiae, and, in the case of 
tumours, the presence of a swelling in the renal region, will help 
us. Haematinuria will be recognised by its characteristic symp- 
toms, borne out by a microscopic examination of the urine. 
The condition most likely to be mistaken for renal calculus is 
early strumous disease of the kidney. The. presence of pain in 
calculus, and the absence of haematuria in strumous disease, 
are the chief signs relied upon for diagnosis. I have on two 
occasions (once with the assistance of my colleague. Dr. 
Shingleton Smith) diagnosed strumous kidney from the dis- 
covery of tubercle-bacilli in the urine. 

An attempt to diagnose the actual pathological condition 
present ought to be made. 

The small calculus with healthy kidney may be suspected 
when the symptoms are chiefly or entirely haematuria and pain. 

The large calculus embedded in an abscess sac is suggested 
by pus in the urine, a tumour or increased resistance in the loin, 
and pain on pressure. 

The hydro-nephrotic kidney, with small calculus blocking the 
ureter, is suggested by repeated attacks of lumbar pain, alkaline 
or putrid urine containing little pus, and a swelling in the loin, 
which is not very hard, and not very painful on being pressed. 
* Practitioner, Oct., 1887. 



524 NEPHRO-LITHOTOMY. 

Indications for Operation. — Dickinson tells us, that of three 
individuals who have stone in the kidney, only one dies of it ; 
the other two die of something else. The mere presence of 
stone in the kidney is not, therefore, an indication for operation. 
We must, in the first place, wait to see if the stone will be 
passed by the ureter : and, in the second place, come to a deci- 
sion, either that the calculus is setting up mischief in the kidney 
which may endanger life, or that the subjective symptoms are so 
urgent that necessary work cannot be performed or health is 
being undermined. In every case, palliative treatment by rest, 
the exhibition of alkaline drugs, and careful dietary, will have 
been fully and fairly tried. Morris makes the wise suggestion 
that, when anuria follows symptoms of calculus in one or both 
kidneys, the kidney which has last become affected should be 
first explored. 

A further reason for caution in proceeding to operate is 
the fact, that no fewer than twenty-five exploratory operations 
have been performed, and no stone found. This, of course, 
is no reproach to the operation itself; on the contrary, as 
all the patients recovered, it speaks in its favour. This more 
especially refers to operation where the kidney is comparatively 
healthy. 

Where the kidney is diseased, the indication is to operate at 
once, provided the other kidney is diagnosed as healthy. In 
such a case, the operation may be little more than a simple 
nephrotomy, with drainage of an abscess. If advanced suppu- 
ration exists, the question of nephrectomy will arise, and must 
be decided on the same principles as would guide us in operating 
where there was no stone. In many cases of suppurative nephri- 
tis, stones are found which may have little connection with the 
origin of the disease. Barker points out that, in advanced 
calculous disease, both nephro-lithotomy and nephrectomy are 
about equally dangerous, as the patients are usually advanced 
in years and much pulled down in strength. Nephro-lithotomy, 
where the kidney is healthy, is a very safe operation : as yet, its 
mortality has not exceeded lo per cent. Of 21 operations col- 
lected by Gross, 2 died — a mortality of 9.52 per cent. Newmari 



THE OPERATION. 525 

has collected 42 operations on healthy kidneys without a death. 
He finds that Brodeur (possibly Gross also) included cases in 
which suppuration existed. Where suppuration was present, 
60 operations were followed by 26 deaths — a mortality of 43.3 
per cent. 

THE OPERATION. 

The instruments necessary, besides knife, scissors and catch- 
forceps, are : two large broad retractors ; a fine conical needle, 
two and a half inches long, set in a handle, for exploring the 
kidney ; and specially-designed sounds, probes, scoops, or 
forceps, for detecting the stone and removing it. Lucas's in- 
struments seem to be admirably suited for this operation. An 
ordinary bladder-sound with short beak and of smallest size for 
children, will be found necessary, if the kidney is to be explored 
in the manner recommended by Jordan Lloyd. 

The best incision is the oblique lumbar one recommended 
for nephrorraphy. Morris favours this incision : Howse made 
use of a vertical incision, supplemented by a transverse one ; 
and other surgeons have variously modified it. The knife is 
entered close to the edge of the erector spinge, half an inch or 
more from the lower border of the twelfth rib, and carried 
obliquely downwards and forwards towards the crest of the 
ilium for three or four inches, according to the size and shape 
of the costo-iliac space. If, in spite of the artificial enlarge- 
ment of the costo-iliac space by the pillow placed under the 
opposite loin, the area for operation is very limited, the incision 
may be curved forwards, after being carried farther back than 
usual. Additional space may be got by dividing transversely 
the fibres of the quadratus lumborum. With the division of 
the deep lumbar aponeurosis and the exposure of the circum- 
renal fat, this preliminary stage of the operation is finished. All 
pressure forceps are now removed, vessels of considerable size 
being ligatured, and the wound is made to gape as much as 
possible by retractors in the hands of an assistant. 

The fatty capsule is teased open with forceps, and the kidney 
surface is exposed. Morris says that, as the back of the kidney 



526 



NEPHRO-LITHOTOM Y. 



is approached, there may be noted differences in the character, 
of the fat ; that next the kidney being of fine texture, and of a 
delicate primrose colour. If there has been long-standing 
inflammation of the kidney, the surrounding tissues will be 
abnormally firm and coherent. 

Through the opening thus made in the fat the finger is pushed, 
and the surface of the kidney systematically explored. During 
this examination, an assistant, pressing on the abdominal sur- 
face, forces the kidney as much as possible into the wound. 
The anterior surface may be explored while the kidney is lying 
on the psoas, against which firm surface it is pressed. To 
explore the posterior surface, the kidney is pulled forward and 

compressed against 
either a broad spatula 
or the fingers of the op- 
posite hand. Lange's 
proposal, to examine the 
pelvis by tilting forward 
the whole organ, is well 
worthy of attention. 
(Fig. 73.) It is cer- 
tainly easier to examine 
the kidney between thg 
fingers when it is well 
pulled forwards out of 
its bed, than when it is 
lying far back in its 
normal situation. 
Every particle of renal 
tissue is rubbed and 
squeezed between the 
fingers, and any hard 
spot is noted. If the stone is small, and if it is overlapped by 
renal tissue, which may be increased in density from prolonged 
irritation, it may be impalpable. In one case of Morris's, after 
the kidney had been removed and placed on a table, it was 
found impossible by palpation with the finger to detect a stone 




Fig. 73. (Lange.) 

Pelvis and Ureter exposed from behind after 
removal of Peri-nephric Fat. 

A, Kidney ;. B, Pelvis of Kidney ; E, F, Quadratus 
Lumborum. 



THE OPERATION. 527 

which was embedded in a calyx. Of this fact there can be no 
doubt : a most painstaking examination with the finger may fail 
to detect a stone where it is present. 

Should a hard or elevated area be made out, the exploring 
needle is pushed into it, and the stone felt for. 

Should no stone be felt, the plan recommended by Jordan 
Lloyd" should now be adopted. As a result of his anato- 
mical studies (see above) and practical experience, he con- 
siders it infinitely more reliable and quite as easy to execute as 
the ordinary plan of needling. " The procedure is analogous to 
the method of detecting stone in the bladder, differing from it 
only in the one particular, that we reach the kidney's interior 
through an opening artificially made. When the kidney is 
exposed through a lumbar wound, I puncture its lower end with 
a long-bladed tenotome in a direction upwards and inwards, 
making for the lowest of the calyces. If the surgeon is observ- 
ant and his knife is keen, he will readily appreciate the moment 
when a cavity is struck by the altered resistance offered to the 
puncturing instrument. . . . Into this opening I pass a child's 
bladder-sound, and systematically explore the whole interior of 
the pelvis. This sound should be of special construction, 
having a beak not more than one-third of an inch in length, a 
stem about seven inches, and the size of a No. 3 English 
catheter. It should be passed at once to the top of the kidney 
cavity, a distance of nearly four inches, and the exploration 
should be carried out systematically, from above downwards, 
the point being rotated in all directions so as to investigate 
both tubes and calyces as the instrument is withdrawn." He 
has succeeded by this plan, after needling and palpation have 
both failed. 

Should this plan fail, a systematic examination with explor- 
ing needle may be carried out. This needle is a fine sharp steel 
probe, mounted on a wooden handle. It is so fine that it makes 
a very small wound ; and, being only two and a half inches in 
length, it cannot, if pushed through the cortex, wound the large 
renal vessels. The exploratory punctures are made in a 

• Loc. cit. 



528 NEPHRO-LITHOTOMY. 

thoroughly systematic manner from one end to the other of the 
posterior border. While this is being done with the needle in 
one hand, the kidney is steadied and held upwards in the wound 
by the fingers of the other hand. Every thrust ought to be 
towards the hilum, so as to strike the position of the calyces. 
Should the needle strike a stone, a long thin-bladed knife is 
pushed alongside of it, till it also strikes the stone, and a vertical 
incision is then made in the renal tissue through which the stone 
may be extracted. 

Supposing that no stone is discovered after complete explo- 
ration with the needle, the operation is not to be abandoned. 
The kidney may be unhesitatingly laid open by an incision 
along its posterior border, long enough to permit of digital 
examination of the calyces. As Morris remarks, "kidney 
wounds are known to heal readily, and whilst the risk of such 
an incision would not equal that of a nephrectomy, the subse- 
quent condition of the kidney would be preferable to the 
possession of only one of these organs." Instead of the finger, 
a sound, such as that of Lloyd or Lucas or Bruce Clarke,*' may 
be used. The latter surgeon made a series of careful experi- 
ments in the post-mortem room, to test how far it was possible 
to explore with a flexible sound the various recesses of the 
kidney. He found that with an ordinary bougie a houle with a 
porcelain tip it was possible to explore nearly every part of the 
pelvis and calyces. 

Supposing a stone is felt in the pelvis of the kidney, it may 
become a question whether it would not be better directly to 
extract it by incising or tearing the pelvis, than to do so by 
incising the renal tissue. The pelvis should be opened from 
behind if possible, and the instrument used ought not to be 
sharp. After opening the pelvis, there is a risk of urinary 
fistula ; therefore, wherever it seems feasible and proper, ex- 
traction should be made through an opening in the renal 
tissue. 

The first incision down to the stone is made large enough to 
admit the forefinger. An attempt is made to raise up the stone 
* Surgery of the Kidney. London, 1886. 



THE OPERATION. 529 

on the finger-pulp, and this manoeuvre may be assisted by a 
small scoop. The opening, if not large enough, is increased by 
tearing and dilating. Haemorrhage is controlled b}- the finger, 
acting as a plug, and is rarely troublesome. It is always advis- 
able to remove the stone entire, if this can be done without 
injuring the secreting substance ; otherwise, it must be broken 
up. Bennett May has succeeded in removing entire from a 
kidney but slightly enlarged a stone an ounce in weight ; and at 
least one heavier has been extracted. 

The removal of a calculus blocking the orifice of the ureter 
may be an affair of extreme difficulty, taxing to the full the 
manual and mental resources of the surgeon. I have 
assisted at such an operation in which most skilful and 
persevering efforts on the part of one of our most brilliant 
operators only succeeded after an hour's trial in removing the 
stone. 

Where the kidney is suppurating, and the stone lies in an 
abscess sac, the operation may be very eas}^ On the other 
hand, as in large branched calculi, it may be impossible to 
remove the " stone until it has been broken into fragments. 
Each case must be managed on its own merits : a resourceful 
surgeon will at once decide upon the most favourable plan of 
removing the calculus. 

A drainage-tube is placed in the bottom of the parietal wound, 
behind the kidney : the wound itself is closed in the ordinary 
way by deep and superficial sutures. ¥ox the first day or two 
nearly all the urine escapes by the drainage-tube : it soon dimin- 
ishes, however ; and after a few days or weeks, ceases altogether. 
To prevent contact of the urine with the wound, an attempt 
ought to be made to convey it into a reservoir. This may be 
done by using ordinary imperforated rubber tubing, making 
holes in it only for the distance it extends into the tissues, and 
carrying the external imperforated portion into a rubber bottle 
which lies at some distance from the patient. The tube should 
be fixed in the opening by a stitch including the tube and the 
skin. The wound is dressed with ordinary absorbent material : 
it usually heals with great rapidity. 

35 



530 NEPHRO-LITHOTOMY. 

Of special dangers following nephro-lithotom}- we know 
little ; for they have not yet appeared. If haemorrhage is 
troublesome, a catgut suture may be carried through the renal 
tissue, so as to exert compression. Cellulitis, renal abscess, 
and renal fistula, are mentioned as possible results by Morris. 
In cases of advanced calculous pyelitis, the dangers are prac- 
tically those of nephrotomy or nephrectomy for the same 
condition. The question as to the advisability of combining 
abdominal section with lumbar section is but little different, in 
calculous disease, from that presented in non-calculous disease, 
and need not specially be considered here. 



Puncture of the Kidney, and Nephrotomy. 

By nephrotomy is meant the operation of making an incision 
into the kidney, for the purpose of evacuating cystic or purulent 
collections of fluid. Puncture of the kidney is simply nephro- 
tom}' done without dissection, and not followed by drainage ; 
nephrotomy is usually preceded by careful dissection through 
the loins, and is nearly always followed by drainage. 

Puncture, nephrotomy, and nephrectomy overlap. Any one 
of them may be indicated for the same condition ; and, indeed, 
all of them ma}^ properly be performed in succession for the 
cure of this condition. Thus, in a case of hydro-nephrosis 
puncture failing to cure, nephrotomy with drainage may be 
tried ; if this also fails, nephrectomy may be performed. Begin- 
ning at the other end, nephrectomy as a primary procedure has 
a more limited application. It is admissible where puncture 
and incision are inadmissible, only in the case of new growths ; 
in every other condition, and especially in cysts and abscesses, 
it may properly follow a want of success in the minor operation 
of nephrotomy. 

It is undoubtedly the case that for the same disease — scrofu- 
lous kidney, for example — nephrotomy or nephrectomy may be 
performed with equal propriety. But the actual stage or con- 
dition of the disease ought to be very different for each operation. 
It is impossible, therefore, to classify the indications for opera- 
tion under the heads of the pathological condition for which the 
operation may be performed. It will serve our purpose of 
description better, and at the same time emphasise the best 
recognised practice, if under each operation we consider only 
such diseases as directly and specially call for it. For some of 
them, puncture ought first to be performed ; if this fails, nephro- 
tomy ought to follow ; if this also fails, nephrectomy may be 
called for. In others, the first proceeding ought to be nephro- 
tomy; if this fails, nephrectomy may be demanded. Nephro- 
tomy also may sometimes be regarded as preparatory to 

35 * 



532 PUNCTURE OF THE KIDNEY AND NEPHROTOMY. 

nephrectomy. In a third class, nephrectomy ought to be 
performed at first. 

The following classification may be adopted as practically 
convenient : 

Renal Puncture, indicated in — 
(i) Simple cysts. 

(2) Hydro-nephrosis. 

(3) Hydatid cysts. 

Nephrotomy, indicated in — 

(i) Cases where puncture fails. 

(2) Pyo-nephrosis. 

(3) Suppurative nephritis and pyelo-nephritis. 

(4) Scrofulous kidney. 

(5) Calculous suppression of urine. 

Nephrectomy, indicated in — 

(i) Cases where nephrotomy fails, or would evidently be 

useless. 
(2) Certain new growths of the kidney. 
{3) Ureteral and renal fistulae. 
{4) Serious wounds of the kidney. 
(5) Disease or degeneration of movable kidney. 



Puncture of the Kidney. 

CONDITIONS FOR WHICH THE OPERATION MAY BE PERFORMED. 

Puncture of the kidney may be employed in any form of 
renal cystic enlargement ; but it is primarily indicated as a 
curative measure only in simple and hydatid cysts, and in 
hydro-nephrosis. 

Simple Cysts of the Kidney. — Here we are not concerned with 
those small cysts so frequently found in granular kidneys ; nor 
with the rare general transformation into numerous cysts found 
congenitally or in adults. The former never attain to surgical 
dimensions ; the latter, general cystic degeneration, being bi- 
lateral, is not amenable to surgical treatment. 

Simple serous cysts are found as thin - walled globular 
tumours, of varying dimensions, springing from some part of 
the renal cortex. Their contents are not urinous, but a pale 
straw-coloured fluid, of low specific gravity, containing a con- 
siderable amount of albumen. Sometimes the cavity of the cyst 
communicates by an opening with one of the calyces ; most 
frequently it is blind. The fluid often contains cholesterine, 
and occasionally blood. Rarely the contents are thick, or of the 
consistence of jelly. 

These cysts are harmful only when they attain to large 
dimensions. They tend to distort, spread out, and cause 
atrophy of the proper renal tissue, as well as to interfere with 
health, from their bulk. 

The symptoms are simply those of a slowly growing cystic 
tumour, situated in the loin. There are no special signs avail- 
able for diagnosis. Urinary symptoms are absent ; and there is 
no pain, or pyrexia, or evidence of ill-health. Diagnosis can be 
made only by exclusion of other forms of cystic enlargement. 

Para-nephric Cysts are rare developments of doubtful origin, 
which arise in the tissues immediately surrounding the kidney, 



534 PUNCTURE OF THE KIDNEY. 

and sometimes form a connection with it. They may be con- 
genital. Chnically, they are undistinguishable from simple 
cysts ; practically, their recognition is unimportant, as the 
treatment is identical. 

Hydatid Cysts of the Kidney. — Hydatids are found in the 
kidney six times less frequently than in the liver. In a con- 
siderable majority of cases, the left kidney is the organ affected ; 
very rarely are both organs affected at once. 

The cyst usually originates in the secreting substance ; but 
occasionally develops in the cellular tissue underlying the 
capsule or surrounding the pelvis. The renal tissue is thinned 
out and atrophied, from pressure. As compared with hydatids 
of other organs, renal hydatids do not attain to very large 
dimensions ; this is probably due to a tendency which they have 
to discharge a portion of their contents through the ureter. 
Of 63 cases of renal hydatids collected by Roberts, a history 
of vesicles passed in the urine occurred in 52. A renal hydatid 
cyst containing four pints of fluid would be considered a large 
one. It may burst into surrounding organs, as the intestine or 
lung ; and it may undergo any of the inflammatory, degener- 
ative, or atrophic changes which are found in hydatids else- 
where. Hydro-nephrosis has been caused by the impaction of 
a vesicle in the ureter. 

The symptoms of renal hydatid disease are : the passage of 
hydatid vesicles in the urine, preceded by attacks of renal colic ; 
and the existence of an abdominal tumour, fixed in the loin. 
Sometimes there is a discharge of hydatids, and no tumour ; 
more rarely is there a tumour, and no h3^datid escape. In only 
18 of Roberts's 63 cases was a tumour discernible. Fluctuation 
is not always perceptible ; and the hydatid fremitus is as rarely 
observed here as in the liver or elsewhere. The vesicles are 
found entire or ruptured ; occasionally nothing is found in the 
urine but booklets and shreds of membrane. Blood or pus 
may be discharged with the hydatids : these are specially 
frequent after attacks of renal colic. Retention of urine has 
been caused by blocking of the urethra ; and, as already re- 



HYDRO-NEPHROSIS. 635 

marked, hydro-nephrosis may arise from blocking of the ureter. 
In the bladder, the vesicles may beget symptoms of irritation or 
tenesmus, or even inflammation : impacted in the ureter, the 
vesicles may set up the train of symptoms already described as 
characteristic of renal colic, from the passage of calculus. 

Hydro-nephvosis. — This is a distension of the kidney with fluid, 
caused by an obstruction to the flow of urine. The obstruction 
may exist at any point in the urinary tract — urethra, bladder, 
ureter, or pelvis of the kidney. It may be congenital or acquired. 
According to Morris, about one-third of the cases have a con- 
genital cause ; but in some cases this cause does not have its 
full effect in producing hydro-nephrosis till late in life. " Con- 
genital nephrosis " must not be confounded with " hydro- 
nephrosis having a congenital cause." 

Congenital causes of hydro-nephrosis are numerous and 
various. In the ureter, twists, kinks, reduplications or folds, 
stenosis, and complete obliteration, have all been described as 
causes. The junction of the ureter to the kidney or to the 
bladder may be faulty, obstructing the flow of urine. Compres- 
sion of the ureter by abnormal arteries has been described as a 
cause of hydro-nephrosis. 

Of acquired causes, the most important, from a surgical 
point of view, is impaction of a calculus in the ureter or pelvis 
of the kidney. In an elaborate investigation into the causes of 
142 cases of marked hydro-nephrosis extracted from the post- 
mortem records of Middlesex Hospital, Morris found that 116 
cases had cancer of the pelvic organs, uterus, vagina, bladder, 
or rectum ; 2 had cancer of the ovaries ; and the remaining 
24 had, in about equal proportions, cystitis, vesical calculus, 
enlarged prostate, ovarian cyst, constriction of ureter, cancer of 
abdominal organs : in one there was a villous growth of the 
bladder ; in 4 the causes were imknown. Roberts found in 32 
cases of hj^dro-nephrosis the causes to be — impaction of calculus 
in the ureter in 11, and probably in 3 more; in 5, cicatricial 
stenosis of the ureter ; in 6, compression of the ureter b}^ pelvic 
tumours ; and in 3, compression by inflammatory peritoneal 



536 PUNCTURE OF THE KIDNEY. 

bands. Retroflexion of the uterus has been described as a 
cause ; and Morris and James have explained how greatly in- 
creased frequency of micturition may produce hj'dro-nephrosis. 
The most elaborate investigation into the causation of acquired 
hydro-nephrosis has been carried out by Newman.* Of a total 
of 665 cases, tumours of the pelvic organs causing pressure on 
the ureters were the causes in 184, stricture of the urethra and 
enlarged prostate in 234, tumours or abscesses of pelvic organs 
leading to tortion of the ureters in 32, renal calculi in 68, 
displacements of the kidney in 17, tumours of the bladder in 10, 
and bands and adhesions in 12. 

Hydro-nephrosis is about equally common in both kidneys ; 
in about one-third of the cases it exists in both at the same 
time. It is found at all ages, and with equal frequency in both 
sexes. From an analysis of 69 cases of hydro-nephrosis and 
pyo-nephrosis, Dickinson concludes that death from one or other 
of these closel3^-allied complaints " is especially frequent during 
the first ten years of life, as the result of congenital lesions ; as 
an acquired disease, largely due to stone, it produces its fatal 
issue with increasing frequenc}' up to 50, beyond which age it is 
seldom delayed." 

As to the actual lesion produced, it may affect the whole 
kidney, or only part of it ; that is to say, the distension may 
involve the whole pelvis, or only a few of the calyces. A case 
has been recorded in which a tumour of considerable size was 
caused by the distension of one calyx. The mode of distension 
is easil}' understood. The pelvis is first converted into a globular 
sac ; the calyces then become dilated ; and lastly the medullary 
and cortical portions are stretched out and thinned. In extreme 
cases, the secreting tissue ma}' be represented by a thin layer 
underlying the capsule ; or all traces of it may disappear, and 
the kidney is little more than a cyst with thin fibrous walls sub- 
divided internally into secondary cysts or saccules by complete 
or incomplete septa. In most cases some trace of secreting 
tissue remains, with something of the kidney shape. In size the 
sac varies from that of the normal kidney, or less, to dimensions 
* Surg. Dis. of Kidney, 1888, p. 114. 



HYDRO-NEPHROSIS. 537 

sufficient to fill the abdominal cavity. In only a small propor- 
tion of cases, however, does hydro-nephrosis attain to a size 
sufficient to cause perceptible tumefaction of the abdomen. 

The fluid in the cyst is never pure urine; frequently it con- 
tains neither urea nor uric acid. It is usually a simple, clear, 
aqueous fluid, of low specific gravit}', containing a little chloride 
of sodium and perhaps albumen. Occasionally the fluid is 
brown, from admixture with blood ; rarely it is thick or colloi- 
dal ; and sometimes it is putrid, ammoniacal, and turbid. 

It has been pointed out that the obstruction in the most 
typical cases of hydro-nephrosis is not complete and not con- 
tinuous. A cpmplete obstruction to the urinary flow leads to 
atrophy, rather than to dilatation of the kidney ; stricture, 
varying in narrowness, predisposes to dilatation. A calculus in 
the pelvis or the ureter, occasionally moving, causing at one time 
partial, at another time complete obstruction, while it some- 
times moves out of the way altogether, provides the ideal cause 
of hydro-nephrosis, such as comes up for surgical treatment. 

Symptoms of hydro-nephrosis, in the absence of a tumour, 
are usually wanting altogether; in the worst cases there ma}' be 
symptoms of urinary suppression. In disease of both kidneys, 
uraemia sooner or later appears. Diagnosis is possible, or rather 
probable, only when a tumour is present. Such a tumour is 
rounded, often lobulated, usually fluctuating, and lies mainly in 
the loin. If the tumour is very large, it may occupy and 
distend the whole abdomen, on one side as much as on the 
other ; in such a case, a histor}^ of its having once been one- 
sided, or of its having appeared in the costo-iliac interspace, 
will be of assistance. In every case, a history of its varying in 
size is of importance — almost pathognomonic, in fact. Morris 
has recorded eleven cases where the tumour completely inter- 
mitted ; that is, where it was prominent at one time, and not 
distinguishable at another. Many others show temporary 
diminution without actually vanishing. If, with the diminution 
or disappearance of the tumour, there is observed an increased 
flow of urine of low specific gravity, we ma}' almost certainly 
diagnose hydro-nephrosis. 



538 PUNCTURE OF THE KIDNEY. 

As to subjective symptoms, records are extremely variable. 
Frequently there is no pain whatever ; sometimes there is severe 
pain, occasionally amounting to agony. The amount of tension 
and the presence of a calculus would influence the production of 
pain. 

The diagnosis of hydro-nephrosis is often difficult, sometimes 
impossible. It may be mistaken for any cystic abdominal 
tumour. Of renal cystic enlargements, it is most liable to be 
confounded with simple or hydatid cyst, and with pyo-nephrosis. 
In hydatids the history gives most important aid. In pyo- 
nephrosis, elevation of temperature with continuous or occasional 
presence of pus in the urine, may be expected. Hydatids of 
liver or spleen may mislead. But, when the tumour is large, it 
is most frequently mistaken for ovarian cystoma; at least fifteen 
cases are on record in which hydro-nephrotic or simple renal 
cysts have been mistaken for ovarian tumour, and laparotomy 
performed on the erroneous diagnosis. (Morris.) 



THE OPERATION OF PUNCTURING THE KIDNEY. 

This operation may, with a fair promise of cure, be performed 
for any of the above conditions; viz., simple cyst, hydatid, and 
hydro-nephrosis. In the case of simple cysts, tapping may be 
repeated several times should the cyst refill. In hydatid disease, 
tapping may be successful, and should be tried ; but incision, 
with drainage, is likely to be called for. If there is no discharge 
of vesicles by the urethra, Morris considers that the only 
proper treatment is nephrotomy. The first proceeding, in all 
cases of hydro-nephrosis calling for treatment, ought to be 
tapping. Friction and compression by the hands have caused 
several hydro-nephrotic tumours to disappear ; but in few cases 
can manipulation be entirely free from risk, and in the great 
majority, from the nature of the obstruction, it must be useless. 
A single tapping is rarely curative in hydro-nephrosis; frequently 
the operation has had to be repeated many times. But if, after 
three or four tappings have been tried, a cure is not effected, 



THE OPERATION. 539 

most surgeons would proceed to incision and drainage. Repeated 
tapping is liable to beget suppuration. 

Puncture and tapping of the kidney is best performed with 
the aspirator. The needle should be of large size, to lessen the 
chance of its becoming blocked with debris. The skin and the 
needle must be thoroughly aseptic ; and the needle ought to be 
introduced full of an aseptic fluid, to prevent the introduction of 
air into the cyst. An air-bubble will rise into a sac of fluid out 
of the point of an aspirator needle, and filthy epidermic scales 
m.aj' be carried in on the cutting point. An abundant experience 
of this very simple operation proves that it is too frequently 
allied to the experiment of introducing a germ-laden needle into 
the midst of a cultivation jelly. 

The point at which puncture is to be made will vary accord- 
ing to the size of the tumour, its nature, and the side on which 
it lies. In every case the operation ought to be extra-peritoneal; 
the needle, therefore, must not be inserted too far forwards. 
Morris advises that " if there be any spot over the swelling 
which is thin, soft, prominent, or fluctuating, the trocar should 
be there inserted. A point which is not seldom indicated is 
midway between the umbilicus and the anterior superior spine 
of the ilium ; or half an inch below, and an inch and a half 
to the side of the navel." One danger in puncturing too near 
to the middle line is, that the colon may be wounded. 

Where the tumour is not large, or where no favourable spot 
presents itself, the site to be selected should be regulated by 
the anatomy. As a result of several experiments, Morris found 
that, to puncture the left kidney, the best point of entrance was 
one "just anterior to the last intercostal space." On the right 
side, puncture in this situation would probably traverse the 
liver ; therefore, a lower point is selected half-way between the 
last rib and the crest of the ilium, from two to two and a half 
inches behind the anterior superior spine of the ilium. " This 
spot is on a level with the front of the bodies of the lumbar 
vertebrae, and a needle here passed horizontally inwards will be 
altogether in front of the normal kidney, and will either transfix 
or pass in front of the ascending colon when in its usual place. 



540 PUNCTURE OF THE KIDNEY. 

It may, however, with safety be conjectured that, in any case of 
hydro-nephrosis of the right side requiring to be tapped, if the 
trocar be inserted at the place I propose, and directed somewhat 
forwards, the peritoneum and colon will be sufficiently in front 
to escape injur}' ; the liver will be safely out of reach above, and 
the kidney behind ; while the dilated pelvis of the kidney will be 
tapped at its anterior and lower aspect." (Morris.) 

As soon as the needle is embedded in the skin, the exhausting 
bottle should be connected ; and the needle is then cautiously 
pushed onwards till fluid is sucked out, when it should be 
pushed in no further. Thus the risk of wounding renal vessels 
is diminished. More than one case has died from extravasation, 
of the cyst-contents into the peritoneal cavity. Wound of the 
margin of the liver may prove harmless. The risk of wounding 
the pleura has alread}' been referred to. 



Nephrotomy. 

CONDITIONS FOR WHICH NEPHROTOMY MAY BE PERFORMED. 

Pyo-nephrosis is simply hydro-nephrosis with suppurative 
inflammation of the Hning membrane of the cyst. Between a 
simple catarrh with shedding of proliferative endothelial cells, 
and the formation of granulations with abundant discharge of 
pus, all degrees of inflammation are found. Mucus, blood, and 
urine are frequently found in the purulent fluid ; occasionally it 
is very putrid. In certain cases, phosphates are found in 
sufficient amount to form with the pus a sort of paste. 

Pyo-nephrosis may be the first effect of a calculus; or it may 
be an after-development of hydro-nephrosis, either spontaneously 
evolved, or as a result of surgical interference by tapping. It 
may originate in any of the conditions alread}^ mentioned as pro- 
ductive of hydro-nephrosis, and more particularly from renal 
calculus. Suppurative calculous pyelitis has already been 
described under nephro-lithotomy, and need not be further 
dwelt upon. 

The symptoms are those of hydro-nephrosis //«s suppuration. 
Elevation of temperature, with or without rigors ; hectic ; loss 
of appetite, with perhaps symptoms of ursemia or septicaemia, 
may be looked for. A tumour may be visible and palpable ; but 
it rarely attains to the enormous dimensions sometimes observed 
in hydro-nephrosis. Dulness, if the tumour is large, may be 
interrupted towards the middle line by the colon passing over it. 
Fluctuation may or may not be detected. A lobulated outline on 
palpation maybe frequently made out. Pain, cutaneous oedema 
or redness, and other local signs of suppuration, may be 
expected. An examination of the urine may reveal the presence 
of pus, and an estimation of its quantity ma)' show a diminution 
in amount. Intcrmittence of the tumour has been found. 
Occasionally cystitis is set up, from contamination with purulent 
or putrid urine. 



642 NEPHROTOMY. 

Suppurative Diseases of the Kidney. — There are various distinct 
forms of suppurative inflammation of the kidney. They may be 
described as: (i) simple circumscribed renal abscess; (2) general 
suppurative nephritis, pyelitis, and pyelo-nephritis; (3) scrofulous 
kidney. Such a classification is neither cHnically nor pathologi- 
cally perfect ; it is, however, that usually followed, and may be 
conveniently adopted here. 

(i) Renal Abscess has its typical origin in injury, as from a 
blow, or a calculus, or other foreign body : it may be secondary 
to. peri-nephric suppuration; and it has been known to follow 
the administration of cantharides and turpentine. A single 
abscess may be formed by the fusion of many small ones ; and 
there may be more than one abscess in the kidney. 

Renal abscess is usually limited to one kidney. It may find 
its way into the pelvis, and thence empty itself into the bladder 
through the urethra ; or it may burst through the capsule into 
the surrounding cellular tissue, causing peri-nephric abscess ; or 
both events may occur. It is by no means rare to find more 
than one abscess in the renal tissue. In many cases the whole 
organ is transformed into an abscess, limited by pelvis and 
capsule, and partly subdivided by septa. 

In acute cases, the symptoms are frequently ushered in with 
rigors, frequently repeated, and great elevation of temperature. 
In chronic cases there may be little or no fever at any stage of 
the disease. Pain in the region of the kidney is usually com- 
plained of. Pus may be found in the urine; if it is considerable in 
amount, and accompanied with decrease in the size of a lumbar 
tumour, the existence of renal abscess is almost certain. A sense 
of increased resistance in the loin to the examining fingers, 
oedema and redness of skin, and complaints of local pain on 
pressure, suggest renal abscess. The disease is always attended 
by great prostration, rapid emaciation, and complete loss of 
appetite. 

(2) Suppurative Nephritis is usually described as secondary to 
some disease of the lower urinary tract. It may be confined to 
the pelvis, when it is known as pyelitis ; or to the kidney, when 
it is described as nephritis ; or it may involve the whole rena 



SCROFULOUS KIDNEY. 543 

organ, when it is known as pyelo - nephritis. In its typical 
development it is best known as " surgical kidney ; " that is to 
say, it has its origin in any disease of the penis or bladder for 
which surgical treatment has been or may be instituted. As a 
matter of fact, the disease is more frequently caused by want of 
surgical treatment than by excessive or erroneous application 
of it. 

From the nature of the disease, both kidneys are usually 
affected ; and this fact is, in itself, sufficient to forbid a local 
operation of any magnitude. Suppurative nephritis is, in the 
great majority of cases, a rapidly fatal complaint ; and surgical 
treatment offers little or no hope of cure. 

(3) Scrofulous Kidney — or scrofulous pyelo-nephritis, as it is 
sometimes called- — is an inflammation of the kidney, attended 
with the formation of the characteristic cheesy material. It is 
a constitutional disease. Of 95 cases reported by Dickinson in 
which death took place from scrofulous kidney, only 11 were 
free from similar disease in the other kidney or elsewhere. As 
these were all cases of death from scrofulous kidney, it is prob- 
able that the proportion of intercurrent disease would be higher 
than when the patient first came under observation. Still, in 
the view of operative proceeding, the undoubted frequency of 
outlying scrofulous mischief in cases of scrofulous kidney ought 
to teach caution. 

The appearance of a typically scrofulous kidney is charac- 
teristic and unmistakable. The organ is enlarged as a whole — 
sometimes to three, four, or even six times the normal dimen- 
sions. On section, aggregations of the well-known cheesy 
products are seen replacing, and more or less accurately fol- 
lowing, the outlines of the individual lobules. These cheesy 
masses are partially divided from each other by incomplete 
septa, representing the divisions between the lobules, and 
containing remnants of the original secreting tissue. On 
these septa, and on the inner surfaces of the capsule and the 
pelvis, ragged cedematous granulations are exposed when the 
purulent material is removed. Sometimes the abscesses are 
large, while the septa between them are thin and short ; in such 



544 NEPHROTOMY. 

cases p3'elitis will be superadded to nephritis. In other cases, 
the abscesses are small and the septa are very thick. The 
inflammation spreads from the pelvis down the ureter, which 
also becomes thickened in its walls and ulcerated on its surface. 
This thickening and ulceration of the ureter frequently descends 
as far as the bladder, and is one of the characteristic concomi- 
tants of such scrofulous kidneys as may be brought under oper- 
ative treatment. 

The symptoms of scrofulous disease of the kidney are often 
obscure or misleading. Occasionally there are no local signs, 
only vague general signs of ill health, with perhaps slight indi- 
cations of urinary disorder. Usually there is continuous pain 
in the loins of a dull aching or dragging character. But this 
pain is often aggravated, occurring in paroxysms, as in renal 
colic, and due, in all probability, to blocking of the ureter by 
debris. Pus in the urine is a very constant sign of scrofulous 
kidney : its presence in the bladder may set up irritation, or 
even strangury, and lead to a suspicion of calculus. Blood also 
is often mixed with the pus in the urine, and more particularly 
during the early stages of the disease. Granular detritus, and 
pieces of cheesy matter, soluble on the addition of acetic acid, 
are often detected on microscopical examination. I have been 
concerned in the treatment of two cases of scrofulous kidney in 
which tubercle-bacilli were found in the urine; and others 
have had a similar experience. Locally a hard tender swelling 
in the region of the kidney may usually be felt. Elevations of 
temperature occurring at irregular intervals, lasting for short 
periods, and accompanied often with rigors and sweating, are 
said to be characteristic. The patient rapidly loses strength 
and flesh ; the skin becomes dry and hard; diarrhoea and sick- 
ness set in ; and death takes place from exhaustion. 

Scrofulous kidney is liable to be confounded with cancer of 
the kidney, pyo-nephrosis, calculous pyelitis, and even with 
certain diseases of the bladder or prostate. The presence of 
blood in the urine, and the hardness of the growth in scrofulous 
kidne}^ are the conditions which may give rise to a diagnosis of 
cancer. Abundance of pus in the urine, with granular detritus 



PERI-NEPHRIC ABSCESS. 545 

and perhaps bacilli, and elevation of temperature, are mainly to 
be relied on as diagnostic. From other forms of suppurative 
inflammation, the history and the hectic character of the tem- 
perature will be the most important elements in differentiation. 

Pevi-nephric Abscess is in most cases a sequence of suppuration 
in the kidney itself. It occurs also as a primary idiopathic 
disease, quite independently of the kidney, and also as a con- 
sequence of urinar}^ extravasation or renal fistula. As a primary 
disease, it is usually an effect of injury of some sort. Occa- 
sionally it occurs as a sort of metastasis, from operation upon, 
or inflammation in, distant parts of the urinary or generative 
organs : and not infrequently there is a visible and continuous 
connection between suppurating inflammations in distant parts 
and the peri-nephric abscess. The historic nephro-lithotomy 
was essentially the evacuation of a peri-nephric abscess, which 
contained a calculus that had ulcerated its way through the 
renal tissues. 

Rarely does a peri-nephric abscess burst through the peri- 
toneum. Rather does it burrow in various directions along the 
fasciae surrounding the contiguous muscles, ultimately reaching 
the surface somewhere in the loin : not infrequently the matter 
gets into the sheath of the psoas, and reaches the inguinal region, 
after the manner of a psoas abscess. With curious frequency 
the matter finds its way through the diaphragm into the lungs, 
and is expectorated. I have removed a vesical calculus 
weighing more than nine ounces from a man who had a sinus 
between the seventh and eighth ribs, which led downwards to a 
peri-nephric abscess, and upwards into a pulmonary fistula, 
through which pus was discharged in large quantities by the 
mouth. Peri-nephric abscess has been known to burst into the 
colon, the duodenum, and even into the bladder. 

The symptoms of peri-nephric abscess arc, in the first place, 
those of deep-seated suppurative inflammation, with its ordinary 
local and general concomitants, situated in the tissues surround- 
ing the kidney. P''urther special signs have been observed: such 
are, lameness on the affected side, with flexion of and inability 

36 



546 NEPHROTOMY 

to extend the thigh, due to involvement of the psoas, and oedema 
of the foot and ankle. Dr. John Roberts of Philadelphia," after 
an elaborate study of the condition, gives directions for the 
localising of peri-nephric abscess as follows : in all anterior 
regions, we may expect pain, tenderness, swelling, oedema, or 
pointing in front, or at the side, of the abdomen. In all posterior 
regions, we look for pain, tenderness, swelling, oedema or point- 
ing in the loin. In the upper tracts, peri-nephric abscess will 
probably cause pleuritic friction, pleural effusion, empyema, 
expectoration of pus, and dyspnoea ; pn the right side we may 
expect to find oedema of both legs, jaundice, fatty stools, persis- 
tent vomiting, rapid emaciation, and ascites. In the middle 
tracts, there may be albuminuria and casts; supra-pubic, scrotal, 
or vulvar pain, or anaesthesia ; suppression of urine ; ura3mia ; 
pyuria; oedema of the scrotum. In the lower tracts, he tells us 
to expect with peri-nephric abscess, flexion of the hip ; pain or 
anaesthesia in the front, the outside, or the inside of the thigh ; 
pain in the knee ; scrotal or vulvar pain, or anaesthesia, without 
albuminuria; unilateral oedema of the leg; abscess pointing 
near Poupart's ligament ; with constipation on the left side, 
and involvement of the receptacle for chyle on the right side. 

Calculous Suppression of Urine may be taken as a condition for 
which nephrotomy may be performed. In 1880 Weir advocated 
nephrotomy for calculous suppression. Bennett Mayf forcibly 
argues in favour of the operation. Bardenheuer, according to 
Weir, has removed a calculus the size of a bean from the ureter, 
and four others from the pelvis of the kidney. Morris, in a very 
suggestive paperj on the feasibility of removing a calculus im- 
pacted in the ureter, speaks in favour of the proceeding. No 
patient should be permitted to die of calculous suppression 
without a serious attempt to discover the site of the obstructing 
calculus. If low down in the ureter, the calculus may possibly 
be removed after the manner suggested by Morris. If high up, 
it may be removed by nephro-lithotomy, or perhaps by pyelo- 

* Trans, A-mer. Surg. Ass. ii., 1885, p. 518. 
+ Brit. Med. Journ., Mar. 8th, 18S4. + Amer. Journ. Med. Sc, Oct., 1884. 



INDICATIONS TO OPERATE. 547 

nephrotomy. If its site cannot be discovered, then pyelotomy 
and the estabhshment of urinary fistula will at least save the 
patient's life. A remarkable example of the value of nephrotomy 
for total suppression of urine is afforded by a patient of Clement 
Lucas's, from whom one kidney had been excised four months 
previously, and from whose remaining kidney a large calculus 
was removed. 

Indications to Operate. — Nephrotomy is indicated in all cases 
of cystic enlargement where puncture has failed. More precisel}^ 
it is called for in cases of simple cyst where tapping has been 
performed five or six times without effecting a cure. Nephro- 
tomy as an original operation has, according to Newman, been 
performed 21 times without a death for cases of hydronephrosis 
and cystic disease. In seven of these cases a fistula remained 
in the loin. In hydatid disease, if one tapping does not kill the 
parasite or check the growth of the tumour, nephrotom}' may 
properly be performed. In hydro-nephrosis, if the cyst rapidly 
refills after two or three tappings, or if rupture seems imminent, 
nephrotomy is indicated. In every case suppuration in a cyst 
is an indication for incision and drainage. 

In all cases of suppuration in and around the kidney, incision, 
with evacuation of pus and drainage of the abscess-sac, is indi- 
cated. Contra-indications in such cases are — firstly, such a 
condition of exhaustion as would negative any serious surgical 
exploit ; and, secondly, a diseased condition of the opposite 
kidney. Wherever operation for abscess is feasible, nephrotomy 
ought to be the first operation. The prime object is, evacuation 
of pus ; secondary objects are, diagnosis of the actual state of 
affairs and determination of the chances which nephrotomy 
provides towards cure, and preparation of the kidney and tlie 
patient for the major operation of nephrectomy where mere 
incision cannot be expected to be curative. Nephrectomy 
performed in the first place as an operation for suppurative 
lesions of the kidney, is not so successful as nephrectomy per- 
formed as an operation following on nephrotomy and drainage. 
The patient gains strength after evacuation of an abscess, and 

36 * 



548 NEPHROTOMY. 

the kidney decreases in size ; while the vascularity of the organ 
and the density of its adhesions become less marked after 
drainage. 

Rarely is operation admissible in suppurative nephritis or 
pyelo-nephritis — in uro-septic or surgical kidney. Scrofulous 
kidney as often calls for excision as for incision — at least, when 
the abscesses are small and numerous. 

Before performing nephrotomy it is advisable, though not 
necessary, to take measures for ascertaining the condition of 
the other kidney. But the justifiability of the operation will 
be the urgency of the disease. Whether the opposite kidney 
is sound or not, renal or peri-renal abscess which is endangering 
the patient's life must be evacuated if the general condition will 
warrant operation. 

THE OPERATION OF NEPHROTOMY. 

The incision is the same as that already described as suitable 
for nephro-lithotomy, and the structures divided are identical. 
This holds good for suppurative lesions, if there is no great 
increase in size, and no visible tendency to point through the 
skin. If the renal enlargement is considerable, the incision may 
be carried farther forward ; and redness, swelling, or other 
indications of pointing, must be taken as marking the best 
site for making an opening. In cases of non-suppurative cystic 
enlargements, the ordinary lumbar incision will usually be best. 
True, it may be more easy to make the opening farther towards 
the front in cases of considerable enlargement, and in doing so 
there would be little risk of entering the peritoneum. But, 
looking to the results sought to be attained — drainage of the 
cavity, and shrivelling of the cyst — the advantages of having 
the kidney or its remnants fixed well behind around the opening 
made, and of having a dependent opening for drainage, weigh 
in favour of the ordinary lumbar incision. 

If the operation is for hydatids, simple cyst, or hydro-nephrosis, 
there may be no peculiarity in the tissues traversed. The circum- 
renal fat will be thinner than normal, being either spread out over 



THE OPERATION. 549 

the swelling or atrophied from pressure. Adhesions to surround- 
ing tissues may be present in hydatids. A portion of the cyst- 
wall is denuded of overlying fatty tissue to an extent sufficient 
to permit of its being brought to the surface, and sutured there 
after being opened. An excellent mode of making the opening 
is, to push a Lister's sinus forceps either directly through the 
cyst-wall or through a small opening made by a tenotome, and 
dilate the opening by separating the blades. As the contents 
flow outwards, the cyst-wall is pulled to the surface by means 
of forceps attached to the: margin of the opening. Frequently 
it will be found impossible to pull the cyst-wall quite to the 
level of the skin ; then fixation of the opening in the cyst to 
tissues as near to the surface as possible may be tried, or the 
opening may be left to itself when a drainage tube has been 
inserted. In every case evacuation of the contents is to be 
assisted by pressure from the abdominal aspect. 

In operating for suppurative lesions, we may find the skin, 
muscles, and fasciae traversed by the incision to be abnormally 
vascular and oedematous. The circumrenal fat may be hard, 
dense, and firmly adherent ; often it contains numerous small 
abscesses. A small area of the renal capsule is exposed, and 
through this the largest needle of an aspirating syringe is 
pushed. If matter is struck, it is, as far as possible, evacuated 
at once ; if not, the needle is carefully pushed in the most 
likely directions till purulent fluid is met with. Along the side 
of the aspirating needle a knife or dilating forceps is pushed, to 
enlarge the opening sufficiently to admit the finger. Curdy 
matter which will not run through a tube is scooped out with 
the finger, and the cavity thoroughly explored. If openings 
into other abscess cavities are found, these are dilated, if 
necessary, and their contents removed : if this is impracticable, 
direct openings are made through the convex surface. In each 
cavity, and reaching to the bottom of it, a drainage tube is 
placed. Finally, through the tubes the abscess cavities are 
thoroughly washed out by irrigation with an antiseptic lotion. 
The matter found in renal abscesses is often very offensive, and 
frequent irrigation with antiseptic lotions may be necessary. 



550 NEPHROTOMY. 

In exploring a scrofulous kidney, the septa between the 
abscesses should not be torn or cut through, as they are often 
very vascular. The finger should be pushed into the pelvis if 
possible, to ascertain whether the upper end of the ureter is 
pervious. 

In peri-nephritic suppuration, after evacuating the pus, the 
renal surface ought to be carefully examined, to ascertain 
whether nephric abscess co-exists. Such an abscess must, of 
course, be opened and drained. 

The wound, after careful disinfection and cleansing, is closed 
around the drainage tube or tubes in the ordinary manner. 
Thick rubber, perforated only where it traverses renal tissue, 
makes the best drainage tube. It may be fixed by a stitch to 
the skin. Absorbent dressings are fixed over the wound by 
means of an abdominal binder. 

The progress of the case will depend on the nature of the 
operation. In hydatid disease the cavity will probably spon- 
taneously close after suppuration. In simple cyst primary 
closure may be expected, without discharge of pus. In hydro- 
nephrosis, a fistula will in most cases be left, for which there is 
no cure without further operation. The patient's life may be 
made fairly comfortable by the use of such a receptacle as that 
invented by Morris. An attempt may be made to close the 
fistula by a plastic operation, but it is not often successful. 
Nephrectomy may then be contemplated. 

Nephrotomy for abscess is frequently a curative proceeding 
— more frequently, probably, than published records would lead 
us to suppose. Even if cure do not follow, no harm is done, 
but rather good. For the patient, in view of further operative 
proceedings by nephrectomy, has been tided over the immediate 
danger of an acute illness, and has gained strength ; while the 
kidney is diminished in size, its vessels are smaller, its tissue is 
less friable, and its surroundings are more tolerant of surgical 
interference. 



Nephrectomy. 

Nephrectomy is the name given to removal of the kidney by 
surgical operation. 

History. — According to Heineke,"" Zambeccarius was the 
first to contemplate the operation of nephrectomy, and sought 
to prove its feasibility by operations on dogs. S. Blancard 
successfully extirpated the kidney in dogs ; and several surgeons 
who saw the operation considered that it might be performed 
on human beings. Rayer condemned the operation where the 
kidney was inflamed (as in calculous nephritis), because then 
it would be so closely adherent to the peritoneum that it could 
not be disturbed without injuring that membrane. Blundell 
experimentally performed nephrectomy on animals. 

Nephrectomy had been performed unintentionally several 
times before it was carried out deliberately as a planned opera- 
tion. In i860, Walcott of Milwaukee! removed a cancerous 
kidney, believing it to be a hepatic cyst. Peaslee and one or 
two others have removed renal cysts, believing them to be 
ovarian tumours. Walcott's case lived fifteen days ; the others 
succumbed more quickly. The first planned operation was 
performed by Simon of Heidelberg, in April, i86g. Before 
operating on the human subject, he had experimented on 
animals. His operation was performed for incurable fistula 
of the ureter, and his patient — a lady — made an excellent 
recovery. Since 1869, the operation has been performed at 
least 300 times, and with a steadily decreasing mortality. 

Conditions for which the Operation may be Performed. — These may 
be classified as follows : 

(i) The same class of diseases as call for nephrotomy when 
this operation is not likely to succeed, or has already been tried 
and failed. 

(2) New growths of the kidney. 

(3) Ureteral and renal fistulae. 

* Von Pitha and Billroth's Surgery, f Phih. Med. and Surg. Rep,, 1861, p. 126. 



552 NEPHRECTOMY. 

(4) Serious injury to the kidney, with hasmorrhage, urinary 
infiltration, or destructive suppuration. 

(5) Disease or degeneration in movable kidney. 

(i) In the category of failures after nephrotomy we may 
include all cases where a renal fistula is left. This may happen 
after incision for any cystic or purulent collection, in simple 
hydatid cysts, in hydro-nephrosis or pyo-nephrosis, and in renal 
suppurations of all sorts. The original disease ma}^ be cured; 
the fistula is an accidental complication, which has to be raised 
to the dignity of a separate disease, and counted as a special 
indication for operation. 

By far the most important class of failures after nephrotomy 
which may demand nephrectomy is supplied by suppurative 
lesions of the kidney. On account of multiplicit}^ of abscesses, 
it may be impossible to open and drain them all ; a large abscess 
may have been opened, and several small ones may have been 
overlooked ; the abscess-sacs may be very slow to collapse, and 
the patient's strength may be ebbing away from prolonged sup- 
puration ; these and similar considerations may suggest the 
major operation. Again, in some cases nephrotom}^ is deliber- 
ately performed as a temporary measure, intended to effect 
improvement in the local as well as in the general condition, 
before nephrectomy is undertaken. Bruce Clarke, Lucas, and 
others have specially insisted on the value of this measure. 

Among diseases ordinarily amenable to nephrotomy, a certain 
number will be met with where this operation would evidently 
prove futile, and where nephrectomy gives the only chance of 
recovery. Scrofulous kidney would perhaps furnish the greatest 
number of examples under this head. The organ may be 
riddled with abscesses, which can neither be evacuated nor 
drained without causing great haemorrhage or seriously damaging 
the renal structure. In this case, a complete nephrotomy would 
result in chopping the kidney into fragments, and would be a 
more grave affair than nephrectom3\ Any variety of extensive 
suppuration that is not localised in one district demands nephrec- 
tomy. Calculous nephritis may be of this nature. Very exten- 



NEW GROWTHS. 553 

sive suppuration has followed injur}' to the kidney : Von Bruns, 
under these circumstances, had on one occasion to remove the 
organ. 

(2) New growths of the kidney may be another indication 
for nephrectomy. The varieties of new growth are classified by 
Paul* as follows : 

Of Congenital Origin : — 

i Round-celled. 
Fibro-sarcoma. 
Striped Myo-sarcoma (Rhabdo-myoma). 
\ Adeno-sarcoma. 

Dermoid tumours. 

Of Adult Origin : — 

Cysts. 

Cavernous tumours. 

Sarcoma. 

Adenoma 



{ 



Cystic. 
Tubular. 



[ Pelvic, like bladder. 

Carcinoma: < ^^, ■, 1 ( Cystic. 
) Glandular: ] rj.-' ■, , 
( ( Tubular. 

Many other classifications have been offered, notably the 
exhaustive one of Newman; but the above, prepared after 
special opportunities for study, may be accepted as trustworthy. 

Cystic tumours of the kidney have already been dealt with, 
under puncture and nephrotomy. There remain for consider- 
ation the solid growths ; and these, as will be seen from the 
classification, are mostly of a malignant nature. Sarcoma, 
both of congenital and of adult origin, is by far the most 
important ; and carcinoma comes next in importance and in 
frequency. In a most valuable study of Primary Malignant 
Disease of the Kidneys, Mingest found that of 63 cases, 30 
were sarcomata, 30 carcinomata (21 encephaloid — probably 
most of them really sarcomata), i adenoma, and i fibro-cystic. 
It is clear, however, that different men reporting their cases 

• Brit. Med. Joimi., Jan. 12th, 1884. 
t Journ. Amer. Med. Assn., June 6th, 1885, et seq. 



554 NEPHRECTOMY. 

have followed different classifications, and no exact conclusions 
can be drawn from the nomenclature adopted. Billroth removed 
a papillomatous growth. Adenoma is, in one case, given as the 
name of the tumour for which the kidney was removed. Further 
consideration of minor varieties of new growths may be dis- 
missed ; our purpose here will be fulfilled by an account of 
primary malignant disease, as represented by sarcoma and 
carcinoma. Secondary malignant disease does not concern the 
operating surgeon. 

Malignant growths of the kidney show a curious predilection 
for youth and for old age ; they are least common during adult 
life. Congenitally, sarcoma is the form of malignant disease 
usually met with : carcinoma, though not unknown, is, as Ebstein 
states, very rare in infancy and childhood ; it is more common in 
old age. Traumatic irritation, as by calculus, is now admitted 
to be a contributive cause of renal cancer. The disease occurs 
with equal frequency in both kidneys ; very rarely does it exist 
in both organs at the same time. 

The tumour frequently attains to enormous dimensions ; and 
this is particularly true of growths occurring in children. Roberts 
records an example found in a child of six, where the tumour 
weighed 31 lbs. In its growth the tumour extends into the 
pelvis, often blocking the ureter, and sometimes passing down it 
for a considerable distance. The renal vein soon becomes in- 
volved ; and through it the cancer may grow inwards to the vena 
cava, thus providing a focus from which infarcts may be carried 
into lungs or liver. The retro-peritoneal glands escape with 
curious frequency. Ebstein says that secondary deposits are 
found in more than half the cases that die of the disease. Local 
extension into peri-renal tissue is not very common ; and invasion 
of neighbouring structures — vertebrae, ribs, intestines, stomach — 
though described, is even more rare. I have seen a case of 
primary cancer of the kidney, where the omentum alone was 
attacked by local extension of the disease. Though malignant 
disease of the lower urinary tract, in testis, prostate, or 
bladder, frequently infects the kidney, the reverse is practically 
unknown. 



SYMPTOMS OF RENAL CANCER. 555 

Symptoms. — Roberts says : "The distinctive symptoms of can- 
cer of the kidney are, tumour in the abdomen and haematuria. 
In every case in which it was the determining cause of death, 
either one or both were present." If this is not accurately true, 
it is certainly very approximately so. Minges found a tumour 
absent only three times in 103 cases, and in two of these cases a 
tumour was not discovered because it was not carefuU}^ looked 
for. A tumour is always present in children, and frequently it 
is of enormous size. Haematuria is found in about half the 
cases, and in a far greater proportion of those which claim origin 
from injury. It is usually irregularly intermittent, and occurs in 
varying amount at all stages of the disease. Occasionally the 
blood is very abundant, forming clots in the ureter or bladder, 
and causing renal colic or vesical tenesmus. The urine in the 
intervals of bleeding is usually normal, though pus-cells and 
tube-casts are sometimes found. 

Pain, as a symptom of malignant disease of the kidneys, is 
found in most, though not in all, cases. It is situated chiefly in 
the loin and abdomen, but radiates widely in all directions 
around the back and shoulders, and down the front and back of 
the thigh. 

The physical signs are, shortly : a solid tumour situated in 
the loin, growing forwards, and not at all bulging backwards ; 
rounded and smooth where palpable; resisting movements on 
pressure, and not descending on inspiration ; dull on percussion 
from the spine forwards, except perhaps along a vertical line in 
front where it is crossed by large intestine. It is characteristic 
of renal tumours, that when the lumbar hollow is filled up, all 
further development is forwards. Renal tumours may be diag- 
nosed from hepatic and splenic enlargements by the fact that they 
are rounded on all sides where exposed to the examining fingers. 
There is no notch or sharp edge anywhere. Fixation is said to 
be a characteristic of renal growths : they impart to the feel a 
peculiar sense of resistance when attempts are made to move 
them in any direction. There are, however, exceptions to this 
rule. There is no resonance in the flank. The large intestine 
crossing in front of the tumour is, when present, a valuable 



556 NEPHRECTOMY. 

diagnostic sign. The ascending colon usuall}^ passes over the 
front and inner side of the growth ; the descending colon passes 
in front, and a little to the outer side. If distended, the colon 
may be detected by its resonant note on percussion ; if empty, 
it may be felt and rolled about by the fingers. 

Renal growths are liable to be confounded with hepatic 
enlargements on the right side, splenic enlargements on the left, 
and also with faecal accumulations and tumours of the ovary. 
Hepatic tumours have no bowel in front, and the liver margin 
can often be felt. A space into which the fingers may be pushed 
is usually left between the upper extremity of a renal growth 
and the edge of the ribs. An enlarged spleen has no bowel in 
front ; it has a well-defined edge, in some cases notched. Faecal 
accumulation onl}' requires to be mentioned as a possible source 
of error. Cystic enlargements of the kidney are more likely to 
be mistaken for ovarian tumours than solid growths. 

{3) Urinary fistulae connected with ureter or kidney may be 
an indication for nephrectom3\ Simon's operation was, as 
already remarked, performed for ureteral fistula. In most cases 
ureteral fistula is a result of an operation wound. It may be 
produced b}' sloughing after a difficult labour. The operation 
of nephrectomy has been performed at least eight times for 
urinary fistula. 

Renal fistula may be produced by wounds of, or by disease 
in, the kidney. In the great majority of cases, it opens in the 
loin. But rare examples are found of renal fistula opening into 
various parts of the intestines, into the stomach, and into the 
lung. Renal fistula opening into the peritoneum is rapidly 
fatal, if not treated. 

The diagnosis of these conditions requires no description. 

(4) Cases of grave injury to the kidney, involving rupture of 
the organ with free bleeding, may call for nephrectomy as the 
onl}^ chance of saving life. The danger is not so much from the 
amount of bleeding, as from the clotting of the blood in the 
bladder, with resulting inability to pass urine. Rawdon* of 
Liverpool performed nephrectomy in a case of this sort, and 
* Lancet, May 26, 1883. 



MORTALITY. 557 

would have saved his patient's Hfe, had it not been that decom- 
position of blood in the bladder set up cystitis and suppurative 
nephritis of the opposite kidney, and this in spite of C3^stotomy 
performed four days after the nephrectomy. 

In cases of urinary infiltration, with destructive suppuration, 
nephrectomy may be called for. But the major operation will, 
in most cases, be adopted only as a sequence to lumbar incision 
and drainage. West, Bennett May, Barker, Weir, and others 
have published cases of this sort. 

(5) An account has already been given of the diseases or 
degenerations which are liable to attack movable kidney. Here 
the indication to operate will usually be pain or enlargement 
accompanying the mobility ; and in most cases the decision to 
proceed to removal will only be come to after exposure and 
examination of the organ. 

Mortality and Appreciation of Nephrectomy. — The statistics of 
nephrectomy have been collected by Harris, Billroth, Gross, 
Weir, Baum, Minges, and others. The general mortality was 
given by Harris,*" in 1882, as 45 per cent. ; by Billroth,! in 1884, 
as 47 per cent.; by Weir,| in 152 cases, as 50 per cent.; and 
by Gross, § in 1885, in 233 cases, as 44.6 per cent. The latest 
statistics: — of Baum,|| adding 72 cases up to Februar}^, 1884, 
giving a mortality of over 50 per cent. ; and of Minges,^ giving 

60 cases of operation for primary malignant disease, with 46 
deaths, — show little improvement. The most recent and most 
complete statistics are those of Newman. ^'"^' Nephrectomy has 
been performed for hydronephrosis and cystic disease 46 times, 
with 18 deaths ; for suppurative disease without calculus 54 
times, with 18 deaths; for suppurative disease with calculus 

61 times, with 22 deaths ; for tubercular disease 33 times, with 
12 deaths; and for tumours of various sorts 74 times, with 24 

* Amey. Jouvn. Med. Sc, July, 1882. f Wien. mcd. Woch., 1884, Nos. 23, 24, 25. 

\ New York Med. Jotmu, Dec. 27th, 1884. 

§ Amer. Jouvn. Med. Sc., July, 18S5, |] Phila. Med. Times, Feb. 21st, 1885. 

•1 Journ. Amer. Med. Ass., June 6th and 13th, 1885. 

** Surg. Diseases 0/ Kidney, 1888. 



658 NEPHRECTOMY. 

deaths. This gives a total of 268 operations, with 94 deaths. 
In Newman's Hst are also included 30 nephrectomies for movable 
kidney, with g deaths, and 27 for traumatic lesions, with 8 deaths. 
The total mortality is 35.2 per cent. The results of individual 
operators of experience are more favourable, but not strikingly 
so. Under the most advantageous circumstances, a general 
primar}^ mortality may be expected, in all cases of nephrectomy, 
of something under 40 per cent. 

In malignant disease recurrence takes place in a proportion 
of 40 per cent., according to Martin of Berlin. Gross estimates 
that recurrence takes place in a third of all the cases, and that 
the average duration of life is two years: of 13 operations on 
children, only 4 recovered ; and all of these died later. Some 
three or four cases of permanent recovery in children, after 
nephrectomy for sarcoma, have since been recorded; so that 
the prospect may not be as hopeless as Gross left it. 

The results vary according to the nature of the disease for 
which operation is performed. The worst results are got for 
malignant disease — nearly 70 per cent. die. For strumous 
kidney, the mortality is about 36 per cent. Here it was found 
that previous nephrotomy did not prove advantageous. For 
suppurative lesions, Gross found that nephrectomy, without 
antecedent nephrotomy, gave a death-rate of nearly 50 per 
cent. ; while nephrotomy gave a death-rate under 30 per cent. 
Bolz and Weir give not very different results. 

Indications and Contra-indications. — ^With results such as those 
described, it is not surprising that nephrectomy should be looked 
upon with some degree of disfavour. No doubt the mortality 
has been increased by a selection of unfavourable cases, or by 
delaying the operation too long. Under the most favourable 
circumstances, however, it may be taken for granted that the 
mortality of nephrectomy will always be high. In favour of the 
operation, even thus loaded with a terrible death-rate, it may 
be urged, that it is performed for a certainly fatal disease; a 
complete success is a life saved ; a failure is simply an acceler- 
ated dying. 



INDICATIONS. 559 

For sarcoma and cancer, the position of the operation would 
probably be as follows : In all cases where the disease has been 
known to exist for some months, where the growth is large, and 
particularly if it is firmly adherent in the loin, no operation is 
advisable. In children, unless the growth is small, the patient 
healthy and not less than four or five years of age, no operation 
is to be thought of. In a word, for malignant disease, nephrec- 
tomy is a justifiable procedure only in a very few specially 
selected cases. It is right to add that, for children, Gross 
forbids operation altogether. 

In h3'dro-nephrosis, as in cystic disease, removal ought not 
to be undertaken till incision has been tried and has failed. 
Billroth considers that for hydro-nephrosis, nephrectomy ought 
never to be performed. In a third of the cases, removal has 
been carried out after mistaking the disease for ovarian cystoma: 
naturally, the mortality is much greater than after incision. If 
fistula remains, this may be palliated or treated later on with 
more chance of success by nephrectomy. 

In suppurative lesions, the question of excision as against 
incision will depend — firstly, on the condition of the patient ; 
and, secondly, on the state of the organ. It may be laid dow^n 
as a rule, never to be departed from, that no suppurating kidney 
should be removed without first making a careful examination 
through an exploratory incision into its substance. Also, the 
major operation should not be performed if the patient is very 
weak. The mortality of nephrotomy is less than that of ne- 
phrectomy, but not so much less as might be expected : the 
per-centage of recoveries in favour of the former operation is 
only twenty-five. Still, this is decisive where nephrotomy is 
likely to be curative. But certain cases will evidently not be 
cured by nephrotomy : in these, it may even be doubtful 
whether traumatic interference will not be positively harmful ; 
and it may appear that the patient, on the operating table, is 
in a condition as favoural^le as he is ever likely to be for opera- 
tion. Such cases will usually be scrofulous ; and, as a matter 
of fact, the mortality after nephrotomy for scrofulous kidney is 
just as great as after nephrectomy. In every case where ne- 



560 NEPHRECTOMY. 

phrotomy presents a fair chance of cure, or even of amelioration, 
it should be selected ; where nephrotomy is out of court, and 
the patient is likely to bear it, nephrectomy may be performed. 

For wounds in the kidney and their consequences, nephrec- 
tomy has been performed by Brandt, Marvand, Cartwright, 
Rawdon, and Bruns — five times, with two deaths. If death 
seems to be imminent from haemorrhage, and after exploratory 
incision it is found to be impossible to check the bleeding, then 
nephrectomy ought to be performed. Clots in the ureter may 
cause suppression of urine ; in the bladder, they may prevent 
the discharge of urine, or set up cystitis : here also, if bleeding 
cannot be checked, and life is being endangered, nephrectomy 
is indicated. Where suppuration, with extravasation of urine, 
follows rupture of the kidney, incision or removal is indicated, 
according to the gravity of the condition and the state of the 
patient. 

Urinary fistula, renal or ureteral, if it causes great discomfort 
and prevents the patient from following a necessary occupation, 
may be an indication for nephrectomy. Simon, Archer, Boeckel 
and others, have operated for ureteral fistula caused by acci- 
dental wound inflicted during hysterectoni}'. The greatest 
number of operations have been performed for renal fistula 
left after nephrotomy, and here the results have been most 
favourable. 

Methods of Ascertaining the Condition of the othev Kidney. — Before 
proceeding to remove one kidney, it is well to ascertain as ac- 
curately as possible whether the other kidney is sound ; or, in 
fact, whether it exists. Though it has been estimated that the 
kidney is solitary only once in 4,000 cases, it has been the un- 
fortunate lot of one surgeon to remove such an organ. This 
was^the remarkable case of Polk,*' in which a displaced kidne}^ 
lying on the left side above Poupart's ligament, was removed, 
and found, at the post-mortem examination eleven days later, 
to be the only kidney. In cases of suppurative disease where 
nephrectomy is contemplated, the importance of ascertaining 
* NeiD York Med. Joxirn,, Feb. 17th, 1S83. 



EXPLORING THE URETERS. 561 

the functional capacity of the organ to be left can scarcely 
be over-estimated. It is not surprising, therefore, that many 
devices with this object in view have been introduced ; and it 
is, perhaps, no less surprising, considering the inherent difficulty 
of the procedure, that none of these devices is entirely satis- 
factory. 

Tuchmann* invented a compressor, something like a litho- 
trite, for the ureter, which he improved in 1880. Hegarf pro- 
posed temporary ligature of one ureter through the vagina. 

Simon, I in 1875, practised direct catheterisation of ureters 
through the dilated urethra in the female ; but after much prac- 
tice, he attained to only a qualified success. In 1876 Griinfeld j 
used Simon's method with the help of an endoscope. 

Pawlik of Vienna || claims to have been the first to sound 
the ureters in the female without dilating the urethra. Using as 
guides certain folds in the vaginal wall, he has succeeded in 
passing hollow sounds into the ureters of the female 150 times 
in the dead subject, and 50 times in the living. His method 
has not generally been adopted, in this country at least. 

Silbermann *; sought to compress the ureter by small rubber 
bags, filled with quicksilver, introduced through a large silver 
catheter. Newman of Glasgow, in cases of his own, and in one 
of Dr. McCall Anderson's, has used Silbermann's method with 
success. But Newman has introduced a plan of his own, in 
which sight, with the help of an electric lamp in the bladder, is 
called in to help in the passing of the catheter into the ureter. 

Sands recommends the insertion of the hand into the rectum, 
and compression of the ureters by the fingers. 

Gliick** recommends a proceeding even more serious ; namely, 
compression of the ureter by forceps through a lumbar incision. 
The opposite kidney is supposed to be sound if iodide of soda, 
or ferro-cyanidc of potassium, administered to the patient, is 

* Wien. med IVoch., 1874, No. 20. t Operat. Gynnk., 1874, p. 456. 

X " Uber die Methoden die Weibliche Urinblase," &c., 

Samml. hlin. Vortr., No. 38. 

^Wein.med.Presse, i876,Nos.27, 28. || See letter in G/as^. M^cf. Joxm., July, 1885. 
II Berl. klin. Woch., No. 34, 1883. ** Ceniralbl. f. Chir., Dec. loth, 1881. 

37 



562 NEPHRECTOMY. 

found in the urine secreted by the other kidney. But a kidney 
advanced in disease might elude this test. 

Polk* has devised a clamp for compressing the ureter, one 
blade being inside the bladder and the other in the rectum. 
The bladder being washed out, the urine secreted by the other 
kidney can be got in a fairly pure state and examined. 

Davy's rectal lever has been uj^ed, with somewhat uncertain 
results, to compress the ureter as it crosses the brim of the 
pelvis. On the right side it can be employed only when there 
is a well-developed mesentery to the rectum. 

Fen wick's f ingenious apparatus for performing suction of the 
ureters in the male promises to be valuable ; but it has scarcely 
been more than tried. \ 

On one occasion, while removing papillomatous growths 
from the female bladder, I was struck with the ease with which 
I could detect and reach the orifices of the ureters. To enter 
the female bladder, I now always incise the outer urethra, and 
dilate the inner urethra and the neck of the bladder. The 
additional freedom in exploring the bladder so afforded is much 
greater than would be supposed : I feel sure that little difficulty 
would be experienced in finding the orifices of the ureters, and in 
catheterising them, by this method. It is easy enough on the 
dead body. Three or four catgut sutures give primary healing, 
and no incontinence is left. Probably some modification of 
Polk's plan will be found most suitable for the male. 

Our confidence must rest mainly on the characters of the 
urine as a whole, and on the condition of the patient. The 
quantit}^ of urine, its per-centage of solids and especially of 
urea, and the presence of no more albumen than might be 
accounted for by the pus in the urine, must be our chief data 
for guidance. Any symptoms of ursemic poisoning, of course, 
negative the operation. 

Abdominal section is valuable as a means of ascertaining the 
* New York Med. Journ., Feb. 17th, 18S3. 
t Lancet, Sept. i8th, 1886. 

J For an exhaustive consideration of the methods of exploring the ureters 
in the female, see M. D. Schultz, Nouv. Arch. d'Obsfet. et de Gyne'c, ii., 5, p. 205. 



THE OPERATION. 563 

condition of the other kidney ; but its true position is rather 
as an alternative to lumbar nephrectomy which secures this 
additional advantage, than as a mere method of diagnosis. 

THE OPERATION. 

The kidney may be removed in two ways : 

(i) By incision through the loin — Lumbar nephrectomy. 
(2) By incision through the parietes — Abdominal nephrec- 
tomy. 

Lmnhav Nephrectomy. — Several varieties of incision are recom- 
mended. Morris recommends " a transverse or slightly oblique 
incision, made somewhat nearer the last rib than in colotomy ; 
with this should be conjoined a second incision, running verti- 
cally downwards from the first, and starting from it about one 
inch in front of its posterior extremity." The special advantage 
of the vertical incision is, that it affords increased facility for 
passing the ligature round the pedicle. Weir*' made use of a 
lumbar vertical incision three inches from the spine, just below 
the twelfth rib, and extending to the crest of the ilium ; and a 
second incision, transverse, varying in length according to 
requirements, and running from near the top of the vertical 
incision along the edge of the ribs. Simon's original incision 
was a vertical one ; but in his case the kidney was not enlarged. 
Lucas t recommends an oblique incision, as for colotom}^, 
supplemented by a vertical one carried along the outer edge of 
the quadratus, and extending from the last rib to the iliac crest. 
Klineberger used a curved incision, the convexity of which was 
upwards and outwards. Thornton, ]: in a discussion on Dr. 
Walter's case of nephrectomy for cystic tumour of a floating 
kidney, thought that the operation of the future would be a 
vertical incision, farther out than Langenbuch's through the 
linea semilunaris; not entering the peritoneum, but pushing it, 
with the colon, inwards. Other varieties of incision have been 
described. 

* New York Med. Journ. , Dec. 27th, 1S84. f Brit. Med. Journ., ii. , 18S3, p. 61 1. 

\ Brit. Med. Journ., ii., 1S83, p. 615. 

37 * 



564 NEPHRECTOMY. 

The lines of incision should be determined by the condition of 
the organ to be removed. A healthy kidney, or one but slightly 
enlarged and not adherent, may be removed through a simple 
oblique incision made between the ribs and the iliac crest. The 
upper extremity should be at least an inch distant from the last 
rib : the lower extremity may be carried close to the crest of the 
ilium ; if the costo-iliac space is small, the line of incision may 
be curved forwards some distance. 

If the kidney is of large size, or if it is fixed by adhesions, 
more space is required both for its removal and for performing 
the necessary manipulations in enucleating it. In every case, 
the operation may be begun by the oblique incision. Through 
it the condition of the kidney may be ascertained, and, in cases 
of suppuration, a decision come to as to the advisability of 
giving nephrotomy a trial ; while, if the kidney is to be removed, 
the best mode of enlarging the incision will be more accurately 
judged after seeing the amount of space provided by the oblique 
incision. Some form of transverse incision, starting near the 
lower extremity of the oblique one and carried towards the 
middle line as far as may seem expedient, will usually be found 
the best. It is made by the scissors cutting through the 
parietes at one stroke, and guided by the forefinger, which is 
pushed forwards through the cellular tissue, and keeps the peri- 
toneum out of the way. The incision may be carried forward to 
any distance desired, the peritoneum being carefully elevated 
from the kidney surface, and pushed inwards. 

The actual lines of incision are not of supreme importance. 
Any incision which gives plenty of room, and does not involve 
entering the peritoneal cavity, may be adopted. The incision 
described is that which I have found most suitable. 

The incisions being made, and all bleeding points having 
been secured, the kjdney is separated from its connections. If 
there has been no inflammation, this will be found an easy pro- 
ceeding ; the forefinger of one hand, carried close to its capsule, 
readily enucleating the organ from its fatty bed. But if there 
has been much inflammation, the cellulo-fatty tissue may be 
very dense and very adherent, and enucleation may prove very 



THE OPERATION. 665 

difficult. In some cases, enucleation is simply impossible with- 
out the use of a cutting instrument — scissors being best for this 
purpose. An attempt may be made to enucleate the kidney 
from its capsule, leaving the capsule behind ; but this also, 
if there has been suppuration at many points, will be found a 
difficult matter. Each case must be judged on its own merits. 
It must not be forgotten that there is a limit to the amount of 
force which may be exerted in the separation of adhesions sur- 
rounding a kidney : surgical manipulation ought never to be 
carried into brute force. Very dense adhesions should be 
divided by scissors ; forceps, where necessary, being placed on 
the bleeding points. In cases where nephrotomy has been per- 
formed, it is usually found that enucleation from the capsule is 
more feasible than enucleation from the circumrenal fat. In 
cases of old-standing suppuration, with great enlargement, the 
vena cava and the aorta may be intimately adherent to the cap- 
sule. One such case was recently met with in the post-mortem 
room of the Bristol Infirmary ; here it was simply impossible, 
after death, to dissect apart the vascular walls and the renal 
capsule. In another case, for similar reasons, the organ could 
not have been removed by any proceeding claiming to be recog- 
nised as surgical. In such cases, where complete removal is 
out of the question, an artificial pedicle, including some renal 
tissue, may be formed at some distance from the middle line. 
The tissue left will probably either atrophy or slough ; and the 
danger of wounding vena cava or aorta will have been avoided. 
The kidne}^ having been freed, the next step is to secure the 
pedicle. This is a proceeding demanding great care and 
delicacy. A few surgeons recommend that the arter}' and the 
vein should be ligatured separatel}'. In many cases this will be 
found impossible ; in none is it necessary. Indeed, the walls of 
the vein or veins, by acting as a sort of padding, may add to 
the safety of ligation, preventing the thread from slipping and 
distributing the pressure on the artery or arteries. As a matter 
of fact, the only deaths as yet recorded from secondary haemor- 
rhage were in two cases where the vessels were separately tied. 
The vessels are ligatured in a body ; the ureter, separately. 



566 NEPHRECTOMY. 

The kidney is first most carefully raised out of its bed, and 
handed to an assistant, who holds it steadily in both hands, 
exerting no traction on the pedicle. The fingers of the left 
hand (or the right hand, as may be most convenient), surround- 
ing the pedicle, isolate ureter and vessels as far as possible by 
teasing out the cellular tissue between them. Pulsation in the 
artery is a guiding sign of importance, A ligature of thick silk 
is carried, by an aneurism needle in the other hand, around the 
vessels, and tied. While the ligature is being tightened, all 
traction must be taken off the pedicle. The ureter, isolated as 
far as possible, is caught in a pair of compression forceps, and 
left to be dealt with as seems best afterwards. The kidney is 
now deliberately cut away, at a safe distance from the site of 
ligation, by successive snips of the scissors ; and while this is 
being done, all tension on the pedicle must be relaxed. An 
artery may be dragged through a very tight ligature which 
encloses other tissues ; and this artery, recoiling afterwards, 
may bleed. If it is impossible to bring the pedicle fully within 
sight, then a large catch-forceps should be placed upon it out- 
side the ligature, and division made between forceps and kidney. 
Or a temporary ecraseur, of rope or wire, may be used for the 
same purpose. Every possible precaution should be taken 
against the occurrence of haemorrhage. 

The ureter is separated from the pelvis by a stroke of the 
scissors. If it is much thickened, and its mucous membrane 
ulcerated, Thornton's admirable plan of fixing the divided 
extremity in the parietal wound should be adopted. If it is 
fairly healthy, it may be ligatured and left in the wound. 

In some cases of large suppurating kidney it may be impos- 
sible to manufacture a pedicle composed of vessels only at a 
safe distance from the aorta or vena cava. In this case the 
simplest plan is, to surround the base of the organ with a tem- 
porary ligature attached to an ecraseur, and cut away the 
diseased tissues close to it. Tait's temporary rope-clamp is 
very suitable for this purpose. If the kidney is very large, it 
may, while this compression is being exerted, be cut away in 
portions, to the great simplification of the operation. The diffi- 



THE OPERATION. 567 

culty of delivering an enormous kidney through a lumbar wound 
is thereby avoided, and, more important still, the risks of trac- 
tion on the vessels are escaped. When the organ is shaved 
away down to the position of the temporary compression, the 
pedicle may be dealt with deliberately by ligation, forci-pressure, 
or cautery, as seems best at the time. 

There would seem to be no extra danger in placing the liga- 
ture quite close to the aorta or vena cava. But most surgeons 
would endeavour to give these vessels as wide a berth as possible 
— not only to avoid injury to their walls, but also to escape the 
risk of extension into their lumina of the thrombotic plugs. 

A final examination is made of the pedicle and of the cavity 
of the wound. All blood-clot is removed, any bleeding points 
are secured, and the peritoneum is carefully examined, to make 
certain that it has not been torn. A peritoneal rent is at once 
closed by a continuous catgut suture placed from the outside, 
which will cause accurate apposition of its serous surfaces. If 
the colon has been exposed on its retro-peritoneal aspect, it also 
must be examined for injury. 

A large rubber drain is placed in the bottom of the cavity, 
and the wound sutured by deep and superficial stitches. The 
peritoneum, pushed backwards by intra-abdominal pressure, 
soon closes in over the large cavit)^ Primary healing is the 
rule ; and the progress, as soon as the first dangers are over, is 
usually very rapid. 

Abdominal Nephvectomy. — The incision may be made either in 
the ordinary way, through the linea alba ; or, after the method 
introduced by Langenbuch, through the linea semilunaris on 
the side of the kidney to be removed. Langenbuch's method 
is now almost universally adopted. 

The length of the incision must be sufficient to admit the 
whole hand — at least four inches — even if the kidney is of 
normal size ; if the kidney is enlarged, the length of the incision 
must be made to correspond. Its middle point is at the level 
ot the umbilicus. When the abdominal cavity is entered, a 
large flat sponge is inserted, to keep the intestines out of the 



■^68 NEPHRECTOMY. 

way and to absorb effused blood. Before proceeding to remove 
the kidney, the state of the other will have been ascertained as 
accurately as possible by examination with the hand passed 
through the parietal opening. 

The kidney is exposed by tearing through the peritoneum 
where it forms the outer layer of the meso-colon. The inner 
layer — that between the colon and the middle hne — contains the 
vessels which supply the bowel, and incision through it may 
cause, and in fact has caused, gangrene of the gut. Two or 
three fingers, passed through this opening, enlarge it by tearing 
and stretching, and separate the front of kidney from the cir- 
cumrenal fat. When a way has been opened to the renal vessels, 
these may be exposed, or at least brought nearer to the field of 
vision, by hooking up the peritoneal flaps with a retractor, 
which, in the hands of an assistant, at the same time makes the 
parietal wound gape. The vessels are carefully isolated with 
the forefinger. A ligature is passed round them with a blunt 
aneurism needle and tied. The ureter is caught in forceps, 
which are left attached. The organ is now completely separated 
from its surroundings, the vessels are divided at a safe distance 
from the ligature, the ureter is cut through, and the whole mass 
lifted out of the wound. If there is any doubt as to the security 
of the ligature, a long catch-forceps should be placed on the end 
of the pedicle, while a second ligature is applied behind the first. 
In most cases double ligatures have been used. 

The ureter is treated as in lumbar nephrectomy. If it is 
fairly healthy, it is ligatured, cleansed, and returned ; if it is 
diseased, lined with thick granulations, and contains putrid pus 
its divided extremity may be fixed in the wound, as suggested 
and practised by Thornton ; or turned out through an opening 
in the loin, as suggested by Morris. In such cases as strumous 
pyelitis, where the disease often extends down the ureter, this 
extra-peritoneal treatment of the ureter lessens the chances of 
its becoming a new abscess-sac, and permits of its being irrigated 
and disinfected. Thornton's plan has been criticised, as inviting 
the subsequent occurrence of intestinal obstruction by raising 
up a tense band between bladder and loin. 



CHOICE OF OPERATION. 569 

The cavity is finally cleansed, and examined for bleeding 
points. The peritoneal rent falls together naturally, and requires 
no suture. If pus or urine has escaped during the manipulations, 
a drainage tube should be placed in the bottom of the wound ; 
otherwise, drainage is unnecessary. The parietal wound is 
closed in the ordinary way. 

Choice of Operation. — Whether the lumbar or the abdominal 
method be selected in a given case, will depend on many cir- 
cumstances. Firstly, there is the predilection of the operator. 
That men of such experience and success as Tait and Thornton 
should prefer the abdominal method, is a very strong argument 
in its favour. But the force of the argument is weakened, in so 
far as it refers to surgeons in general, from the fact that those 
men who prefer the abdominal operation are also men of very 
large experience in performing abdominal sections for other 
purposes. To most surgeons the lumbar operation would com- 
mend itself, as being more easy of performance. 

Then there is the question of safety. The general mortality 
after the lumbar operation is considerably less than that after 
the abdominal. Out of 233 cases collected by Gross,"' iii by 
the lumbar method gave a per-centage mortality of 36.93, while 
120 by ventral incision gave 50.83 per cent, mortality. Newman 
gives the mortality after lumbar nephrectomy as 30.5 per cent., 
and after abdominal as 47.1 per cent. It may, however, be 
reasonably urged against any conclusions drawn from these 
statistics, that the simplest cases were naturally selected for the 
lumbar operation, and the most difficult for the abdominal. 
There are no figures to show what mortality the abdominal 
method or the lumbar would have given, each in unselected 
cases. It is just possible that the abdominal method, in those 
cases where the lumbar was adopted, would have given even 
better results. Indeed, in the hands of a few operators, with 
cases that were certainly far from being simple, the results in 
abdominal nephrectomy are far ahead of the average in lumbar 

nephrectomy. 

* Amer. Journ. Med. Sc, July, 1885. 



570 NEPHRECTOMY. 

We cannot ignore these facts, and compare the value of 
general lumbar nephrectomies with general abdominal nephrec- 
tomies by figures alone. All that can be said is, that, so far, 
the general superiority of the one to the other has not yet been 
proved ; and the surgeon is left absolutely to his own discretion, 
in each case, as to the operation he shall adopt. 

Looking at the mechanical details of the operations them- 
selves, we find that certain cases are most suitable to one method, 
and some to the other. Generally speaking, it is possible before 
operation to make a sound selection ; but frequently it is not. 

By the lumbar method, less space is given for removal of 
the kidney ; the important procedure of ligature of the pedicle 
is carried out at some distance from the surface, and frequently 
out of sight ; and there is not the same facility in dealing with 
bleeding points in the tissues from which the kidney has been 
enucleated. On the other hand, the lumbar method is an extra- 
peritoneal operation ; it gives more facility for the separation of 
strong adhesions behind the kidney; and in the case of its being 
unwise, as in abscess, or in tumour infecting the surrounding 
tissues, to proceed to removal, it is less serious to the patient. 
In the case of abscess, it has the further advantage of permitting 
of treatment by incision and drainage, without serious risks of 
peritonitis. 

Langenbuch's operation is, in its way, a perfect surgical 
procedure, securing its aims by a minimum of injury to sur- 
rounding tissues. In the linea semilunaris, the advantages of 
avoiding large muscular masses are secured ; and by tearing 
through the peritoneum in front of the colon, the vitality of the 
bowel is not endangered. It gives plenty of room for removal 
of the kidney. Lastly, it secures the all-important advantage of 
giving information as to the condition of the alternate kidney. 
Its disadvantages, in addition to the opening of the peritoneal 
cavity, are chiefly the difficulty of separating adhesions behind 
a large kidney, and the dangers from rupture of abscess-cysts 
inside the cavity. 

Bearing in mind the advantages and disadvantages peculiar 
to each operation, we can roughly specify the cases most suit- 
able for each. 



CHOICE OF OPERATION. 571 " 

By the lumbar method, all small kidneys may be removed. 
These include ordinary examples of ureteral fistula, and cases 
of wounds of the kidney in which there is urinary extravasation 
or suppurative disintegration of tissue. It ought to be selected 
for all small growths of the kidney, and particularly if it is 
movable. It is best employed for all enlargements containing 
fluid — hydatid, hydro-nephrotic, or purulent — in which incision, 
with drainage, has not produced cure. In cases of calculus in 
which the renal tissue is completely disorganised, the lumbar 
method is the best. 

The ventral incision is most suited to large non-adherent 
solid tumours, and to those movable kidneys which have 
become diseased and are unsuitable for nephrorraphy. In 
very fat subjects, the ventral incision may be easier than the 
lumbar, as permitting of easier approach. In very lean sub- 
jects, both operations are much facilitated — the lumbar more, 
perhaps, than the ventral. 

A word must be said on the plan recommended by Thornton, 
but now abandoned by him, which IMorris has called "Lateral 
Retro-peritoneal Nephrectomy." In this plan, the incision is 
made further outwards than the linea semilunaris — so far out, 
in fact, as to permit exposure of the kidney by the peritoneum 
being pushed aside without opening it, as in ligature of the 
external iliac. The advantages of making the incision in the 
linea semilunaris are perhaps more ideal than real : an ab- 
dominal section is about as easily performed by division of 
muscles as of fasciae ; the bleeding is easily controlled, and the 
wounds unite just as readily. If there is any advantage in 
going further outwards, the division of muscle need not deter 
us. In cases of considerable enlargement of the kidney, for 
which only this method would be selected, the peritoneum is 
pushed inwards, and reflexion of it, without entering the 
abdomen, is easy enough. It is doubtful, however, if by this 
lateral incision it is as easy to deal with the pedicle as in 
Langenbuch's operation. 



Section IX. 



OPERATIONS ON THE LIVER AND 
GALL-BLADDER. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY OF THE LIVER. 

The surgery of the liver being concerned with diseases which 
cause enlargement of the organ, it behoves us to know accu- 
rately the limits of the space it normally occupies. The limits 
of percussion dulness, relative and absolute, are well enough 
known ; but, as the organ is overlapped by lung above, and 
as, at parts where it is thin, it lies in close contact with air- 
containing viscera below, these limits may not be anatomically 
correct. 

On the right side, a transverse line passing through the 
junction of the fifth rib with its cartilage would graze the top 
of the right lobe at its highest point. In fact, the highest level 
of the liver almost touches the lower border of the fourth rib. 
On the left side, a transverse line running through the junction 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 573 

of the sixth rib with its cartilage would pass close to the upper 
and outer limits of the left lobe. Below, its margin is just 
covered by the ribs behind : as it comes to the front, it leaves 
the cartilage of the tenth rib on the right and crosses obliquely 
to the left, towards the junction of the fifth left rib with its 
cartilage. 

A triangular area of liver surface is thus left uncovered by 
anything but abdominal wall ; and it is in this area, usually 
increased in dimensions, that many surgical procedures have to 
be carried out. The sharp free margin, with its notch a little 
to the right of the middle line, indicating the attachment of the 
broad ligament, may frequentl}' be palpated. From the notch 
to the umbilicus runs the double fold of peritoneum known as 
the longitudinal or suspensory ligament. Its parietal attach- 
ment is along the inner border of the right rectus muscle ; its 
free border contains the fibrous cord known as the round liga- 
ment, which is the remains of the obliterated umbilical vein. 
At the notch the round ligament passes behind the liver along 
the longitudinal fissure. It must not be forgotten that the 
umbilical vein is not always completely obliterated, and that a 
wound of it may cause haemorrhage. This fact must be noted 
in the making of long incisions in the region. 

The extent to which the right lung and pleura overlap the 
liver varies considerably in health. When the liver is enlarged 
it rises upwards, encroaching on the pulmonary space ; but 
though the level of the upper surface is raised both actually and 
to percussion, and though the lung may be pushed up in front 
of it, the diaphragmatic pleura still retains its position. A 
puncture above the normal level of the lower limits of the 
pleura, or the insertion of the diaphragm, though it may not 
pass through lung, will traverse the pleura, and, if there are no 
adhesions, will enter the pleural cavity. The level of the pleura 
in the right axillary line is at the lower border of the ninth rib ; 
and if variations occur on this side as frequently as they do on 
the left side, we must not be surprised to find it placed lower. 

The liver possesses some range of movement. Following 
the movements of the diaphragm, it descends with inspiration 



574 OPERATIONS ON THE LIVER. 

and ascends with expiration. If there is occasion to stitch a 
wound in the hver to the parietes, the evil effects of this con- 
tinual movement may be minimised by fixing the sutures at a 
distance as great as possible from the rib margins. Unim- 
portant displacements take place as the position of the indi- 
vidual varies, and as the abdomen is compressed or relaxed. A 
real pathological displacement is seen in the rare condition 
known as wandering or floating liver. Though most of the 
cases so described have proved to be errors in diagnosis, a few, 
perhaps a dozen, are attested by post mortem examination or 
incontrovertible physical signs.*' In the great majority of cases 
the condition has been found associated with pendulous ab- 
domen. In none is treatment called for beyond the wearing of 
an abdominal belt. 

The structure of the liver is such that we should expect it to 
be intolerant of surgical interference. But experience would 
seem to point the other way. Its capsule is ver}' closely adhe- 
rent, and so thin as to be incapable of bearing much strain from 
sutures. The tissue is very friable and very vascular ; but the 
blood-stream is very sluggish, and easily controlled by pressure 
such as may be exerted by sponges or a row of sutures. 

The gall-bladder (Fig. 74), lying on the under surface of the 
liver in a shallow groove between the lobulus quadratus and the 
right lobe, is, when healthy, beyond the reach of palpation. Its 
fundus extends a little lower than the edge of the liver, and lies 
in a shallow depression, whose margin can sometimes be felt 
below the inner border of the ninth costal cartilege. In this 
position it is a little to the right of the outer margin of the 
right rectus muscle, and can be reached by an incision through 
the upper end of the right linea semilunaris. 

The bladder itself is about four inches in length, and about 
an inch broad, with a normal capacity of a little over an ounce. 
It is fixed to the under surface of the liver simply by the peri- 
toneum, which passes over it. Occasionally the peritoneal 

* Consult Thierfielder, Ziemssen's Cycl., vol. iv., p. 48. Landau, Dcr 
Wandcrleber und der Hdngerbauch dev Fraiien. Berlin, 1885. Larionoff, Rubin- 
ovitch, Dmitrieff, and Botkin ; Abstract in Loud. Med. Rec, Aug. 15th, 18S5, 
by Dr. Idelson, who gives further references. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 



575 



folds meet on its upper surface between it and the liver, forming 
a sort of mesentery. On one occasion when performing chole- 
cystotomy on the cadaver, I found a double fold of peritoneum 
passing between the free surface of the bladder and the interior 
margin of the foramen of Winslow. As another, though less 
perfect, example of this anomaly was found in the post-mortem 
room within a few months, I suspect that this condition is not 




Fig. 74. (Weisse.) 
The under surface of the Liver ; the Duodenum and the Pancreas. 

I. Cystic Arteries supplying Gall-bladder. 2. Obliterated Umbilical Vein. 3. Obliterated 
Branch to Vena Portfe. 4. Hepatic Duct. 5. Hepatic Artery. 6. Obliterated Ductus 
Venosus. 7. Inferior Mesenteric Vein discharg;ing into the Splenic Vein. 8. Ductus 
Communis Choledochus. g. Probe entering the l3uct and coming out at the Orifice in the 
Duodenum. lo. Cystic Duct. — The inferior Vena Cava is crossed by the lines from 8 and 9. 
The superior Mesenteric Vein crosses the transverse portion of the Duodenum and passes 
under the Pancreas to join the Splenic \'ein in the Vena Portse. 



very rare. This abnormality need not interfere seriously with 
operative proceedings ; but if met with unexpectedly, it might 
be confusing. 

The cystic duct, about an inch long, leaves the neck of the 
bladder at a very obtuse angle, passes a little towards the left 



576 OPERATIONS ON THE LIVER. 

in the gastro-hepatic omentum, accompanied with its artery, 
and joins the hepatic duct at an acute angle. These, joining, 
form the ductus communis choledochus, which, after a course 
about three inches long in the right border of the lesser omen- 
tum, passes with the pancreatic duct obliquely through the 
inner wall of the descending portion of duodenum. The cystic 
duct can readily be examined through a ventral incision ; and a 
dilated or obstructed common duct can be felt, at least through 
the first part of its course. In any manipulation that may be 
carried out on these ducts, their close relations with the portal 
vein and the hepatic artery must be borne in mind. 

The fibrous coat of the gall-bladder, though thin, is very 
strong and tough, and is not easily dilated. The thin layer of 
muscular fibres is arranged mainly in longitudinal direction. 
The mucous coat is everywhere elevated in ridges, which are so 
arranged as to produce polygonal depressions, most highly 
developed near the middle of the cavity. At the neck, one 
large ruga overhangs the entrance to the cystic duct, and acts 
as a sort of valve. When the bladder is over-distended, these 
rugae are usually obliterated. In the cystic duct the mucous 
membrane is raised into half a dozen or a dozen oblique folds, 
arranged so as to form a sort of interrupted spiral. These folds 
increase the difficulty of gall-stones being passed onwards. Any 
distension of the duct causes the intervalvular spaces to be 
distended, producing a sort of cork-screw appearance. 

The relations of the bowels to the gall-bladder are unim- 
portant, except in view of the operative formation of a fistula 
between the two. This will be discussed farther on. 



Operations upon the Liver. 

Surgical operations are performed on the liver for abscess 
and for hydatids. The operations are various : all of them are 
of the nature of proceedings for the evacuation of cystic collec- 
tions of fluid. Although most of the proceedings involve wound- 
ing of liver tissue, the special name "Hepatotomy" is given 
only to that operation wherein an abdominal section is made, 
and the liver tissue is directly incised through the parietal 
wound. The name is, of course, equally applicable to incision 
through the costal parietes. Partial " Hepatectomy" must 
now be included amongst operations on the liver, since Lan- 
genbuch-' removed (unsuccessfull}-) a pedunculated mass of 
hepatic tissue which caused great pain and pressed on the 
pylorus and neighbouring structures. 

The various operations will be most conveniently considered 
under the heads of the diseases. 



HEPATIC ABSCESS. 

Anatomical Characters. — The fact that chiefly concerns the 
surgeon is, that the abscess is sometimes multiple. In the 
majority of cases, however, especially if of some duration, the 
abscess is single. There is always a tendency for abscesses, if 
multiple, to coalesce ; so that if one abscess is opened, and 
pressure be removed from the walls of its neighbour, there is a 
likelihood of the second bursting into the cavity of the first. In 
most the abscess is covered with healthy tissue, with uninflamed 
capsule, and an incision may have to be carried some distance 
through the healthy substance to reach it. If it is permitted to 
burst naturally, it is most frequently fatal. Rarely it bursts 
through the skin. Sometimes it bursts into the peritoneal 
* Bcrl. klin. Woch.. iS8S, iii. 
38 ' 



578 OPERATIONS ON THE LIVER. 

cavity or pericardium, when it causes death. It may open into 
the pleura, when it is usually fatal. The most favourable 
openings are, into the bowel and into the lung ; though in 
both cases the prognosis is grave. In any case where free 
evacuation not into a dangerous site has taken place, there is 
a remarkable tendency for the abscess cavity to close up and 
cicatrise, while the liver readily regains the power of discharging 
its normal functions. 

Diagnosis. — The diagnosis of abscess of the liver is sometimes 
very difficult, or even impracticable ; nevertheless, in most cases, 
especially with the help of the exploring needle, something like 
certainty may be arrived at. To begin with, we may have a 
history of residence in hot climates, and perhaps of malaria or 
dysentery. There may be a history of rigors. Sometimes also 
it would appear to be connected with operations on the rectum. 
There is the characteristic muddy complexion ; the harassed, 
anxious, restless expression ; the rapid pulse and the elevated 
temperature. The tongue is coated with white fur ; and there 
will be an irritable stomach, with vomiting. Locally there is 
pain and tenderness in the hepatic region, with enlargement, 
sometimes very considerable, of the organ itself. Occasionally, 
but not frequently, there is fluctuation. The presence of jaun- 
dice is rather against than in favour of abscess. When the 
abscess bursts into the lung, the chocolate-coloured expectora- 
tion is pathognomonic ; before it bursts, this sign may be got 
from exploratory puncture. 

It is most liable to be confounded with empyema at the base 
of the right pleura, and it has been mistaken for pleurisy and 
pneumonia. I have seen a large abscess of the liver diagnosed 
as abscess of the kidney ; and the reverse is just possible. The 
nodular feel of a cancerous liver will usually distinguish it from 
a suppurating one ; and if no nodules exist on the surface, and 
the new growth be behind, we can fall back upon the pyrexia that 
accompanies the latter. In hydatids also there is no pyrexia, 
very little constitutional disturbance, and but little, if any, pain: 
the hydatid fremitus is so rarely felt as to be of little value 
clinically. 



HEPATIC ABSCESS. 579 



SURGICAL TREATMENT. 

For liver-abscess, as for other abscesses, there may be said 
to be no treatment that is not surgical. True, as in other cases, 
the abscess may become absorbed naturally ; but that is a result 
so rare, that no prudent man would wait for it. And we must 
not delay the necessary opening too long. If we wait for the 
abscess to point at a convenient spot, we may have waited too 
long, and the abscess may elect to point at an inconvenient 
spot. On similar grounds, we must not wait for the doubtful 
formation of adhesions to the body walls. They may never form 
there ; and if they did, it is doubtful if we could diagnose them. 
There is nothing for it but removal of the pent-up pus, as soon 
as an abscess is diagnosed. 

The surgical measures available are : 

(i) Aspiration. 

(2) Puncture by trocar — leaving the cannula in situ. 

(3) Opening by caustic or by thermo-cautery. 

(4) Direct incision into the abscess through the body walls. 

(5) Incision a deux temps, after the artificial formation of 

adhesions between the liver and abdominal walls. 

(6) Incision, and drainage by abdominal section — Hepa- 

totomy. 

(i) The employment of the aspirator in hepatic abscess must 
be regarded rather in the light of a tentative and exploratory 
measure, than as a permanent cure. It is now used more 
extensively, perhaps, than published literature would lead us to 
expect. For clearing up a diagnosis, and giving temporary 
relief, the removal of quantities of pus from the liver by aspi- 
ration is of undoubted value, and not attended with much danger. 
Ransohoff 's case of hepatotomy was aspirated without benefit, 
and he had to incise afterwards.* It may tell us where the col- 
lection mainly lies, and may even afford some light as to whether 
the abscess is single or multiple, but it can scarcely be expected 

• N. Y. Med. Rec, No. 22, 1882, p. 258. 
38 * 



580 ■ OPERATIONS ON THE LIVER. 

at one operation to be curative. In a good few cases aspiration, 
repeated more than once, has been followed by cure. Ball, 
Maclean, Hammond, and others have had fairl}^ good results 
from aspiration.'^' 

In the use of the aspirator, its thorough cleansing with anti- 
septic lotions must be seen to. The needle may be introduced 
full of I-20 carbolic lotion; the skin at the site of puncture 
must be thoroughly purified, as some of the epidermic scales may 
be carried into the abscess cavity on the point of the needle, 
and, if impure, be a cause of septic infection. The movements 
of the needle, following the movements of the liver (if it moves 
with respiration), must not be checked, as thereby the liver tissue 
may be torn and permit escape of pus into the peritoneum. 

(2) Puncture by Trocar — leaving the cannula to permit drain- 
age — is a procedure by no means new. In 1842 Murray! 
advocated it ; and since then it has been in quite general use, 
and is esteemed by many as the most favourable of all plans. 
An ordinary medium size instrument is used; though De CastroJ 
used a hollow trocar, with perforations corresponding to similar 
ones on the cannula. The trocar is left in situ for two or three 
da3'S, w^ien adhesions will have formed, and is then replaced by 
a drainage tube of some sort. The purifying of the trocar is to 
be carried out as carefully in this proceeding as in aspiration. 
Some antiseptic material, such as terebene with vaseline, or 
eucalyptus or salicylic cream, may be smeared over the trocar. 
The full details of Listerism will by most be considered as 
affording an additional probability in favour of asepticism 
throughout : if the spray is not used, perhaps sal alembroth 
wool, with frequent cleansing of the neighbourhood of the 
wound, would be as good a dressing as any. 

An indication in favour of the employment of the trocar 
would be, the tendency of the abscess to point, shown by 
oedema, or some redness and tenderness of the skin. Some 

* See Editorial, Annals of Surgery, March, 1S87. 

t London Med. Gazette, No. 38, p. 566. 

\ Desabscis du foie des pays chauds et de leur triatement Chir., Paris, 1870, 



HEPATIC ABSCESS. 581 

danger may attend its use, however. In such a case as one of 
those operated upon by Knowsley Thornton, where the omen- 
tum, with large veins coursing through it, lay adherent on the 
surface of the liver, serious bleeding might arise. The risk of 
setting up inflammation of the liver substance by puncture with 
fine instruments is very small. Indeed, Trousseau used punc- 
ture by several needles, as a safe means of setting up inflamma- 
tory adhesion between the serous surfaces of the liver and the 
abdominal wall, as a preliminary to incision. But it must not 
be forgotten that puncture with trocar, after all, taps the ab- 
dominal cavity ; and, being done in the dark, may cause serious 
injury to an abdominal organ other than the liver ; and may 
even permit of the escape of pus into the abdominal cavit3\ 

(3) Gradual opening by caustic, and b}^ thermo-cautery applied 
to the abdominal wall over the tumour, are proceedings whereby 
a liver abscess ma}^ be opened. Both are slow and painful pro- 
ceedings, and are not likely to be brought into competition with 
other more rapid and less painful, while equally efficient, methods. 
Recamier-" advocated the use of caustic potash applied to the 
abdominal wall for liver abscess. This process of gradual 
perforation by destructive chemical or thermic agents is more 
in vogue for the treatment of h3-datids of the liver than for 
abscess. 

(4) Direct Incision into the abscess through the abdominal or 
thoracic walls would be carried out only if there were signs of 
the abscess bursting of its own accord. Redness, tenderness, 
and some swelling at any part over a hepatic tumour which is 
probably suppurating, may be taken as an indication that the 
matter is forcing its way to the surface. In such cases there 
will be adhesions between the liver and the overlying peritoneum, 
and an opening may be made with safety. 

It need scarcely be said that such a tendency to point is 
neither to be waited for nor encouraged. The chances of an 
abscess of the liver escaping towards the abdominal or thoracic 
* Velpeau, Mdd. Optrat., 2nd Ed., iv., p. 19. 



582 OPERATIONS ON THE LIVER. 

parietes are, considering the amount of surface, at least not 
greater than the chances of its escaping through the diaphragm 
or into the peritoneum. And before signs of pointing appear 
the patient will have been reduced to a very low ebb. 

After such incision, conducted antiseptically, a large drainage 
tube will be inserted. If the discharge continues sweet, there 
will be no need for syringing or irrigation of the cavity ; if it is, 
or becomes, putrid, then frequent washings with some trust- 
worthy antiseptic solution must be instituted. 

(5) Incision in two stages — after the manner of Graves,* who 
made the incision only as far as the peritoneum ; or of Begin 
(1830),! who went through the peritoneum — has much to recom- 
mend it. The operation in two stages is that favoured by Volk- 
mann, and at the present day is known by his name. It is, in 
fact, an old application of the modern principle of creating 
adhesions between a hollow abdominal viscus which is to be 
opened and the parietes, when there is risk from escape of the 
contents of that viscus and not very great urgency for making 
the opening. In the case of hepatic abscess there is urgency, 
and consequently this double operation Avill not often commend 
itself. 

In Graves's procedure, some lint or other material is pushed 
to the bottom of the wound in the parietes, setting up simple 
inflammation of the parietal peritoneum, which thus in a few 
days becomes adherent to the liver. Some uncertainty attaches 
to the plan of Begin, as it has been found that the liver does not 
always come up to, and lie in contact with, the wound in the 
parietes; and thus adhesions do not certainly form. There is 
always the risk in the operation which does not lay open the 
peritoneum, that omentum or even bowel may lie directly under 
the opening and be wounded when the liver is incised. These 
objections are partly met by suturing the liver surface to tbe 
parietes, as recommended by Barwell.:J: 

* Dublin Hasp. Rep., May, 1S27. t Journ. Hebdom., 1830, i., p. 417. 
I Lancet, Jan. 29th, 18S7. 



HEPATIC ABSCESS. 583 

(6) Hepatotomy — the name usually given to direct incision 
through the Hver tissue, after abdominal section — is the operation 
which most commends itself for hepatic abscess. With lapar- 
otoni}', the risks of wounding omentum or bowel are done away 
with : we see, and can control, the bleeding from the liver ; the 
danger of escape of the abscess contents into the peritoneum 
can be met and overcome, and if they do so escape they can be 
mopped up ; while, lastly and not least important, a second 
abscess can be seen and opened, as has already been done in at 
least one case. (Thornton.) 

To Tait of Birmingham belongs the chief merit of introducing 
and establishing the operation of hepatotomy. He had done the 
operation ten times when his work was published — nine times 
for hydatids, and once for abscess. All were successful. Thorn- 
ton has published two cases, — one of suppurating hydatid cyst, 
done as a forlorn hope when the patient was profoundly septi- 
caemic after five tappings, Avhich failed ; the other of hydatids, 
which was successful. It frequently happens that, after various 
surgical manceuvres, hydatid disease of the liver suppurates, and 
then may be considered and treated as an abscess. Bryant 
has in at least twelve such cases operated by direct incision, in 
each instance successfully ; and other surgeons have had similar 
experiences. When such cysts suppurate, plentiful adhesions to 
the parietes will probably be found ; and if, after careful dis- 
section down to the cyst-wall, there are found adhesions to the 
parietes, the operation is simplified to a mere incision, for ad- 
hesions do away whith the necessity for sutures. But in every 
case, unless we are certain to the contrary, we ought to act as if 
there were no adhesions. 

Ransohoff*' has operated successfully for abscess, making all 
the divisions by thermo-cautery. 

In Australia, where hydatid disease is more common than in 
England, there is a growing tendency to the treatment of all 
cases of abdominal hydatids by direct incision after laparotomy. 

The site for incision will be made over the most prominent 
part of the tumour, and, if there is no reason to the contrary, 
* N. Y. Med. Rcc, No. 22, 1S82, p. 258. 



584 OPERATIONS ON THE LIVER. 

will be longitudinal. A fairl}' long incision, from four (Tait) to 
five (Thornton) inches, will be necessar}^, to permit of the neces- 
sar}- intra-peritoneal manipulations. Should examination, after 
abdominal section, show that the liver is adherent to the panetes 
at an}- point, the opening should be made through the area of 
adhesion, even if this do not correspond with the opening in the 
parietes. Such an opening may be made with trocar; it is 
made permanent by the insertion of a drainage tube. Should 
there be no adhesions, the opening is made directly into the 
liver. The liver tissue being recognised by its characteristic 
appearance, several soft flat sponges are placed round the spot 
selected for making the opening, to absorb any fluid that may 
escape. Then, if we think it necessary for more accurate 
diagnosis, or to relax the walls of the abscess cavity and permit 
of its being raised up more readil)^ after incision, we may insert 
the largest needle of an aspirator, and withdraw some of the 
contents. A knife is then passed in along the side of the needle, 
and the forefinger is made to follow the knife. While an assistant 
helps in maintaining, by pressure, exact coaptation of the parietes 
to the liver structure, the forefinger helps this by hooking up the 
abscess-wall. When all is ready, the knife is carried in along the 
forefinger, and the incision freely enlarged. Then the lips of the 
wound are quickly seized by two or more catch-forceps, and kept 
everted against the parietal wound by means of these. Bleeding 
may be arrested by a squeeze with pressure forceps, or, if this 
fail, b}' a continuous suture of not too fine catgut or silk. 
Probably the abscess will nearly empt}^ itself readily enough ; if 
it does not, a large rubber tube lying in carbolic lotion may be 
pinched at the end, and, when placed in the bottom of the 
cavity, will act as a siphon and suck out all the fluid. I have 
used with advantage such means for the removal of ascites and 
fluid from an ovarian cyst that was laid open, and have no doubt 
it would ansv/er here. 

When the abscess is empty, the finger, carried round its 
walls, will examine for signs of a second abscess, which will be 
opened by pushing the finger into it, or by Lister's sinus forceps 
or by trocar, as seems best. The whole of the purulent material 



HEPATIC ABSCESS. 585 

being removed, the cyst-walls are to be gently cleaned out with 
a soft sponge held by long forceps. Rough manipulation here 
might easily cause bleeding, either by breaking down the no- 
toriously tender granulations of a hepatic abscess, or, if there is 
a membranous wall, by tearing it off the liver. While this is 
going on, an assistant has been gently, steadily, and firmly 
keeping the liver in contact with the parietes. A sponge is now 
placed in the liver opening, and the sponges inserted at the 
beginning are removed, and the peritoneum is cleansed of any 
escaped or peritonic fluid. If the pus is foetid, an antiseptic will 
be applied to the walls of the emptied sac. Thornton uses iodine 
for this purpose. 

When the sac has been emptied of its pus, and the peritoneal 
cavit}' is free of all fluids, the whole length of the incision in 
the liver is stitched to the margins of the wound in the parietes, 
and a large glass or rubber or celluloid drainage-tube is in- 
serted. If there is much discharge, it must be removed once or 
twice daily by S3'ringing, so that it may be kept innocuous in 
case of absorption. Later on, as the cavity shrinks and its walls 
thicken, syringing may be emplo3'ed less frequently, or even 
dropped. An abundance of absorbent antiseptic dressing will 
be necessar}'. 

Thornton* has successfully treated a case of hepatic abscess 
by incision and drainage through the pleura. The patient had, 
fifteen months previously, been cured b}- aspiration of an abscess of 
the left lobe; an abscess having appeared after two months in the 
right lobe, which was not relieved by aspiration, Thornton decided 
to drain along the course of the aspirating needle. He cut out 
a lozenge-shaped piece of skin, carefully peeled the parietal 
and visceral pleurae along small incisions, and sutured them to 
each other b}'' a continuous suture, and so completely shut off the 
pleural cavity from the line of drainage. A track for the drainage- 
tube was made by incision along the side of the trocar. Healing 
took place without trouble. Hunsner and Schede have operated 
in the same situation after resection of the ribs. 
* Brit. Med. Journ., 1886, ii., p. 901. 



586 OPERATIONS ON THE LIVER. 

HYDATIDS OF THE LIVER. 

Anatomical Characters. — The liver echinococcus is usually 
single. When near the surface, it may stand out as a rounded 
fluctuating tumour, distending the abdomen in the hepatic region ; 
when at a distance from the surface, it causes a more diffuse 
enlargement. The liver tissue is thinned out and expanded over 
it. Where there is no suppuration, there is little or no pain, and 
constitutional disturbance is slight or absent. It is exceedingly 
slow in growth, sometimes existing for ten or even twenty years 
without causing troublesome symptoms. Very frequently the 
echinococcus dies and shrivels up, leaving a curdy or chalky 
mass behind, enclosed in a cyst- wall. If it grows, there are 
almost no limits to the size it may attain. When the cyst grows 
at some distance from the surface, the liver tissue is spread 
evenly over it, and the symptoms may be nothing more than 
those of enlarged liver. Occurring near any of its surfaces, the 
cyst may cause symptoms by pressure on any of the neighbouring 
organs, or even by bursting into them. On the upper surface of 
the liver, it presses upwards the diaphragm, encroaching on the 
lung and causing dyspnoea, sometimes almost filling the right 
chest. Extending downwards, it may cause obstruction to the 
flow of bile, and jaundice, by pressing on the biliary ducts. By 
compressing the vena cava or portal vein, it may also induce 
symptoms of venous obstruction. Rupture in any direction is 
always immediately dangerous, and may be ultimately fatal by 
causing infection with the parasites. Rupture into the vena 
cava is always fatal; into the peritoneum, usually immediately 
so, and still more frequently ultimately so. Suppuration is rare, 
except from surgical interference of some sort. 

The more rare multilocular echinococcus is frequently asso- 
ciated with jaundice, and has a curious connection with tumour 
of the spleen. 

Diagnosis. — In a comparatively young person, a slow-growing 
fluctuating enlargement of the liver that is unattended with 
pain, fever, or cachexia, is probably hydatid. Perhaps the 
conditions most closely simulating hydatids are, curiously 
enough, chronic hydro -nephrosis and ovarian cyst. Other 



HYDATIDS OF THE LIVER. 587 

diseases of the liver, such as cancer or abscess, are less likely 
to be mistaken for hydatids than the diseases mentioned. Such 
an experienced observer as Thornton operated on a case of 
h3'datids of the liver, thinking it was ovarian disease ; and it 
was not till he had gone some way through the operation that 
he knew for certain what he was dealing with. A hydatid cyst 
may fluctuate free]}-, may occup}^ nearly the whole abdomen, 
and give resonance in the flanks, just like an ovarian cyst ; the 
absence of any palpable connection with the uterus might be 
explained by the existence of a long pedicle, while the con- 
tinuity of its dulness with that of the liver may be explained by 
adhesions to the latter. From hydro-nephrosis of the right side, 
the diagnosis may be still more difficult. Many cases of hydro- 
nephrosis have been operated upon in the belief that they were 
ovarian cysts ; and if echinococcus were more common than 
it is, perhaps hydro-nephrosis would just as frequently be con- 
founded with hydatids of the liver. When the C3'st exists on 
the upper surface of the liver, its diagnosis from pleurisy is 
exceedingly difficult. As Traube has pointed out, pain in the 
right scapula, as pointing to liver disease, may be the only 
symptom to guide us. In such cases, of course, the existence of 
fever and other well-known accompaniments of pleuritic effusion 
will be carefully looked for. An exploratory puncture will 
almost, but not quite, certainly settle the diagnosis. Echino- 
coccus fluid is non- albuminous, contains a large amount of 
chloride of sodium, and is usually below 1.015 specific gravity. 
No other fluid of the body has these characters. The presence 
of booklets in the fluid withdrawn, or of pieces of the laminated 
echinococcus membrane, is pathognomonic. When a hydatid 
cyst becomes inflamed, albumen may be found in the fluid, and 
then our difficulties are increased. When there is clear evidence 
of suppuration, we must operate without delay, and be content 
to make the diagnosis after the fluid has been withdrawn. 

SURGICAL TREATMENT. 

Though the call to treat a stationary or very slow-growing 
hydatid cyst may not be urgent, it must not be forgotten that a 



588 OPERATIONS ON THE LIVER. 

patient with a living echinococcus in the Hver is in constant and 
increasing danger. The risks of suppuration or of bursting of 
the cyst, with the greater likelihood of death after operation on 
large tumours, make early treatment advisable. 

The treatment of hj^datids is entirely surgical, and resolves 
itself into destruction of the life of the parasite in situ, or evacu- 
ation of the contents of the cyst. 

For causing the death of the parasite v^^e have electrolysis ; 
simple puncture ; puncture, with removal of a small quantity of 
the fluid; and puncture, with injection of some chemical solution. 

x\s electrolysis''' has not yet shown better results than simple 
puncture, it is probable that it does good simply from the 
mechanical insertion of the needles. Acupuncture, again, has 
not been so successful as removal of a few ounces of the fluid 
by means of the aspirator. It has been found that this proceed- 
ing in some way kills the parasite, which then shrivels up and 
becomes innocuous. The operation is primaril}' a comparatively 
harmless one ; though Bryant met with a death from puncture 
of a misplaced portal vein, probabl}' letting the hydatid fluid get 
into the general circulation. There is, again, some risk of the 
fluid escaping into the peritoneal cavity through the opening 
left after puncture, and not a feAv have suppurated in conse- 
quence. The injection of some chemical fluid, such as iodine 
solution, has had fairly good results. 

Each case must be a law for itself; but in an ordinary case 
of slow growth, the first treatment would probably be, to remove 
a few ounces of the fluid by aspiration, and carefully watch the 
course of events. If the cyst refills and goes on increasing, and 
more particularly if signs of suppuration appear, some plan of 
opening and emptying the cyst must be adopted. With this 
view, we have various old plans of operating by causing adhe- 
sions between the liver and parietes, and the more modern, and 
more perfect, one of direct hepatotomy by abdominal section. 

For producing adhesions Simon f recommended and prac- 

* For the mode of applying electrolysis, see Fagge and Denham's paper, 
Med. Chir. Trans., vol. xliv. 

t Die Echinocoecencysten der Nieren und des perirenahn Biirdcgeivches. Stutt- 
gart, 1S77. 



HYDATIDS OF THE LIVER. 589 

tised multiple puncture of the tumour through the parietes, 
and evacuation of the cyst-contents by incision, when adhesions 
would have formed after a few days. The first puncture is 
made diagnostic by being made with a hollow needle, and 
removing some of the contents for examination. Many suc- 
cessful cases, treated after this method, are recorded, and some 
failures. Volkmann has called attention to the danger of 
echinococci escaping from the puncture and infecting the peri- 
toneum, and Hiiter relates such a case where death resulted. 

The plan of causing perforation by the application of Vienna 
paste, or caustic potash, or actual cautery, has found many 
adherents. At the Congress of the Societ}^ of German Surgeons 
in 1877, Bardeleben spoke of having treated no fewer than forty 
such cases by perforation with caustic, and with uniform suc- 
cess. He applied Vienna paste over an area of two fingers' 
breadth, which, in from six to nine days, perforated the abdo- 
minal wall, causing adhesions as it advanced, and then the C3'st 
was opened with ease. Subsequent closure of the opening 
always took place without trouble. 

For causing adhesion to the parietes, Ranke recommends an 
incision through the peritoneum, and removal of two semilunar 
pieces of that membrane at the sides of the opening, to make 
the wound, gape. After a week or so, when the adhesions are 
strong, the incision is made without an anaesthetic through 
the insensitive liver tissue, and the cyst evacuated. He 
speaks of four cases successfully treated in this manner, in 
his own and in Volkmann's clinic ; and other successful cases 
are recorded. 

As a provision against the escape of the parasite into the 
peritoneal cavity, there can be no doubt of the validity of the 
plan of perforation by caustic. But it is too slow and too pain- 
ful to have commended itself to the favour of English surgeons. 
Multiple puncture has been justly criticised as being possibly 
uncertain in its results ; sometimes causing multiple fine adhe- 
sions, useless for the end in view, or even no adhesions at all. 
To both proceedings the objection may be raised, that it is more 
or less a working in the dark, and that valuable information 



590 OPERATIONS ON THE LIVER. 

which an abdominal section might afford is withheld. The only- 
objection that can be taken to the procedure of leaving the 
incised peritoneum to adhere over the liver is, that the delay 
has not the same strong reasons for it as other similar proceed- 
ings have, and that it may cause a loss of valuable time and 
possibly be a cause of inflammation in the cj^st. 

Hepatotoniy, or incision and evacuation of the cyst as an 
immediate sequel to laparotomy, is, comparatively speaking, a 
new operation for hydatids of the liver. Lawson Tait, in 1883, 
was the first who wittingly performed the operation for hydatids. 
Up to September, 1882, he had operated on nine cases, in all 
with successful result; and a good many other successful cases 
have, from time to time, been recorded. In skilful hands 
that can be trusted to successfully guard against escape of 
the fluid into the peritoneum, to quickly deal with possible 
haemorrhage, and to accurately suture the liver wound to the 
parietal opening, the operation need not be attended with much 
risk. 

The steps of the operation are essentially the same as in 
hepatotomy for abscess. There is frequently considerable ten- 
sion inside a hydatid cyst, and its contents may be ejected with 
force when liberated. The whole of the contents must be gently 
removed (Tait has used a gravy-spoon for this purpose), the 
cyst-walls united by continuous or other suture to the parietes, 
and a large drainage-tube inserted. In one case Thornton, with 
full confidence in the antiseptic method, used no drainage,'^' and 
had no cause to regret so doing. With most, however, the fear 
of haemorrhage, or suppuration, or leakage through the liver 
wound, would weigh strongly as reasons for the insertion of a 
drainage-tube. 

When the cyst has been thoroughly cleaned out, the fore- 
finger is made to explore the walls, to see that there is no 
further cyst or even, as in a case of Pauly's, an abscess. Before 
closing the wound, most punctilious care must be taken over 
the toilet of the peritoneum ; and, during this manipulation, a 
* Med. Times and Gaz., Jan., 1SS3, p. 89. 



HYDATIDS OF THE LIVER. 591 

sponge will be placed in the liver opening. Exactly similar 
precautions as to the coaptation of liver and parietes will be 
observed as in hepatotomy for abscess. 

The mortality of direct hepatotomy is not high. Pilcher '■^'- has 
published tables of 64 operations — twelve being done in two 
stages, and 53 (the incompatibility of the figures is not explained) 
by the method at one operation. There were 8 deaths altogether, 
of which only 4 could be attributed to the operation — a mortality 
of about 7 per cent. After Volkmann's method 17 operations 
were all successful. 

* Annals of Surgery, March, 1887. 



Operations on the Gall-bladder. 

Operations on the gall-bladder are performed for conditions 
arising from the presence of gall-stones and from obstruction in 
the biliary ducts. By far the most important operation is that 
known as Cholecystotomy : Cholecj/stectomy is performed by a 
few surgeons ; and, besides minor proceedings, such as puncture 
with aspiration, extended sometimes into sounding for stone, we 
have other special proceedings specially named — such as, Chole- 
lithtority : Chole-lithotomy; Chole-duodenostomy ; and Chole- 
enterostomy. 

History. — In 1618, according to Thudichum, Johannes Fa- 
bricius is said to have removed gall-stones from the gall-bladder 
of a living subject. Fabricius Hildanus^' refers to this operation, 
but it is not clear that the operation was not done post-mortem ; 
the only evidence of the subject being alive being the some- 
what dubious expression " delineatio horum lapidum ad viviim 
facta." 

To Petit t is undoubtedly due the merit of having founded 
the surgery of the gall-bladder. In 1733 he mooted his project : 
his most important papers appeared ten years subsequently. 
Petit's opinions were far in advance of his time. He discusses 
with great acumen the diagnosis of tumours of the gall-bladder, 
and the sequences of biliary retention. He recommends, besides 
the simple incision of an enlargement adhering to the peritoneum, 
two other operations : " Tune se sera dans le cas oii la retention 
de la bile est portue a I'extreme, et le malade en danger de mort : 
celle-ci est la ponction ; I'autre operation . . . c'est la litJiotomie, je 
vieux dire I'extraction des pierres hors de la vesicule du fiel." 
His description of these operations of puncture and lithotomy 
would almost pass muster in the literature of the advanced 
surgery of to-day. It may be affirmed that, till ten years 
ago, the surgery of the gall-bladder did not advance a step 

* Obscrv, Chiy. 
t Mem. de VAcad. Roy. de Chir., tome i., p. 163. Paris, 1743. 



HISTORY. 593 

beyond where Petit left it ; on the contrar}^ it fell almost into 
oblivion. 

Among English surgeons, with the exception of that shrewd 
surgeon Samuel Sharp, Petit's work was ignored or condemned. 
On the Continent, Morand (1757), Haller (1760 circa), Herlin, 
Blochs, and others, by observations and experiments, sought 
to advance Petit's labours. Bromfield, in 1773, wrote to con- 
demn the operation. Morgagni, Chopart, Desault, and Walter, 
about the end of the eighteenth century, did valuable work 
in varying the methods, but scarcely in improving the results. 
Richter appeared in 1798 with a htho-triptor, and explained 
how fragments could be removed by washing : he also advised, 
in certain cases, the operation a deux temps, as described for 
hydatids of the liver. 

In the nineteenth century little advance was made. Delpech, 
in 1816, rather decried the operation; and Good, in 1825, spoke 
of it as being of doubtful value. In 1828 Sebastian described 
an operation whereby adhesion was secured between the gall- 
bladder and the peritoneum before opening the tumour — a 
suggestion modified by Graves of Dublin. In 1847 Dufresne 
recommended opening by caustic ; soon after Recamier advised 
the trocar; and several other modifications were suggested. 

Thudichum, in 1859, wrote with an insight which recalls the 
work of Petit. He recommended abdominal section, suturing 
of the unopened gall-bladder to the abdominal wound, and 
opening after several days. 

In 1866 Luton introduced exploratory puncture, doing no 
harm ; and in his presence, Thomas, at the Hotel-Dieu in 
Rheims, discovered a stone by this means. This procedure has 
been resuscitated in modern times. 

The modern operation of cholecystotomy was first performed 
by Dr. Bobbs of Indianopolis in 1867.* He incised the gall- 
bladder, removed some fifty small calculi, and closed the incision 
by one suture. His patient recovered. Marion Sims f followed 
with an operation which, though unsuccessful, had a most 

* Trans. Indiana State Med. Sec, 1S68, p. 68. 

+ Brit. Med. Joum., 1878, i.. Sii. 

39 



594 CHOLECYSTOTOMY. 

important influence in advancing the surgery of the gall-bladder. 
Sims originated the name cholecystotomy {xoXi) — bile, a.i'st(? — 
bladder, 70/0} — incision). At the present time, as regards tech- 
nique and results, Tait holds the leading place with a series 
of some twenty published cases, all successful. 

In 1882 Langenbuch introduced the operation of cholecyst- 
ectomy, or removal of the gall-bladder ; and Thiriar, Courvoi- 
sier, and others took it up favourably, but with no striking 
success. 

CONDITIONS FOR WHICH THE OPERATION MAY BE PERFORMED. 

The conditions which may give rise to a nesessity for opera- 
tion may be conveniently classified as follows :••■ 

1. Cholelithiasis. 

2. Dropsy and empyema of the gall-bladder. 

3. Obstruction in the ductus choledochus. 

4. Wounds and perforations of the gall-bladder. 

Cholelithiasis. — The great majority of operations on the gall- 
bladder are performed for conditions arising out of the presence 
of gall-stones. Apart from the weakening influences of the 
recurrent agonies of biliary colic, there are certain real dangers 
to life to be apprehended. The effects of simple colic itself have 
been fatal. The stones may set up inflammation, suppuration, 
and even gangrene, in the bladder-walls. They ma}^ become 
wedged in the cystic duct, or pass into the hepatic duct (though 
in this situation they usually have come direct from the liver), 
or cause obstruction in the common duct. The effects of back- 
ward pressure are seen in cystic distension, and, where the 
hepatic or the common duct is blocked, in jaundice. Stones 
which have escaped into the bowel sometimes cause obstruction. 
Occasionally they perforate the bladder through an ulcerated 
area, either directly into the abdominal cavit}^ causing fatal 
peritonitis, or, after the formation of adhesions, into any of the 

* See Roth, " Zur Chirurgie der Gallenwege," Langenbeck's Archiv. 
Bd. xxxi., Heft. i. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 595 

hollow viscera or through the abdominal wall, forming biliary 
fistulas. Parietal fistulae are, fortunately, the most common. 
Fistulfe communicating with the stomach and the bowels are 
next in frequency. Sometimes the communication is extended 
between different portions of bowel, as the colon and duodenum. 
The urinary bladder has been perforated. Arteries may be 
ulcerated through — the pyloric, for instance. The diaphragm 
has been perforated, and stones have been found in the air- 
passages. It is stated by some that gall-stones are an exciting 
cause of cancer of the liver : it is certain that they are frequent 
concomitants. 

In obstruction of the cystic duct, the changes are local. If 
the obstruction is in the common duct, the changes are general 
as well as local ; there is dilatation of the biliary channels of the 
liver itself as well as of the gall-bladder, with the symptoms of 
obstructive jaundice. Changes take place in the accumulated 
bile, which are identical in the bile-channels and in the gall- 
bladder. The bile is first transformed into a yellowish-brown 
watery fluid, which becomes mixed with a mucoid secretion from 
the duct-walls. If the obstruction has existed for some weeks or 
months, the bile is replaced by a perfectly clear fluid containing 
flakes of mucus, but little or none of the proper constituents of 
bile,'''" which is all the more remarkable that the tissues generally 
may be saturated with it. In obstruction of the common duct, 
general cholasmia now supervenes. In obstruction of the cystic 
duct, matters may remain stationary after the bladder is dis- 
tended, or they may become more urgent. Increase of tension 
may go on to inflammation, suppuration, or even ulceration and 
perforation. 

Without obstruction, the presence of gall-stones may either 
set up no symptoms at all, or may cause any degree of inflam- 
mation from simple catarrh up to suppuration and necrosis. 
Accompanying the catarrh we sometimes find a low cellulitis of 
the outer coats, leading to subsequent thickening and contrac- 

* It has been said that this fluid sometimes contains a ferment. My friend 
Mr. G. M. Smith, lecturer on Physiology at the Bristol Medical School, fully 
tested a quantity of fluid removed by me in a case of cholecystotomy, and 
found no evidence of the presence of a ferment. 

39 * 



596 CHOLECYSTOTOMY. 

tion. But this cellulitis is sometimes of an acute nature, leading 
to great increase of size from thickening of the bladder-walls. 
One of Musser and Keen's cases, in which operation could not 
be completed, was probably of this sort. 

Tait informs us that he has found in the majority of cases 
either a very few large stones or very man)^ small ones. An 
examination of collections of gall-stones in museums, shows 
that biliary concretions in the gall-bladder generally show this 
peculiarity. 

Dropsy and Empyema of the Gall-bladder. — In most cases these 
conditions are sequels of obstruction in the bile-ducts. The 
most common cause of obstruction is a gall-stone ; but collec- 
tions of parasites, such as liver-flukes, hj'datids, or worms, have 
been found to cause blocking. Stricture following localized 
inflammation, and obstructive catarrh, are also reckoned as 
causes. Rarely the cause is external, arising from pressure by 
a new growth springing from a neighbouring organ. 

There is, practicall}^, no limit to the amount of distension 
which a dropsical gall-bladder will bear. The bladder- walls are 
nearly always thinned. Emp3'ema does not usually attain to 
great dimensions : perforation is liable to occur when distension 
is excessive. In empyema, the walls are greatly thickened in 
some places ; at others, they ma}^ be thinned by stretching or 
ulceration. The changes which take place in retained bile, 
leading to dropsy, have already been described : the passage to 
suppuration is easily understood. 

Obstruction in tlie Coiinnoii Duct. — This may be caused by 
foreign bodies in the duct, such as gall-stones, worms, or 
hydatids ; by stricture in any part of its course ; or by com- 
pression from the outside by inflammatory exudations or new 
growths in neighbouring organs. Among tliese last must be 
reckoned tumours of the pancreas, duodenum, stomach, and 
kidney. The bladder may become distended to considerable 
dimensions, and the contents may undergo the changes already 
described. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 597 

Jaundice, passing into profound cholaemia, is to be expected, 
with its well-known train of symptoms. Few cases last more 
than six months before symptoms of cholaemia appear, and 
death usually supervenes within the year. One case is recorded 
by Murchison in which there was complete obstruction for six 
years. 

Wounds and Pevfovations of tlie Gall-bladder. — The gall-bladder 
may be wounded by cutting or piercing instruments ; or it may 
be perforated by ulceration started by a foreign body in its 
cavit}^ ; or it may burst from over-distension. Bursting of an 
empyema is always fatal ; escape of a foreign body with the 
bladder contents, though usually fatal in a very short time, has 
in a very few cases not been fatal for some Aveeks. Localised 
peritonitis is set up, which confines the extravasated contents in 
a suppurating cavity for a time. Simple extravasation of bile 
has usually been reckoned as certainly fatal. But the experi- 
ments of Schtippel, Bostrom, and others Avould seem to show 
that large quantities of bile may be absorbed by the peritoneum 
without causing much trouble ; and certain recorded cases of 
wound of the gall-bladder show that a similar result may take 
place in the human subject. Paroisse records a case in which 
a ball remained for two years in the gall-bladder. Sabatier had 
a patient who lived seven years after wound of the gall-badder 
by a sword-thrust : at the post-mortem examination, much fluid 
bile was found in the abdomen. But, in spite of these and other 
cases, the general experience is, that wounds of the gall-bladder, 
with extravasation of bile, are nearly alwa3^s fatal. Sometimes, 
before death takes place, there is an enormous accumulation of 
bile in the abdomen. Thiersch successfully removed forty-severr 
pints of what appeared to be pure bile from the abdomen of a 
boy whose gall-bladder had been ruptured by a blow. 

Diagnosis. — Cholelithiasis, in its simplest form, is diagnosed by 
recurrent attacks of hepatic colic, with or without enlargement of 
the gall-bladder, and not necessarily accompanied with jaundice. 
The symptoms of hepatic colic are well known. Paroxysmal 



598 CHOLECYSTOTOMY. 

attacks of pain in the epigastric and right hypochondriac regions, 
radiating towards the back and shoulders, often preceded by a 
rigor, frequently accompanied by vomiting, and always attended 
by profound constitutional disturbance, suggest the passage of 
gall-stones. The paroxysms, increasing in severity, may pass 
off suddenly in a few hours : rarely do they last more than one 
or two days. The liver is usually enlarged during the attack : 
and occasionally it is possible to detect a distended gall-bladder. 
If jaundice is present, we may infer that there is occlusion of 
the common or the hepatic duct. 

If there is permanent occlusion of any of the ducts, there 
follows permanent distension of the gall-bladder. The physical 
characters of an enlarged gall-bladder are of importance. In 
all cases it will appear to have its origin in the right hypo- 
chondrium. When first discovered, such a tumour is usually 
about the size of the closed fist ; but all dimensions are met 
with, even up to filling the abdominal cavity. Kocher operated 
successfully on a case in which the disease was supposed to be 
ovarian cyst ; and Tait has had a similar experience. The line 
of enlargement is usually in a diagonal line from the normal 
situation of the gall-bladder towards the umbilicus. Mr. J. W. 
Taylor''- has specially insisted on this point as an important aid 
in diagnosis. A dull note is usually given out over the whole 
tumour, but sometimes a resonant area is found at its junction 
with the liver. The shape of an enlarged gall-bladder has been 
described as cordate, or pyriform, or globular. According to 
the amount of tension and the thickness of its walls, the tumour 
may be hard and unyielding, or soft and semi-fluctuating. Its 
consistency is, however, not easily ascertained, on account of 
its tendency to slip backwards from the grasp. The tumour, if 
not of large dimensions, moves upwards and downwards with 
the liver during forced expiration and inspiration. 

The conditions most likely to be mistaken for enlarged gall- 
bladder are, tumours and cysts of the right kidney, and movable 
kidney. Any solid growth of the kidney may be mistaken for 
an enlarged gall-bladder ; but mistakes are most likely to arise 
* Bn't. Med. Journ., Jan. 31st and April nth, 18S5. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 599 

in cases of cystic tumours, and especially of hydro-nephrosis 
In these cases symptoms of functional disturbance of secretion 
of urine are to be diligently sought for. From floating kidney, 
the points of distinction refer specially to peculiarities in shape, 
consistence, and range of mobility, as proper to each. An 
important criterion is, the presence of resonant bowel overlying 
a movable kidney. Hydatid or other cysts of the peritoneum 
might be a possible source of confusion. A patient recently 
died in the Bristol Infirmary of aneurism of the pyloric artery ; 
for two months the diagnosis was enlargement of the gall- 
bladder. Acupuncture and aspiration are not recommended as 
aids to diagnosis. 

Of jaundice as a factor in diagnosis, no more need be said 
than that its presence in a marked and persistent form indicates 
obstruction in the common or the hepatic duct. Though we 
might expect that obstruction in the common duct would be 
uniformly attended with cystic distension, and obstruction in 
the hepatic duct with cystic collapse, the clinical facts are by 
no means uniform in either direction. The detailed accompani- 
ments of obstructive jaundice cannot properly be considered 
here. The presence of leucin and tyrosin in the urine, and 
diminished secretion of urea, may aid in diagnosis. 

The diagnosis of wounds of the gall-bladder must be purel}' 
inferential, unless there is an escape of bile through a parietal 
wound. Abdominal shock, with a sensation of distress in the 
right hypochondrium and a history of traumatism in that region, 
followed by abdominal distension and perhaps by jaundice, 
suggest rupture of liver or gall-bladder, or both. The injury is 
a rare one. Perforation by a gall-stone, or rupture of an em- 
pyema, are diagnosed only through the help of previous history. 

Indications for Operation. — In ever}'' case of wound or perfora- 
tion of the gall-bladder, operation ought at once to be performed. 
Operation gives the only chance of recovery. 

In every case of empyema of the gall-bladder operation is 
indicated. Aspiration is only a temporary measure, and it is 
by no means free from danger. 



600 CHOLECYSTOTOMY. 

In every case of dropsy of the gall-bladder operation is indi- 
cated. Aspiration may do no harm, and it may detect the pre- 
sence of stone. But it is useless towards the removal of the 
stone, and, generally, it has no beneficial effect on the disease. 

In cases of cholelithiasis, the indications to operate must be 
guided by the effects produced by the disease. The dangerous 
sequences of gall-stones are : frequently recurring attacks of 
hepatic colic, which wear out the patient's strength ; jaundice, 
proceeding to dangerous cholaemia ; and suppuration in the 
gall-bladder. The indication in each instance is strengthened 
by the presence of an enlarged gall-bladder. 

No general rule can be laid down as to the weight of the 
indication arising from hepatic colic. After months or years of 
intense but intermittent suffering, many patients get well, and 
remain so. On the other hand, a patient's life may be rendered 
miserable, or his active existence as a bread-winner may be cut 
short, by persistently recurring attacks of hepatic colic, A time 
then comes when patient and surgeon both agree that it is 
proper to interfere. In all such cases the patient's desire must 
have great influence with the surgeon. 

In cases of persistent obstructive jaundice, operation is at 
the same time indicated and contra-indicated. Cholaemia, not 
only as weakening and depressing the patient, but also as pre- 
disposing to bleeding, is an unfavourable element. In only seven 
of Musser and Keen's series of 35 cases of cholecystotomy was 
jaundice present,* and five of these cases died, — half of the 
whole mortality. That the jaundice had much to do with this 
excessive death-rate, there can be no dispute : this suggests 
early operation, before the patient's condition is lowered by 
cholaemia. 

Where evidences of suppuration appear in cholelithiasis, 
operation is to be urged. Every day that passes brings in- 
crease of danger. 

In cases of obstruction of the common or the hepatic duct, 
cholecystotomy may simply prevent death from cholaemia by 
permitting escape of the biliary poison. Patients can live with- 
* Amer. Journ. Med. Sc, October, 1SS4. 



SOUNDING FOR GALL-STONES. 601 

out discharge of bile into the intestines. But Tait has shown 
how a stone in the common duct can be crushed : so that even 
in these cases cure may be effected. 

In cases of obstruction of the cystic duct, operation in the 
majorit}^ of cases will not only relieve pain, and remove danger 
of suppuration in the gall-bladder, but will also, in all proba- 
bility, bring about complete cure. 

As to the viortality, cases are as yet too few for the establish- 
ment of trustworthy data. The mortalit}^ in skilled hands is 
very small. Tait has published fort3'-one cases, with two deaths. 
If operation is performed before cholasmia supervenes, a death- 
rate of not more than six per cent, may be predicted. Of the 
thirty-five cases quoted in Musser and Keen's table,'^-' ten died. 
Depaget has collected 78 operations, to which one of my 
own might be added, making 79. Of these, six were done by 
immediate peritoneal closure : three died immediately from 
peritonitis, one had recurrence, and two recovered. In 73, 
including my own, the gall-bladder was sutured to the ab- 
dominal wound : of these 11 died — five from haemorrhage and 
collapse, others from ordinary causes or accidents. Collapse 
with haemorrhage would seem to be the most usual cause of 
death ; and this cause is most potent in cholaemic individuals. 
Jaundice, therefore, in all cases coming up for operation, must 
be regarded as a contra-indication ; and specially so if the 
jaundice be of long standing. Amongst the bad results, count- 
ing practically as failures, must be reckoned the considerable 
number, about one-third, in which biliary fistulae have remained 
for months or years. 

Sounding for Gall-stones with a probe passed through a hollow 
cannula inserted into the gall-bladder was proposed by Petit J in 
1733; t)ut was not put into practice till 1876, when Bartholow 
successfully used the method. In 1878 Brown § sounded gall- 
stones in this way. A similar purpose may be served by using 

* Amcr. Journ. Med. Sc, October, 1884. 

t Lancet, Jan. 12th, 1889, and Journ. de Med., Brux., 1888, No. 24. 

I Maladies Cliir., i., 282. § Brit. Med. Journ., 1878, ii., 916. 



602 CHOLECYSTOTOMY. 

the fine needle of an aspirator as a sound. Whittaker of Cin- 
cinnati, in conjunction with Ransohoff, in 1882", employed this 
plan. Harley in 1884,! in ignorance of Whittaker's priority, 
practised sounding for gall-stones. These cases were successful 
in detecting the stone. 

The proceeding is not free from risk. In Harley's case, 
after a short interval, enteritis and peritonitis set in, and killed 
the patient. In Keen's first case, not a little haemorrhage and 
considerable local peritonitis followed the use of a hypodermic 
syringe. Unless there are very urgent reasons for doing so, 
few men would care to risk a patient's life for the sake of making^ 
a diagnosis. Urgency is great only when a patient's life, in 
imminent danger, can be saved by a very grave operation, and 
an error in diagnosis would be a catastrophe. And if we bear in 
mind the blind groping nature of the proceeding, and the close 
contiguity of important organs and vessels, we must admit that 
the risks are scarcely less than those following extravasation of 
bile or pus. Musser and Keen, though justly criticising the 
somewhat crude proceedings of Harley, and quoting the disas- 
trous result of his own case to disprove his statement that the 
operation is both "easy and safe," still look upon exploratory 
puncture with favour, on account of the valuable informatioa 
which it may supply. 

I look upon the proceeding with no favour whatever. If 
the gall-bladder were considerably enlarged, if its walls were 
thick, and it lay in contiguity with the abdominal wall, puncture 
might be safe ; but we can very rarely be certain that these 
conditions are present. The positive detection of a stone in 
the bladder is a clinical fact of supreme importance ; but a 
failure to detect stone is, as more than one case has shown, no 
proof that it is not there. And it is not the presence of stone 
that justifies operation. A stone or stones in the gall-bladder 
may be perfectly harmless ; we have no right to meddle with 
them unless they produce serious discomfort or danger. 

I am strongly of opinion, that in cases where it is clear that 

* New York Med. Rec, i., 1SS2, p. 56S, and ii., 18S2, p. 25S. 
t Med. Times and Gaz., May 17th, 18S4. 



SOUNDING FOR GALL-STONES. 605 

surgical interference of some sort is called for, the operation 
should in the first place be abdominal section; then, exploration 
with the finger; and then, cholecystotom}^, if the operation is to 
be anything more than exploratory. Of course, where a sup- 
purating gall-bladder is adherent to the abdominal wall, mere 
incision is all that is called for — provided the incision will 
permit of the withdrawal of stones. 



Cholecystotomy. 

Cholecystotomy is the name given to incision made into the 
gall-bladder after division of the parietes. It may be followed 
by removal of gall-stones — cholelithotomy ; or by crushing of 
stones that are impacted and cannot be removed — cholelithotrity. 
In other cases it is simply of the nature of an evacuation of 
cystic or purulent fluids, followed usually by drainage. 

The parietal incision is best made vertically over the most 
prominent part of the tumour, if there is one ; and over the 
situation of the fundus of the gall-bladder, if there is not. The 
best landmark is the tip of the cartilage of the tenth rib : the 
fundus of the gall-bladder lies directly beneath it. Musser and 
Keen recommend that the incision be made parallel to the ribs ; 
and various other lines of incision have been recommended. 
But the vertical one over the fundus is probably the best. 
Tait, whose experience is largest and whose success is greatest, 
always uses it. 

The skin and the muscles are divided in the ordinary way. 
The peritoneum, pinched up between two pairs of catch-forceps, 
is opened by slowly cutting through the elevated fold stretched 
between them. Through the opening the right forefinger is 
inserted, and the bladder explored. If the bladder is much 
distended, and more particularly if it " fills the abdomen," such 
exploration is impossible (as it is unnecessary) until the fluid 
has been drawn off. If the bladder is small, the presence of 
stones may be easily detected by touch. But sometimes, it 
would seem, we may meet with considerable difficulty in finding 
the bladder. 

The opening is made in different wa3's, according as the 
bladder is collapsed, moderately full, or enormously distended. 
If the tumour is very large, its contents may be at once evacu- 
ated by an ordinary cyst-trocar. During the evacuation, the 
cyst is gradually brought to the surface — and, if possible, a little 
way out of the wound — by forceps attached by the side of the 



THE OPERATION. 



605 



trocar. But the cyst-wall should not be roughly dealt with by 
compression-forceps; as it must be left behind, we must be 
careful not to cause sloughing. If small catch -forceps are 
applied in the line of incision above and below the trocar 
opening, the chance of danger from injury is minimised by 
having the bruised area in the line of attachment to the 
parietes. This caution is all the more necessar}-, in dealing 
with greatly distended gall-bladders, when, 
as is frequently the case, their walls are very 
thin. In every case flat sponges are suitably 
placed around the site of puncture, to absorb 
any fluid that may escape. 

If the cyst-wall is very tense from over- 
distension either by bile or by pus, it is best 
alwa3's to remove the fluid contents by the 
aspirator before making the large opening. 
An excellent needle, which may at the same 
time be converted into a blunt probe, is that 
invented by Hodder. (Fig. 75.) The needle 
is inserted as low dowm on the tumour surface 
as possible, because as the fluid is removed 
the cyst-wall contracts and draws the open- 
ing upwards. Any drops of fluid that exude 
by the side of the needle are at once mopped 
up. When the fluid is removed, two small 
catch-forceps are placed, one at each side 
of the puncture ; the cyst-wall is drawn 
forwards, and vertically divided by scissors 
to an extent sufficient to admit the fore- 
finger. Before this opening is made, it will 
be wise to place a sponge below the gall- 
bladder. 
If the bladder is collapsed or but slightly distended, the 
opening may at once be made. The fundus Is caught in a 
catch- forceps, and gently drawn to the surface. Below the 
bladder is placed a flat sponge, which keeps the bowels out of 
the way and absorbs any fluid that may escape. A second 



Fig. 75. 

Hodder' s Guarded 

Aspirating 
Needle. Half size. 



606 



CHOLECYSTOTOMY. 



forceps is attached by the side of the first, and the raised fold 
between them divided by scissors to an extent sufficient to 
admit the finger. Any bleeding points are at once secured. 
The forceps placed on the edges of the wound are handed to an 
assistant, whose duty it is with gentleness to keep the opening 
in the bladder steadily forward in the abdominal opening ; while 
he is also careful to mop up any fluid that may well up while 
the operator has his fingers or instruments inside the bladder. 

The finger, inserted through the opening, feels for stones, 
measures their size, and tells 
how best they may be removed. 
For their removal, Tait uses 
special scoops and forceps ; and 
these will be found very con- 
venient. Small stones are 
scooped out; large ones are 
carefully extracted by forceps. 
All this is eas}^ enough ; but 
if a stone is impacted in the 
neck of the gall-bladder, and 
more particularly if it lies some 
way down the C3'Stic duct, ex- 
traordinary difficulties may be 
met with. It must never be 
forgotten that the walls of the 
bladder and its ducts are 
thin, friable, and by no 
means dis ten- 
sile ; that they 
may very easily 
be torn through ; 
and that, if such 
an accident hap- 
pens, the result, 
as creating a bil- 
iary fistula open- 
ing into the peri- 



FiG. 76. 




Tait's Cholelitliotomy Forceps. 
One-ihiid si.:e. 



THE OPERATION. 607 

toneum, will almost certainly be fatal. Cholecystectomy is then 
the only resource. Therefore, all manipulations upon impacted 
_gall-stones must be carried out with extreme delicacy. Tait's 
special forceps (Figs. 76 & 77) are here invaluable. If the stone 
cannot readily be dislodged, it is broken into fine fragments by 
nibbling or chipping pieces off it as it lies in situ. During this 
process of detrition, one forefinger (the right, if the surgeon 
is ambi-dextrous) is kept over the stone inside the abdomen, to 
act as a guide and as a guard, and perhaps, when it has been 
sufficiently diminished in size, to start it from its bed or push it 
between the blades of the forceps. During these manipulations 
there may be some bleeding from the mucous membrane. 

To prevent escape of fluid into the abdominal cavity, and to 
guide it towards the outside, Musser and Keen invented and 
used a scoop of a special shape, which was held under the 
gall-bladder by an assistant. A sponge is quite efficacious, 
however. 

If a stone in any of the ducts cannot be reached by forceps, 
and cannot easily be pushed onwards or backwards by the 
fingers, we may adopt Tait's ingenious expedient of crushing 
it by carefully-padded forceps outside the duct-walls."'-' The 
obvious suggestion of trying to push the stone onwards by 
means of a probe has been made by several writers ; but it has 
not been successful, nor is it very likely to be so if the stone is ot 
considerable size. Thornton f has in two cases succeeded, after 
dilating the cystic duct, in removing from the common duct 
calculi which caused obstructive jaundice. J. W. Taylor- ot 
Birmingham succeeded in dislodging a stone impacted in the 
cystic duct by frequently syringing the gall-bladder with hot 
water through the fistulous opening left after cholecystotomy. 

Suturing of the opening in the gall-bladder to the edges ot 

the parietal wound is the next step. The sponge inside the 

abdomen is removed ; and the surface of the bladder carefully 

cleansed. While the assistant steadily holds the opening in the 

bladder in the position where it is to be fixed, the surgeon passes 

* Brit. Med. Joimi., July 12th, 1SS4. f Brit. Med. Journ., Nov. 2Gth, 18S7. 
\ Brit. Med. Journ., Jan. 21st, 1888. 



608 CHOLECYSTOTOMY. 

the sutures. The best mode of\ suturing is that favoured by 
Tait — the continuous suture, inckiding skin, parietal peritoneum, 
and cyst-wall. Two needles, threaded with Chinese twist of 
medium size, are used. The needle, beginning opposite one 
extremity of the bladder-wound, is passed in succession through 
skin, parietal peritoneum, and gall-bladder, and so continued by 
separate insertions up to the other extremity. The same is done 
on the opposite side. Two free ends of the two continuous 
sutures are now caught up — one pair in one hand, the other pair 
in the other hand — and pulled sufficiently tight to secure accu- 
rate closure all round. The free ends above and below may 
now be tied together. If extra sutures are necessary to close 
the parietal opening, these are best placed before suturing the 
bladder ; but they are not tied till the last. 

A rubber drainage-tube is placed in the bladder, and left 
protruding through the parietal opening. Rubber is better than 
an unyielding material, because of the movements during respi- 
ration. It is fixed in position by a stitch carried through the 
skin. If the tube fits the opening accurately, additional finish 
may be given to the operation by surrounding it with a sheet of 
rubber, as in drainage after ovariotomy ; or even by carrying its 
imperforated extremity to some distance from the wound, and 
placing it in a bottle which lies by the patient's side. By this 
latter plan I have been able to collect all the-^bile which escaped 
without any of it coming into contact with the wound. 

An ordinary dressing of absorbent material is applied, and 
changed as frequently as may be necessary. At the end of a 
week the sutures are removed. The drainage-tube may be left 
longer if there is much discharge, or if the cavity it drains is 
large and has not greatly diminished. A biliary fistula now 
remains, which will probably close in a few weeks if the ducts 
are pervious. If there remains an obstruction in the common 
duct, the whole of the bile will be discharged through the fistula, 
and attempts to close it will fail. In such cases, if Tait's daring 
expedient of crushing a stone left in the duct cannot be adopted. 
Winiwarter's* plan of establishing a fistula between the gall- - 
* Pra^. Mediz. Wocliensch., No. 21, 18S2. 



ENTERO-CHOLECYSTOTOMY. 609 

bladder and the intestine may be followed. (See Entero- 
cholecystotomy.) 

The plan of complete intra-peritoneal closure of the opening 
in the gall-bladder may be dismissed in a word. Bobbs, in his 
case, had a success, though he used only one suture. Gross, 
whose operation was a sequence to nephrectomy, cut out a 
piece of the bladder with the stone, and closed the opening by 
sutures. When his patient died from the effects of the major 
operation, the wound in the gall-bladder was found to be closed. 
These cases prove that intra-abdominal closure may be suc- 
cessful. But it has also failed, as more than one case proves. 
But primary closure of such a cyst has been proved, in other 
departments of abdominal surgery, to be not so safe as secondary 
closure after drainage. And special risks exist in the case of 
the gall-bladder ; for we can never be certain that the ducts are 
pervious down to the duodenum, and there is often doubt as to 
the complete removal of calculi. The very smallest stone left 
behind may be a source of subsequent trouble. It is, further, a 
consideration deserving of some weight, that if the gall-bladder 
is adherent to the abdominal wall, any stones which may subse- 
quently form can be safely and easily evacuated by a simple 
incision through the old scar. 



EXTERO-CHOLECYSTOTOMY. 

By this operation is meant the establishment of a fistula 
between the gall-bladder and the intestine. The operation is 
indicated only in cases of incurable biliary fistula — that is, in 
cases where there is insuperable occlusion in the ductus com- 
munis choledochus. The original operation of Winiwarter, 
already referred to, successfully established a communication 
between the gall-bladder and the colon. In this situation, the 
physiological effects of the biliary secretion were lost. Dr. 
Gaston of Atlanta, Georgia,*' in a series of instructive experi- 
ments on dogs, showed how a communication might be estab- 
lished between the duodenum and the gall-bladder, thus 
* Atlanta Med. and Surg. Joiirn., Sept. and Oct., 1SS2. 
40 



610 ENTERO-CHOLECYSTOTOMY. 

preserving to the system whatever vakie the bile may have. 
Gaston speaks of his operation as duodeno-cholecystotom3\ 
Some misconceptions and misdirected criticims of Gaston's 
operation have appeared in various journals : to these he has 
given satisfactory answers.* A very valuable experimental and 
literary consideration of the operation has been contributed by 
Francesco Colzi of Florence, f Winiwarter's operation was 
colo-cholecystotomy : Gaston recommends duodeno-cholecys- 
totomy ; and this operation, where it is easily carried out, is 
theoretically the best. But fistula with the upper portion of the 
jejunum would be scarcely inferior to fistula with the duodenum ; 
and fistula with any part of the jejunum, or even ileum, superior 
to fistula with the colon. The choice ought to be surgical as 
well as physiological : the operation may, therefore, be properly 
described as entero-cholecystotomy. 

The operation has, as yet, scarcely passed the experimental 
stage. Winiwarter, not satisfied with his original operation, 
recommends the following : Some portion of the small bowel, as 
near as possible to the duodenum (the duodenum is usually 
too firmly fixed), is stitched to the gall-bladder by sutures not 
penetrating the mucosa. The apposed surfaces are joined to 
the abdominal wound, the threads uncut being left hanging out. 
In five or six days adhesions will have formed between the gall- 
bladder and the intestine : the fistula is made by incision through 
the centre of the adherent area, and the edges of the opening 
sutured, and a tampon inserted to prevent closure. Other plans 
have been suggested. 

In any case of biliary fistula which might be placed under 
my care, I would be inclined to try the following plan : (i) 
Abdominal section below and up to the site of the fistula. 
{2) suture of a convenient portion of the upper intestine to the 
under aspect of the gall-bladder, as near as possible to the 
fundus and over an area as large as convenient. These sutures 
to pass through the serous and muscular coats only, and to 
extend from the margin of the fistula at least an inch down- 

* Med. and Surg. Reporter, Phila., Sept. 12th, 1885. 
t Lo Sperimentale, fasc. iv,, v., 1886. 



CHOLECYSTECTOMY. 611 

wards. (3) At the end of a week or so, perforation of the 
apposed and adherent surfaces by a cutting operation. This 
might readily be done through the abdominal fistula, and would 
not require anaesthesia. A small solid bougie of rubber or 
decalcified bone is placed in the opening, and left for a few 
days longer till it has become a fistula. (4) Blocking of the 
parietal fistula as soon as the fistula between gall-bladder and 
bowel has been established. If simple mechanical pressure does 
not succeed, then a plastic operation might be performed. Such 
an operation, though somewhat tedious, is not dangerous : the 
whole of the proceedings are carried out near the surface, almost 
under the eye ; and it follows up and takes advantage of per- 
fectly natural processes of adhesive inflammation and fistula- 
formation. 

CHOLECYSTECTOMY, 

or removal of the gall-bladder, has been proposed b}^ Langen- 
buch, and carried out by him in twelve cases. Thiriar, " Cour- 
voisier and Tillmannsf have adopted the operation. In 22 cases 
collected by Depage there were only two deaths as a direct 
result of the operation. Thus far the mortality of cholecystec- 
tomy (under 10 per cent.) is more favourable than that of chole- 
cystotomy (over 15 per cent.). One death which should not be 
reckoned occured in Thiriar's practice, in which cerebral tumour 
was the cause. 

The idea is, to remove with the gall-bladder all future 
dangers, such as may arise from the presence of calculi in it. 
It is a fact that perfect health may co-exist with absence, 
atrophy, or obliteration of the gall-bladder. Some animals have 
no gall-bladder, and from others it may be removed without 
interfering with healthy existence. 

Of Langenbuch's twelve operations, two died — one from 
ulceration of the bile-duct, caused by an undetected calculus. 
Seeing that Langenbuch speaks of obstruction in the common 
duct as a contra-indication, the result in his fatal case is a some- 

* Rev. dc Chir., March, 1S86. 

t Beilagc zitm Centyalbl. f. Chir., 1S87, xxv,, p. 76. 

40 * 



612 CHOLECYSTECTOMY. 

what severe commentary on his operation. The mere fact that 
we cannot be certain in some cases that there is no stone left 
behind, is a strong objection to the operation. In a goodly 
proportion of cases of cholecystotomy, stones have appeared 
through the fistula after they had all been supposed to have 
been removed. It is not so much the death as the immediate 
cause of it that speaks against the operation. Not onl}^ does 
cholecystectomy not remove every nidus for biliary calculi, 
but it greatly adds to the risk, in cases of lodgment of stones 
in the ducts, b}^ cutting off one avenue of escape. To seek to 
establish a place for cholecystectomy by decr3'ing the advan- 
tages of cholecystotomy is futile. It is, however, justifiable 
to urge against the performance of the major operation the 
gratifying success of the minor proceeding. 

The indications for operation given by Langenbuch are, 
drops}', cholelithiasis, and empyema. These indications are 
probabl}' too broad. I should limit the indications to two : 
(i) where the bladder, containing one or more calculi, is so 
contracted that its fundus cannot be sutured to the parietes 
without tearing its walls ; (2) where there has been perforation 
after ulceration and empyema, and the tissues are so thin or so 
much inflamed that they will not bear suturing. 

The operation need not be difficult. Separation from the 
liver is begun at the fundus of the bladder, and carried down to 
the cystic duct. The duct is divided between two ligatures, 
and the bladder removed. A suture passing through the outer 
coats will more thoroughly close the divided end of the duct. 
The incision will be at least an inch and a half longer than in 
cholecystotomy ; if additional room is wanted, Courvoisier's 
plan of dividing transversely the muscles a little below the ribs 
may be adopted. If the bladder is intimately attached to the 
liver, a good deal of haemorrhage may be expected : most of the 
bleeding may be checked by forci-pressure, but a few ligatures 
may be called for. During the operation the edge of the liver 
is pulled upwards by a retractor, and the area of operation is 
isolated by means of sponges. 

If removal of the bladder cannot, in whole or in part, be 



CHOLECYSTECTOMY. 613 

effected, ligature of the cystic duct has been suggested. It is 
difficult to see how this can be more beneficial than total 
occlusion of the duct from pathological causes. As the gall- 
bladder not only acts as a receptacle for bile, but also secretes a 
mucous fluid which probably contains a ferment, mere ligature 
of the duct does not seem to promise much benefit. Zelewicz* 
has had a successful case of ligature of the cystic duct after 
cholecystotomy. 

Free bilateral incision of the gall-bladder, followed by suture 
and return to the cavity, has been recommended by Kiister of 
Berlin, and carried out by him and Tillmanns of Leipzig. In 
suppuration of the bladder, removal of redundant portions of 
tissue may be of advantage, and the same may be true of 
enormous cystic distensions ; but it is difficult to see how the 
chances of recovery are removed by mere incision with sub- 
sequent suture. 

* Ccntralbl. f. Chiv., No. 13, 1888. 



Section X, 



OPERATIONS ON THE SPLEEN. 



The operations performed on the spleen are — Splenotomy, or 
incision through the organ ; and Splenectomy, or removal of it. 
It happens that the term splenotomy has been extensively 
employed for extirpation of the spleen ; splenectomy has only 
recently come into general use, in its proper sense. Splenotomy, 
or splenic incision, must always be a rare operation : as being 
so, and as presenting no special features calling for description, 
the present account is practically confined to splenectomy, or 
extirpation of the spleen. 

Surgical Anatomy. — The spleen, lying in the left hypochondriac 
region between the cardiac end of the stomach and the under 
surface of the diaphragm, is roughly moulded to fit the space in 
which it lies ; being concave on the stomachic aspect, and con- 
vex on the diaphragmatic. On the concave inner surface, 



SURGICAL ANATOMY OF THE SPLEEN. 



615 



nearer to the posterior than the anterior border, is the vertical 
groove of the hilum, pierced by apertures for vessels and 
nerves. The peritoneum which invests the spleen is reflected 
at the hiluni to enclose the splenic vessels and nerves and the 

vasa brevia, and is 
1 __..., known as the gastro- 

splenic omentum. 
Surgically, this is 
the pedicle of the 
spleen. (Fig. 78.) 
Between the up- 
per end of the 
diaphragm passes 
another double peri- 
toneal layer, known 
as the suspensory 
ligament of the 
spleen. The exter- 
nal surface of the 
spleen, in con- 
tact with the 
diaphragm, is des- 
cribed as lying in 
contact with the 
ninth, tenth, and 
eleventh ribs. The 
internal surface, in 
its anterior por- 
tions, is in relation 
with the c a r d i a 
of the stomach — 
behind, with the 
left crus of the diaphragm and the left supra-renal capsule ; 
and below, with the tail of the pancreas. Its relations with 
the stomach are liable to be disturbed by the movements of that 
organ. As to the margin of the spleen : at the top, where the 
suspensory ligament is given off, it is blunt and rounded ; the 




Fig. 78. (Weisse). 

Drawing to show the uessels in the Hilum of 
the Spleen. 

1, 2. Vessels penetrating the Spleen at the Superior, and 
4, the Inferior Extremities of the Hilum. 3, 5, 7. Gastric 
iiranches — Vasa Brevia. 6. Gastro-epiploica Sinistra. 
Anterior Border to right, Superior Border above. Artery 
above, Vein below. 



616 OPERATIONS ON THE SPLEEN. 

lower extremity is pointed, and normally lies over the junction 
of the transverse with the descending colon ; the posterior mar- 
gin is broad and rounded, and is connected with the left kidney 
by loose areolar fibres. The average dimensions of the spleen, 
in the adult, are : five inches in length, three or four in breadth, 
and from an inch to an inch and a half in thickness. Its weight 
is about seven ounces. 

The structures in the gastro-splenic omentum, venous and 
arterial, which go to form the pedicle in splenectomy are of 
importance. The splenic artery, the largest branch of the 
cceliac axis, pursues a tortuous course behind the upper border 
of the pancreas from the aorta to the spleen. In its course it 
gives off small branches to the pancreas; near its termination it 
gives off the gastro-epiploica sinistra ; and it finally breaks up 
into a number of branches near the hilum, most of which enter 
it, but a few of which — the vasa brevia — turn backwards 
to the stomach. The vasa brevia, from five to seven in 
number, issue partly from the trunk and partly from the 
branches of the splenic artery. If deligation is made close to 
the spleen, they may escape. The terminal branches are five, 
six, or more in number, and vary greatly in length and size. 
If the branches are short, and they enter the spleen over a con- 
siderable area, it would be impossible to include all of them in 
one or even in two ligatures. 

The splenic vein is a very large vessel, returning blood, not 
only from the spleen and the pancreas, but also from the duo- 
denum, a great part of the stomach and omentum, the descending 
colon, and part of the rectum. Its splenic branches correspond 
to those of the artery ; the vein itself lies behind the pancreas, 
below the artery. 

But little padding of fatty or areolar tissue surrounds the 
splenic vessels at the hilum. As it would usually be unsafe to 
include all the splenic branches in one ligature, it is fortunate 
that they may readily be isolated and ligatured separately. 

History of Splenectomy. — The practice of removing the spleen 
is probably of some antiquity. It was done for purposes suffi- 



HISTORY. 617 

ciently vague, being supposed to improve the wind of the 
individual (as in the Texan runners), or to amehorate his moral 
nature. Dionis, in his second demonstration of surgical opera- 
tions (1733), speaks of a class or sect of surgeons which sprang 
into notoriety about 1700 from their operations of removing the 
milt or spleen — " unmilting " the proceeding was called. He 
does not spare them : " They looked on this part as useless and 
noxious, because (perhaps) unacquainted with its uses ; and, in 
pursuit of this opinion, they prescribe the making an incision in 
the left hypochondrium, through which they take out the milt, 
and after having made a ligature of the vessels, boldly cut it off. 
This operation being performed on some dogs which did not 
thereupon die on the spot, they thence deduced and proclaimed 
the advantages which would accrue to mankind by it. . . 
No longer mention is made of these cruel operations, which 
owing their existence to some crude brains, found a sepulture in 
that of their inventors." 

For prolapse of the spleen through a parietal wound splen- 
ectomy was performed more than 200 years ago. Such an 
operation was that of Matthias, performed in 1678 ;'■' and a few 
others are on record. f 

Many experiments have been made on the lower animals by 
removing the spleen. In comparatively recent times, Blundell 
operated at least seven times on rabbits ; two recovering per- 
manently, and two temporarily. The whole subject has been 
experimentally gone into, with all the aids of modern science, 
by numerous physiologists and surgeons, and notably by 
Tizzoni, Mosler,]: Zesas,i and Winogradoff. [ These experi- 
ments prove that the spleen is not essential to the life of animals ; 
and that if it is removed, its functions are taken up by vicarious 
lymphatic organs which increase in size, and by bone-marrow. 

For disease, the first operation, according to Collier,* was 

* See Simon, Die Extirpation dev MHz am Menschcn. Giessen., 1857. 

t See Morris, Internat. Syst. of Siiyg., vol. v., " Injuries and 

Diseases of the Abdomen." 

I Deutsch, med. l7oc/;,, 1884, No. 22. § Langenbeck's ^rf/uV., bd. xxviii., p. 815. 

I Revue de Chir., 1885, p. 318; quoted from Vratch, 1883, Nos. 6 and 7. 

^f Lancet, 1882, i., p. 219. 



618 OPERATIONS ON THE SPLEEN. 

performed by Zaccarelli in 1549, and was successful. The 
second operation, by Ferrerius in 171 1, seems to have been the 
removal of a rudimentary spleen from an abscess tending to 
point ; it was also successful. Both these operations have been 
discredited. Quittenbaum in 1826, and Kuchler in 1855, each 
removed an enlarged spleen ; the patients in each case dying in 
a few hours, of haemorrhage. Spencer Wells operated for simple 
hypertrophy in 1865 : his patient lived six days, and died either 
of thrombosis or of blood-poisoning — possibly of both. Pean in 
1867, operating for enlarged and cystic spleen, had the first 
success of modern times : from his case we may date the intro- 
duction of splenectomy into modern surgery. 

Conditions for which Splenectomy may he Performed. — Nearly all 
authorities are agreed that the extirpation of leucocythaemic 
spleen is an unjustifiable operation. Therefore, although the 
operation has been performed some eighteen times, leucocythae- 
mic enlargement is excluded from the conditions justifying opera- 
tion. The following conditions remain : 

(i) Injury or Prolapse. 

(2) Certain cases of movable spleen. 

(3) Simple hypertrophy, with or without cirrhosis. 

(4) Sarcoma or lympho-sarcoma in the early stages. 

(5) Cysts. 

(6) Hj^datid disease. 

In the case of abscess, as well as of cysts, simple and hydatid,, 
splenotomy, or incision of the spleen with suture of the wound 
to the parietes and drainage, should first be instituted. The 
treatment is carried out on exactly the same lines as for similar 
diseases of the liver or kidney, and need not be again detailed. 
Should splenotomy fail to cure, splenectomy may be indicated. 
Splenic abscess becomes early adherent to the parietes, and its 
treatment ma}' be nothing more than incision and drainage. 
From such an abscess I have seen a piece of splenic tissue, as 
large as an orange, removed as a slough. 

Woimds of the spleen can only be inferred with a presump- 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 61 ^ 

tion of certainty from the site of the injury and the presence of 
abdominal haemorrhage. Later on, peritonitis, splenitis, and 
abscess may supervene, and induce symptoms calling for ab- 
dominal section, after which the condition is diagnosed with 
certaint3\ In such cases, the state of the patient is the indi- 
cation to operate : splenic wounds are by no means always fatal. 
Prolapse of the spleen through a parietal wound is easily 
diagnosed : in certain cases, the organ may be returned ; in 
others, only the protruding part need be removed. 

Movable spleen, according to Engel,"^ is associated with 
pregnane}^ depending on causes similar to those assigned by 
Landau to movable kidney. It is not free from danger to life. 
Reported cases show that a movable spleen tends to fall into 
the left iliac fossa ; that the organ is enlarged ; that its pedicle 
may become twisted, causing occlusion of the vessels ; and that 
it has a tendency to contract adhesions in its abnormal situation, 
and there undergo degenerative changes, or even gangrene. 
Serious symptoms may be caused by dragging on the stomach 
through the gastro-splenic ligament. 

Simple hypertrophy, with and without cirrhosis, has, in at 
least fourteen cases, been given as the reason for removal. It is 
difficult from the histories to estimate the influence of malarial 
disease in causing the enlargement for which operation was per- 
formed. The diagnosis is simply that of enlarged spleen, already 
described : in most cases, however, the operation was performed 
in the belief that the disease was something else. 

Billroth f has successfully removed the spleen for lympho- 
sarcoma. The tumour had existed for seven years : there was 
no leukaemia. It would be impossible in the early stages to 
diagnose malignant disease from simple enlargement. When 
the disease is so far advanced as to cause adhesions to neigh- 
bouring organs, the operation is unjustifiable. Indeed, from 
what we know of the behaviour of malignant disease of the 
spleen, we should infer that the operation was only very excep- 
tionally admissible. 

Considering the rarity of cysts of the spleen, it is somewhat 
* Centnilhl. f. Gynak., iSS6, V. t Lancet, June yth, 1S84. 



€20 OPERATIONS ON THE SPLEEN. 

remarkable that the organ should have been three times re- 
moved for that disease. All the operations were successful. 
Thornton's first operation — the first successful one in England — 
was for splenic cyst. The diagnosis cannot with certainty be 
made from renal cyst. Puncture, or incision with drainage, 
might be tried before removing the organ. As, however, the 
cystic disease is usually associated with hypertrophy of the splenic 
tissue, it is probable that the cyst-formation is only part of a 
more general disease. In none of the operations was the condi- 
tion diagnosed till the abdominal cavity was entered. 

For h3'datid disease, puncture has been successfully per- 
formed by Wilde, '■' and probably by others. Koeberle has 
extirpated the organ for hydatid disease followed by a sanious 
discharge. The diagnosis must always be uncertain. 

Appreciation and Mcvtality. Indications and Contva-indications. — 
Collier's elaborate tables comprise 29 cases of splenectomy; 13 
being for diseases not associated with leucocythaemia — of these 8 
recovered ; 16 for leucocj^theemic hypertrophy — all these died. 
So far, there would appear to have been performed only one 
successful operation for leucocythaemic spleen — that of Franzolini 
of Turin — and this case is doubtful, f Ashurst:]: has collected 43 
splenectomies for disease, with 31 deaths; and 21 operations for 
injury or prolapse — all successful. Nussbaum, however, of 26 
cases for traumatic causes, found that only 16 recovered. 
Gilson, § in a careful review of the whole subject, quotes 18 
operations for injury, with recovery in all ; and 37 for disease, 
with 29 deaths and 8 recoveries. Podrez of Kharkoff estimates 
the total mortality as 73 per cent. Molliere || has tabulated 28 
cases of laparo-splenectomy for disease, and 11 cases of splen- 
ectomy for wound, with results accordmg with the above. 
Wright of Manchester^ has collected and tabulated 62 cases of 
splenectomy. Of these, 22 were for leukaemia — all were fatal ; 

* Deutsche ArcJiiv., viii., 116. 

■\ Wien. meet. Woch., 1883, No. 20. \ Intevnat. Encyc. Surg., vol. v., p. 1103. 

§ Rev. de Chiv., April loth, 1885. 

II Diet. Encyc. des Sc. Med., 1883, Art. " Splenotomie." 

*\ Med. Chron., Dec, 1888. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 621 

23 were for simple hypertrophy — 15 died ; 7 were for malarial 
disease — 5 recovered ; and 3 for cystic disease — all recovered. 
Asch-'" has collected go cases: of these 51 were successful (14 
were for wandering spleen). 

A dissection of the figures according to the causes of opera- 
tion shows that the removal of prolapsed or v/ounded spleen is 
not only a justifiable but a successful operation ; and that the 
removal of leucocythaemic spleen, even if it gave promise of a 
cure of the disease, is negatived by its almost uniform fatalit}-. 
Experience has shown that in leucocythsemia there is a marked 
tendency to haemorrhage after operations of anj' sort ; and this 
tendency, in such an operation as splenectomy where haemor- 
rhage is always a chief risk, is enough to forbid it. Besides,, 
there is no reasonable ground for inferring that removal of the 
spleen would have an}' influence for good on the general disease. 
Splenectomy in leucocythsmia is, as Bryant puts it, " physio- 
logically unsound and surgicall}' unsafe " : it ought, therefore, to 
be abandoned. In Franzolini's case — the only one reported as 
successful — the spleen was not very large (61 oz.) ; and the last 
report of it, when the blood was said to be normal, was only four 
months after operation. 

For disease not attended with leucocythaemia, the operation 
is at least justifiable. For undue mobility the operation has 
been most successful ; for cystic disease the operation has been 
very successful ; while for such conditions as lympho-sarcoma, 
simple hypertrophy, hypertrophy with cirrhosis, hydatids and 
abscess, the failures have about equalled the successes. 

The present position of splenectomy, therefore, is something 
like the following : Operations for leucocythsemic spleen are un- 
justifiable. Operations for traumatic lesions are justifiable and 
safe. For movable spleen, excision ought not to be carried out 
till less severe measures, such as mechanical support or operative 
fixation, have been tried and found ineffectual. For cysts, the 
spleen may be removed with a fair chance of success ; but 
puncture or incision, with drainage, ought to have a trial first. 
In the early stages of malignant disease the operation is justi- 
* Abstr. in Internal. Journ. Med. Sc, Nov., iSSS. 



€22 OPERATIONS ON THE SPLEEN. 

fiable. In the rare cases of primary hypertrophy, the operation 
is permissible if the disease is attended with danger or serious 
discomfort. 

THE OPERATION OF SPLENECTOMY. 

The incision in most of the operations has been made in the 
middle line. This, no doubt, is a result of erroneous diagnosis, 
and not of operative election. A lateral incision along the 
outer edge of the left rectus would probably be the most 
convenient. It would certainly be so in all cases not attended 
with great enlargement. Kiichler and Wells made the entrance 
through the linea semilunaris ; Bryant, a little farther to the 
outside. In prolapse, the wound may or may not require 
enlargement. 

The tumour being fully exposed, all adhesions are divided 
and ligatured. It is gently delivered, lower extremity first. If 
the tissue is not ver}^ friable, the use of Tait's myoma screw 
will be of advantage. Sponges are packed inside the cavity ; 
and the parietes are depressed as much as possible by an 
assistant, to prevent traction on the pedicle. The tumour must 
be handled with extreme gentleness ; and the most scrupulous 
care must be given to the avoidance of injury to the vessels in 
the pedicle, and even to dragging on them, which has been 
found to produce alarming symptoms of shock. 

The success or failure of the operation may be truthfully 
said to depend on the treatment of the pedicle. Death from 
haemorrhage after a few hours has frequently occurred, after 
what seemed to be the most perfect deligation at the hands of 
our most skilled operators. A small artery slips from the 
encircling ligature (as in Thornton's second case) ; or a ligature 
slips during straining ; or bleeding may commence from the 
moment the patient begins to rally from the shock. It is clear, 
therefore, that our surgical technique in this part of the opera- 
tion is by no means perfect. 

Morris •'■ recommends that, before cutting away the tumour, 
a clamp should be placed around the pedicle, and that it should 
* Inteynat. Eiicyc. Siw^., vol. v., p. 1104 



SPLENECTOMY. 623 

afterwards be ligatured in two or more parts with strong twisted 
silk or whipcord. Thornton, in his successful operation, tied 
the pedicle in two locked ligatures, and added a separate 
ligature carried round the whole. In his unsuccessful case, he 
placed three locked ligatures by double transfixion, tying the 
outer loop first, then the inner, and finally the middle one. 
Temporary forci-pressure was also employed ; yet death oc- 
curred from haemorrhage in a few hours. Thornton, somewhat 
hypercritically (as it seems to me), blames himself for having 
tied the middle ligature last. Billroth was able to ligate artery 
and vein separately ; but in this case he must have passed the 
ligature farther away from the spleen than is usually possible — 
a supposition which seems the more likely, as he removed a por- 
tion of the pancreas with the tumour. Franzolini also was 
able to put a ligature on the artery, which was the size of the 
forefinger, and another on the vein, which was the size of the 
thumb ; in his case, it was specially noted that the pedicle was 
short. The gastro-splenic ligament was also surrounded in two 
ligatures, and the suspensory ligament in one. Simmons, in 
America, ligatured tlae pedicle and the gastro-splenic ligament 
separately and in sections : the patient died, from hasmorrhage 
in two and a half hours. Langley Browne'^'" found no proper 
pedicle, but four very large arteries, each of which he secured 
separately by double ligatures, dividing them between : there 
was no haemorrhage ; but the patient died, in five hours, of 
shock. 

No absolute rule can be laid down as to the management of 
the pedicle ; but a few guiding principles may safely be enunci- 
ated. Every divided vessel, artery, or vein should be efficiently, 
and as far as possible separately, ligatured. The ligature should 
be tied while the pedicle is in a state of relaxation : the tendency 
of a small branch to retract after being forcibly elongated is 
thereby obviated. The veins should be ligatured as well as the 
arteries, because considerable branches communicate with the 
splenic vein close to the site of ligation. If the splenic branches 
spread out considerably before entering the hilum ; if they are 
* Lancet, ii., 1877, p. 310. 



624 OPERATIONS ON THE SPLEEN. 

numerous and intermingled with veins, and not easily isolated ; 
and if the pedicle is not short, the placing of a broad temporary 
clamp before cutting away the tumour may be found advan- 
tageous. In many cases it will be found a good plan to apply 
pressure forceps in pairs — one pair after another — to each por- 
tion of the pedicle which contains a vessel, and divide between 
them till the whole pedicle has been cut through. Then one 
forceps after another is picked up, and the vessel or vessels 
which it grasps are deliberately tied at a safe distance from the 
forceps. When each vessel has been secured, the whole may 
be surrounded with a single ligature, tied with moderate force, 
so as to lessen the shock of the arterial pulse on the distal liga- 
tures. F'inally, the ligatures are all cut short, and the pedicle 
dropped into the cavity. Sponging, if it is necessary, should 
avoid the pedicle, which may be kept out of the way by a 
catch-forceps attached to its extremit}'. 

The gastro-splenic and diaphragmatic ligaments are dealt 
with in the same fashion by separate ligatures; the same minute 
care need not be observed, however. Adhesions are treated 
according to ordinary principles. 

The great risk of the operation is haemorrhage from the 
pedicle. Of the 29 cases collected by Collier, 14 died directly 
from haemorrhage, and 7 from other causes, such as thrombosis 
(i case), peritonitis (2 cases), shock (3 cases). Shock is often 
very alarming, and has appeared during the performance of 
the operation, specially while traction is being exerted on the 
pedicle. 



Section XL 



OPERATIONS ON THE PANCREAS. 



The surgery of the pancreas has not as yet advanced much 
beyond the tentative or experimental stage. The elaborate 
studies of Dr. N. Senn,"^' of IMilwaukee, exhaust what is known 
of the operative treatment of diseases of the pancreas, and fix 
a starting-point in their description from which all future work 
must take its departure. Treiberg of Nickolaiev and Lardy for 
Kocher of Berne I have recently, by reports of cases and examin- 
ation of the literature of the subject, added to our knowledge. 
Treiberg also has made elaborate experiments with a view to 
discover what, if any, serious effects follow the withdrawal of 
the pancreatic secretion from the economy. 

* The Suvf^cry of the Pancreas. Phila., 1886. " The Surgical Treatment of 
<jysts of the Pancreas," Amer. Joiirn. Med Sc, July, 1885. 

t Leader in Annals of Siii-geyy, Nov., 1888. 
41 



626 OPERATIONS ON THE PANCREAS. 

Surgical Anatomy of the Pancreas. — The pancreas lies deeply in 
the abdomen, at the level of the first lumbar vertebra. Its head 
lies in the concavity of the duodenum ; its tail lies in contact 
with the spleen. It can be reached and exposed to sight by 
division of the gastro-colic omentum, and by pulling the colon 
and the stomach apart. In the epiploic sac thus opened, the 
pancreas is seen lying on the large abdominal vessels. The 
stomach lies in contact with its anterior surface, from which it 
is separated by a covering from the " omental bursa." The 
posterior surface rests on the vena cava, the aorta, the superior 
mesenteric vessels sometimes surrounded by gland tissue, and 
the pillars of the diaphragm. Towards the right extremity, it 
is in relation with the vena portae. Each extremity of the pan- 
creas lies surrounded by numerous l3-mphatic vessels and glands, 
embedded in areolar tissue. The inferior surface rests, at one 
end, on the junction of the jejunum and duodenum ; at the 
other, on the transverse colon. The middle portion of the 
inferior surface has a special peritoneal covering, derived from 
the lower layer of the meso-colon. At the upper border, and 
behind the posterior surface, are found the splenic artery and 
vein. 

Just above the pancreas lies the coeliac axis. The common 
bile-duct passes behind the head of the pancreas, close to it and 
sometimes embedded in itS- tissue. The pancreatic duct unites 
with the common bile-duct in the wall of the intestine, at the 
junction of the second and third portions of the duodenum and 
three or four inches below the pyloric orifice of the stomach. 

The pancreas receives its blood-suppl}^ from the pancreatico- 
duodenal branches of the hepatic and superior mesenteric 
arteries. 

Conditions for zvliich Operation may he Performed on the Pancreas. — 
Billrotli'^'' has successfully removed the pancreas for cancer : the 
report, however, is too recent to make certain that the patient 
is free of the disease. Removal of the pancreas for primary 
malignant disease can, however, be very rarely a justifiable 
* U'ien. Died. IVocIi., April 3rd, 1SS4. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 627 

operation. When It has come within the range of physical 
diagnosis, It will have invaded the adjacent organs and tissues 
to such an extent that removal would be either Impossible or 
exceedingly dangerous. The case In which Billroth removed a 
portion of the tail of the pancreas with a splenic tumour has 
already been referred to. To remove the head of the pancreas, 
It would be necessary to leave Intact the pancreatic duct — a 
proceeding scarcely possible. 

Laborderle* Is said to have successfully removed a portion 
of the pancreas protruding through a wound In the parletes. 
This operation has, however, been discredited. 

Further Indications to operate are given by Senn as follows : 

" Partial excision of the splenic portion of the pancreas is 
Indicated in cases of circumscribed abscess and malignant 
tumours. In all cases where the pathological product can be 
removed completely without danger of compromising pancreatic 
digestion or inflicting abdominal Injury upon important adjacent 
organs, 

" Ligation of the pancreas at a point or points of section 
should precede extirpation, as a prophylactic measure against 
troublesome haemorrhage and extravasation of pancreatic juice 
into the peritoneal cavity. 

" The formation of an external pancreatic fistula by ab- 
dominal section Is Indicated in the treatment of cj'sts, abscesses, 
gangrene, and haemorrhage of the pancreas due to local causes. 

" Abdominal section and lumbar drainage are Indicated In 
cases of abscess or gangrene of the pancreas where It is found 
Impossible to establish an anterior abdominal fistula. 

" Through drainage Is Indicat^ed in cases of abscess and 
gangrene of the pancreas, with diffuse burrowing of pus in the 
retro-peritoneal space. 

" Removal of an impacted pancreatic calculus In the duo- 
denal extremity of the duct of WIrsung, by taxis or incision 
and extraction, should be practised In all cases where the 
common bile-duct is compressed or obstructed by the calculus, 
and death is threatened by chola?mia." 

* Gaz. des hdpiiaux, 1856, No. 2. 
41 * 



628 OPERATIONS ON THE PANCREAS. 

As yet, these indications remain to be fulfilled by the surgery 
of the future. Thus far, systematic and deliberate surgical 
treatment has got little beyond cysts of the pancreas. 

The origin of cysts of the pancreas is not fully understood. 
As a rule they are developed in the tail, very rarely in the head, 
of the gland. They, practically, always originate from retention 
of the pancreatic secretion ; but obstruction of the duct is, 
according to Senn, not the only nor the most important element 
in their causation. He would regard as the most important 
etiological factor "an arrest of absorption of the pancreatic 
juice, due either to a transformation of the pancreatic juice by 
the admixture of pathological products into the substance which 
is capable of being absorbed, or to a loss of function in this 
direction of the vessels which perform this task," The causes 
of obstruction are : calculus ; obliteration of a portion of the 
duct, by cicatricial contraction ; and displacement of the pan- 
creas, with flexure of the duct, caused in various ways. 

The size of the cyst varies considerably. The cyst-walls 
are usually thin in rapidly-growing tumours ; and thickened, 
cartilaginous, or even calcified, in tumours of slow growth. 
The inner surface either is smooth, or it presents evidences of 
degeneration similar to those which occur on the internal sur- 
face of arteries in the later stages of endarteritis. In cases 
where the duct is blocked near its extremity, the duct and its 
branches may become dilated, presenting the appearance of 
varicose veins. In other cases the cyst is globular. The gland 
tissue is destroyed by pressure or chronic inflammation. Pure 
pancreatic juice is found only in small and recent cysts ; later 
on, in old or large cysts, various accidental products are added. 
Sometimes pus and blood are found. 

Diagnosis is possible only when the cyst is large, and then it 
is rarely certain. Cysts of the pancreas have been found only 
in adults. A history of painful or inflammatory affection in the 
region of the pancreas is to be looked for. Colicky pains in the 
epigastrium, often of great violence, are sometimes complained 
of. This symptom has been called coeliac neuralgia, and is said 
to be characteristic of pancreatic cysts. Frequently the cysts 



PANCREATIC CYSTS. 629 

grow with great rapidity. Fatty stools point towards the exist- 
ence of some co-existing serious lesion, rather than to simple 
cyst. Digestion is often impaired ; and frequently there is emacia- 
tion, sometimes to a very marked degree. Undigested muscular 
fibre in the patient's stools is suggestive of defective pancreatic 
secretion. A peculiar pale-yellow or earthy colouration of the 
skin, which is said to be pathognomonic, is sometimes observed. 
Diabetes mellitus is occasionally associated with pancreatic 
disease. 

The cyst makes its appearance in the normal situation of 
the pancreas ; the direction in which it increases will depend on 
the portion of the pancreas in which it originated. Thus, its 
most prominent point has been found below the right lobe of the 
liver, in the epigastric region, and in the left hypochondrium. 
The stomach is pushed forwards in all cases, and, later, to the 
right side. The transverse colon is displaced downwards, and 
the spleen to the left. By inflation of the stomach and bowels 
and thereby making out its position behind stomach and colon, 
Kocher, in a patient on whom he operated, was able to diagnose 
cyst of the pancreas. The tumour, being in direct contact with 
the diaphragm, may ascend and descend with the respiratory 
movements. Occasionally the tumour vibrates with the impulse 
of the abdominal aorta, on which it rests. Fluctuation is not 
always perceptible in thick-walled or tense cysts. Exploratory 
puncture, in cases where diagnosis is imperative, may be 
employed. In a case of pancreatic cyst reported by W. T. 
Bull of New York,* fluid withdrawn by a h3^podermic syringe 
was found to be dark-brown, turbid, odourless, alkaline, and of 
specific gravity i.oio. Chlorides were abundant ; there was no 
bile, and only a trace of urea. The fluid became solid on 
boiling. The microscope revealed degenerated cells, fat-globules, 
granular matter, and haematin crystals. When kept at a tem- 
perature of ioo° Fall, for fifteen minutes with some boiled rice, 
the fluid was found to contain one grain of glucose to the fluid 
draclim. The fluid also emulsified oil. In this case also free 
fat was found in the faeces and sugar in the urine, to the extent 
often grains to the ounce. 

* New York Med. Journ., Oct. ist, 1S87, 



630 OPERATIONS ON THE PANCREAS. 

Cysts of the pancreas are most likely to be confounded with 
ovarian cysts, h3'dro-nephrosis, circumscribed peritonitis, and 
hydatids of contiguous organs. In at least three cases, pan- 
creatic cysts have been taken for ovarian cysts by eminent 
surgeons, after repeated and thorough examination. Of about 
twenty recorded cases of operation, correct diagnosis was made 
in only six ; namely, in those of Gussenbauer, Senn, Subotic, 
Bull, Kocher and Kiister,-'' and in each of these recovery followed 
operation. 

THE OPERATION. 

Tapping or aspiration offers little prospect of success as a 
mode of treating pancreatic cysts : the fluid would almost 
certainly re-accumulate. Besides, it might be dangerous as 
permitting escape of the cystic fluid, or by causing injury to 
omental vessels. 

Extirpation has twice been attempted : once by Bozeman, f 
with complete success, both as to removal of the tumour and 
cure of the patient; and once by Rokitansky,:|; who failed to 
completely remove the tumour, and lost his patient from septic 
peritonitis. In both cases operation was performed for sup- 
posed ovarian disease : Bozeman recognised the true nature of 
the cyst during operation ; _ in Rokitansky's case this was not 
done till after death. Extirpation is not recommended as the 
operation of election. If the growth is attached near the tail of 
the pancreas, and has a marked pedicle, it may be removed with 
little additional risk ; but, in the face of the success which has 
attended incision and drainage, this additional risk need not be 
incurred. In other cases, the situation of the tumour at the head 
of the pancreas, the absence of a pedicle, and the existence of deep 
adhesions, might render the operation very difficult, and even im- 
possible. If the cyst-wall were very thin, or rotten or gangrenous, 
then removal — partial or complete— might be attempted. 

Ogston of Aberdeen j operated on a pancreatic cyst which 

* Deutsche mcd. Woch., 1887, Nos. 10 and 11. 

t Netci York Mcd. Rec, Jan. 14th, 1872.! J V/cin. Mcd Presse, Nov. 15th, 1885. 

§ Personal communication. 



OPERATION FOR CYST. 631 

was adherent to the front of the abdomen, ahiiost bursting 
through it, by elhptical incision around the adherent portion 
into the peritoneum. The cyst attachment extended over both 
kidneys. No attempt was made to excise the growth ; it was 
emptied of pea-soup-looking contents, stitched to the abdominal 
wall all around, and the superfluity of cyst-wall cut off. The 
patient died of gangrene of the cyst. The removal of super- 
fluous portions of the cyst-walls, if they are very thin or 
unhealthy, is distinctly advisable, if this can be done without 
causing traction. 

The best treatment is, to establish a pancreatic fistula by 
incising the cyst-wall, and suturing the opening to the parietal 
wound. 

As the stomach and the colon lie above and below the cyst, 
it will always be wise to commence operation with these viscera 
empty. Except in Senn's case, and in Ogston's, the incision 
was always in the middle line. A good rule is, to make the 
incision over the most prominent point of the tumour. This 
point will most likely overlie the seat of obstruction, and it will 
be the situation most favourable for the establishment of a 
fistula. The length of the incision need not exceed two inches, 
at first : it may be prolonged if necessary. If adhesions exist 
between cyst and omentum, and between omentum and parietal 
peritoneum, these need not be disturbed ; but the fluid contents 
may be drawn off through an aspirating trocar, and the C3'st 
incised and stitched to the parietes afterwards. If there are no 
adhesions, the omentum is carefully divided over the c^-st, all 
bleeding points being ligatured ; the aspirating trocar is in- 
serted ; and, as soon as relief of tension permits of it, two catch- 
forceps are made to grasp the cyst-wall and pull it forward. 
When the cyst is empty, and as far as possible pulled through 
the wound, the opening made by the trocar is enlarged by 
scissors sufficiently to admit of the introduction of a large 
drainage-tube, and sutured with the parietal peritoneum to the 
skin. 

Senn recommends an operation in two stages by packing the 
bottom of the wound over the cyst-wall with iodoform gauze, 



632 OPERATIONS ON THE PANCREAS. 

and opening the cyst after six or eight days. Probably the 
most recent experience of direct incision and drainage, in the 
treatment of distension of the gall-bladder and allied conditions, 
would cause him to modify this suggestion. 

Discharge of pancreatic secretion will probably be abundant, 
requiring the use of some local application, such as carbolised 
oil, to prevent it from acting on the skin. The drainage-tube 
is shortened, and changed for one of smaller calibre, as the depth 
of the cavity diminishes, and the amount of discharge decreases. 

With the obliteration of the C3St-cavity we may, in some cases 
at least, expect restoration of the continuity of the pancreatic 
duct. A calculus should be looked for, and, if possible, removed. 

Appreciation and Mortality. — Senn reports cases of pancreatic 
C3'St healed by incision and drainage at the hands of the follow- 
ing surgeons: Senn,* Kulenkampft, f Gussenbauer,]: and Hahn,§ 
— all of them successful. Ogston's case was more than simple 
incision and drainage. A successful operation has been re- 
corded by Bull of New York,|| and another has been reported 
by Witzel,*: from the Bonn Clinic. Treiberg has collected 
some ten more cases. 

In the following cases removal was either attempted or 
carried out: Bozeman — case already described — recovery: 
Rokitansky — case described — incomplete removal, death: 
Luecke,*"''' tapping, subsequent laparotomy, closure of abdo- 
minal wound, death ; malignancy found post-mortem : Riedel,tt 
separation of adhesions, haemorrhage, ligature en masse, death 
from peritonitis: Billroth,]! difficult enucleation, ligation of 
large vessel, death from peritonitis. According to Treiberg, 
extirpation was attempted by Zukowsky, Riedel, Saleer, and 
Koote. All died except Bozeman's case. 

The evidence thus far is strongly in favour of simple incision 
and drainage, leaving the attachments undisturbed. 

* Amer. Joimi. Med. Sc, July, 1885. t Berlin Klin. Woch., Feb. 13th, 1882. 

\ Archil'./ Klin. Chir., vol. xxix., p. 355. § Centralbl.f. Chir., No. 2, 1885. 

ll Loc. cit. ir Deutsche Zeit.f. Chir., XXX., iii., Aug. 25th, 1886. 

** Wvchow' s Archiv., xli., p. 9. ft Archiv, f. Klin. Chir., xxxii., p. 994. 

\\ Reported by Salzer from Biilroth's Clinic. 



Section XII 



UNCLASSIFIED OPERATIONS FOR GROWTHS IN 

OMENTUM, MESENTERY, PERITONEUM, 

AND PARIETES. 



A CERTAIN number of comparatively rare tumours, not 
connected with special organs, but amenable to surgical 
treatment, remain for consideration. Such tumours are 
mainly extra-peritoneal, arising in the sub-peritoneal cellu- 
lar tissue, or in rudimentary or obsolete structures in that 
tissue, or in the parietes. They are rarely diagnosed with 
accuracy, and their removal must be carried out without 
premeditation, and on such general principles as the surgeon 
has mastered. 

Tumours in the Omentum. 

Cysts of the Omentum, not hydatid, are of very rare occur- 
rence. A good few examples, in which the tumours have been 
removed, are however recorded. Thornton^' relates the removal 
* Brit. Med. Jonrn., ii., 1882, p. 1243. 



<334 OMENTAL TUMOURS. 

of two small omental C3'sts during the performance of ovari- 
otomy. One was a small multilocular cystic tumour, of the size 
of a black Kentish cherr}^, which was found to be attached by a 
small pedicle in the lower border of the omentum. The patient 
hiad papillomatous cystic disease in both ovaries; and this small 
tumour, a perfect multilocular ovarian tumour in miniature, 
Thornton considers, owed its origin to cell-infection. The 
second was a tumour, of the size of a small cocoa-nut, with a 
very thick white fleshy wall and a small central cavity, which 
had a puckered lining membrane and contained three or four 
ounces of thick yellowish fluid. The tumour was attached by a 
thick vascular pedicle, and lay high up in the abdomen under 
the right border of the liver, and was nearly overlooked during 
the removal of a large cysto-sarcoma of the ovary. This 
tumour also Thornton considers to have originated from cell- 
infection. 

Doran-'' relates an interesting example of ovarian cyst. 
Dr. Gooding,! of Cheltenham, successfully removed a large cyst, 
containing clear fluid, from between the folds of the omentum. 
The tumour had been growing for four years, had caused 
latterly somewhat troublesome symptoms, and when removed 
was about the size of a child's head. The cyst was enucleated 
after a tedious process of separation ; there was no pedicle, the 
growth being embedded in the folds of the omentum, and 
having the transverse colon below it. The tumour was not 
hydatid ; and Dr. Gooding considers that its origin might have 
been due to a severe blow in the abdomen, sustained some 
months before. 

Dr. Buckley, [ of Manchester, has removed a cholesterine 
cyst of the omentum, weighing 32 ounces. The cyst was 
thick-walled and globular, and its contents were cholesterine, 
fat, and compound granular debris, — the whole soluble in 
ether. 

Ormsby j removed successfully, from a woman of 26, a 
multilocular cystic growth, attached by a well-defined pedicle to 

* Obstet. Trans., xxiii., p. 165. t Lancet, Feb. 12th, 1SS7. 
\ Brit. Med. Joiiyn., May i6th, 1885. § Brit. Med. Jouni., i., 1883, p. 578. 



HYDATIDS OF OMENTUM. 635 

the omentum, weighing 75 pounds. The nature of the growth 
is not described in the short notice of the operation. 

Last year I removed a C3'Stic tumour, attached only to the 
omentum, from a married woman aged 44. It consisted of one 
large cyst, containing nine pints of clear albuminous fluid, in a sac 
of uniform thickness and of pearly-white colour. At the site of 
its attachment to the omentum were several semi-solid masses, 
together about as large as the closed fist. Sections through 
these disclosed, in one portion, a cavity containing characteristic 
dermoid material, with hairs and cartilaginous nodules ; in 
another part, an aggregation of minute cysts, full of clear bright- 
3'ellow fluid which floated in globules on water, and was evidently 
liquid fat. In the largest of these cysts small coherent masses 
of pure fat were found. The pedicle was simple omentum, 
about as thick as two fingers. Near the insertion of the pedicle 
was a fleshy mass, which was the enlarged fimbriated extremity 
of a Fallopian tube. Not till the growth was examined, after 
the operation was concluded, did I suspect that the cyst was 
really ovarian, the pedicle having been twisted through. A 
thorough examination of the tumour by Mr. Bland Sutton''' 
showed it to be a mixed dermoid and glandular ovarian growth. 

Hydatid Cysts of the Omentum have several times been re- 
moved. Solitary echinococcus cysts of the omentum are rare. 
Wickham Legg,! Annandale, Witzel, and others have described 
cases. Witzel,! in relating a case of omental hydatid occurring 
in a girl of ten on whom he operated, takes occasion to fully 
discuss the symptoms and treatment. Pain, lateral and upward 
mobility, movements synchronous with the respiratory acts, and 
certain digestive disorders, are, in addition to the physical signs, 
the leading features of the disease. As to treatment, he recom- 
mends, if there are adhesions, incision and drainage. If there 
are numerous hydatids in the lower portion of the omentum, he 
recommends removal of the omentum, after the application of a 
number of ligatures above the growth. Solitary echinococcus 
should be treated by incision, after fixation to the parietal wound 

* By it. Gynac. Joiirn., Nov., 1887. f Trans. l\ith. Soc, xxv. , p. iCo. 
\ Deutsche Zciisclir. f. CJiir., 1S83. 



636 MESENTERIC TUMOURS. 

with sutures, and drained. A small echinococcus cyst might 
be shelled out of its bed in the omentum without being 
opened. 

Abscess occurring in an omental sac is of the nature of a 
localised suppurative peritonitis, and its treatment is identical. 

Sanguineous Tuniours of the omentum are very rarely met with. 
Dr. Reamy, of Cincinnati, "^^ relates three cases of semi-fluctu- 
ating growths of the omentum, which yielded pure blood on 
being tapped. These were sarcomata, as indeed are probablj' 
all such growths. Doran, Thornton, Gardner, and others have 
related similar cases. Bristowe f relates a case in which cure 
followed several evacuations of pure blood by tapping, and 
which might have been an omental cyst ; but was, in Bristowe's 
opinion, more probably either a hsemato-nephrosis, or a cyst of 
the spleen. 

Malignant disease of the omentum, either local or as a part 
of general peritoneal cancer, requires no description. 



Tumours in the Mesentery. 

A considerable number of operations for mesenteric cysts 
and tumours have been recorded. 

Sir Spencer Wells | has operated on two occasions for mesen- 
teric growths, one being cystic and the other solid. He incised 
and drained the cyst : the patient died after a few weeks ; and 
as no further examination was permitted, the exact nature of 
the disease was not ascertained. The solid growth, which was 
about the size of a child's head, was successfully removed by 
enucleation. Its origin was in the cellular tissue at the root of 
the mesentery proper, near the lumbar vertebrae. The ascend- 
ing colon was closely connected with the tumour, in front and 
to the right ; and all its blood-supply was derived from the 
mesenteric vessels. The exact nature of the growth is not 
recorded. 

* Trans. Am. Gyn. Soc, viii., 1883, p. 123. f Lancet, May 5th, 1883. 
\ Brit. Med. Jouvn., Dec. gth, 1882. 



LIPOMA OF THE MESENTERY. 637 

Lipoma of the mesentery has been met with, and removed. 
Terrillon* recently presented to the Academy of Medicine of 
Paris a patient from whom he had removed a fatty tumour, 
weighing fifty-seven pounds, by enucleation from between the 
layers of the mesentery, 

Homansf of Boston has recorded two cases of removal of 
enormous fatty tumours from the abdomen, which were retro- 
peritoneal, and may have been originally mesenteric. In fact, 
mesenteric tumours might properly be classified under the more 
comprehensive designation of retro-peritoneal. Homans's first 
case was that of a man aged thirty-nine. The girth at the 
umbilicus was 42I inches ; and the tumour felt so fluctuating 
in parts, that it was punctured several times in the expec- 
tation of finding fluid. A first attempt to remove it failed, 
and a second and successful attempt was made some months 
later. The operation was one long and tedious process of 
enucleation from behind the peritoneum and bowels. The 
patient sank from shock. His second case, in a woman of 
sixty, was very similar to the first : this patient also died of 
shock. 

Cooper Forster showed at the Pathological Society, in 1868, 
an enormous fatty tumour, removed after death from a woman, 
which had features in common with those described by Homans. 
Three other cases are described in the Pathological Society's 
Transactions. A similar case is said by Homans to have occurred 
in the practice of Professor Calvin Ellis, of Harford University. 

Cysts of the Mesentery have attained to dimensions so consider- 
able, that they have been mistaken for ovarian tumours, Pean X 
described three such operations, with one success. Watts j 
relates another case of operation for mesenteric C3'st mistaken 
for ovarian cystoma. Carter [| operated on a cyst which sprang 
from the left side of the spine in the lumbar region where the 
mesentery is attached, and arose either between its folds or 
from the sub-peritoneal tissue below it. It contained about 

* Letter in Journ. Amcr. Med. Assoc. + Lancet, i., 1883, p. 449. 

I Tumcurs dc VAbdomen. % Amcr. Journ. Obstct., 1879, xii., p. 333. 

II Brit. Med. Journ., Jan. 6th, 1883. 



638 MESENTERIC TUMOURS. 

sixteen pints of a thin, clear, slightly opalescent fluid, free from 
albumen, and containing a large amount of chlorides — in fact, 
presenting characters identical with the fluid found in h3'datid 
cysts. No hooklets or other structures characteristic of echino- 
coccus were found. The patient was a married woman, aged 
44. There was a history of two years' growth of the tumour, 
with some pain. On opening the peritoneum, the tumour 
appeared as a thin-walled cj-st, covered in all directions with 
large veins. It was tapped, and found to be attached to the 
side of the spine and the left lumbar region, while it was closely 
surrounded by coils of small intestine which were firmly adherent 
to it. An attempt was made to enucleate it ; but haemorrhage 
was so free that the operator had to desist, and finished by 
stitching the cyst- wall to the parietal opening, cutting away as 
much of it as possible, and draining the cavity. The patient 
died of septicaemia and bleeding. 

I know of two other cases, not yet published, of mesenteric 
growths removed b}' operation. 



Extra-peritoneal Cysts. 

Extra -peritoneal cysts underlying the anterior abdominal 
\vall form an exceedingl)^ interesting class. In most of them a 
connection with the urachus has either been demonstrated or 
rendered highly probable. An exceedingly valuable report of 
twelve such cases, operated upon b}^ Lawson Tait,''' has recently 
been published. Of the 12 operations, 4 died, and 8 recovered. 
The origin of all of them he is inclined to ascribe to a patholo- 
gical process in some way connected with an arrested or imper- 
fect closure of the urachus. In three of the cases there was 
found to exist a connection between the bladder and the cyst. 

In his first case, the C5'st-wall appeared after division of all 
the layers except the peritoneum. Thirty pints of brown thick 
fluid, with an abundant flaky yellow deposit consisting chiefly of 
* Brit. Gynae. Soc. Journ. Nov. Gth, 18S8. 



EXTRA-PERITONEAL CYSTS. 639 

pus and mixed with large fibrinous masses, were removed by 
tapping. The cyst -wall was completely enucleated without 
entering the peritoneum. " The cyst did not dip into the pelvis 
at all, and the anterior parietal peritoneum did not reach the 
wall lower than the ensifprm cartilage. The intestines and the 
pelvic organs could be felt through the anterior peritoneal fold, 
non- adherent, and, as far as could be determined, perfectl}^ 
health}'." The inner surface of the " cyst consisted of broken- 
down mucoid epithelium, infiltrated everywhere with pus l3'ing 
upon tiie basement membrane, which consisted almost entirely of 
muscular fibres." The patient died, in three days, of exhaustion. 

In the second case several pints of putrid urine were evacu- 
ated from the C3-st, and the patient recovered with a urinary 
fistula. She died, a month later, of the effects of a miscarriage. 
In the third case, the patient was in an almost helpless condition, 
from suppuration in the cyst and gangrene of its walls, and died 
of exhaustion from excessive suppuration seventeen days after 
operation. The condition in this case was ver}' similar to that 
found in the first. 

In the fourth case, the peritoneum covering the cyst left the 
abdominal wall about two and a half inches above the umbilicus, 
and "presented a curvilinear fold running down outwards and 
backwards symmetrically on each side to about the middle of 
the great crest of the ilium, and this was reflected at once on to 
the promontory of the sacrum. Behind this apron, consisting 
of the cyst-wall and peritoneum united, the intestines and other 
organs could be felt. The whole of the pelvis was entirel}' 
destitute of peritoneum, and was occupied instead by a cyst- 
wall ; and standing up in the middle of the cavity, bounded on 
both sides by the C5'st-wall, was the uterus, and what ought to 
have been the broad ligaments. Tlie bladder had a similar 
relation to the cyst-wall that it ought to have had to the peri- 
toneum ; and then from the base of the bladder, running up and 
lining the posterior surface of the transversalis fascia, was the 
continuation of the cyst-wall. The fluid of the cyst was clear, 
and floating in it were shreds of delicate membrane, with lumps 
of fat in it, presenting precisely the appearance of the omentum 



640 EXTRA-PERITONEAL CYSTS. 

of the foetus." The C3'st was emptied, sponged out, and drained. 
Suppuration set in, and killed the patient six weeks after 
operation. 

The fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth cases were very 
similar to the fourth. The tenth case had been previously 
operated upon by another surgeon. The cyst-walls "were of 
that peculiarly gelatinous friable material which is common to 
all these cases." After dissecting through the posterior wall of 
the cyst, the operator found immediately underneath it the loose 
vascular serous tissue observed in some of the other cases- 
Dissecting carefully on, he came upon a piece of intestine, and 
then with his fingers found that he "could readily separate the 
coils, which were attached to it, not by adhesions, but by 
connective tissue, very extensile and what we are perfectly 
accustomed to in all regions which are immediately connected 
with organs not enveloped in the peritoneal layers, the appear- 
ances being totally different from those of inflammatory 
adhesions. The cyst travelled' everywhere down into the pelvis, 
and the pelvic organs could be felt through its walls." It 
seemed to the operator that this patient had no peritoneal 
cavity at all, and that the intestines lay enveloped in fat and 
loose extensile cellular tissue. 

Cases xi. and xii. were not unlike the others. Portions of 
the cyst-wall of case xi. were removed, and submitted to micro- 
scopic examination by Mr. Bland Sutton. He found a "mix- 
ture of fibrous and non- striated muscle -tissue, arranged in 
fasciculi closely corresponding to the disposition of the bundles 
of tissue which make up the walls of the urinary bladder. 
Scattered throughout the whole thickness of the sections were 
small calcareous nodules. It was difficult to make out any defi- 
nite epithelial investment to the sections ; but on scraping the 
smooth surface of the specimen with a cover glass, the field of 
the microscope became crowded with flattened, rounded, and 
pyriform cells, similar to those found lining the interior of the 
urinary bladder, only very much smaller." Mr. Sutton con- 
siders that "as the urachus is lined with epithelium agreeing 
in shape, and continuous with that found in the interior of 



EXTRA-PERITONEAL CYSTS. 641 

the bladder," the evidence in favour of these cysts being 
allantoic is complete."' 

Bantockf relates two cases, very similar to those of Tait. 

Certain cases of retro-peritoneal cysts containing chylous 
contents have been recorded. ;[: These are probably connected 
with the thoracic duct or other large lymph-channels. The 
treatment is incision and drainage. 

Tumours not cystic are found in connection with the ura- 
chus — sarcoma, for instance. Mr. Ewens recently exhibited at 
the Bristol Medico- Chirurgical Society a remarkable specimen 
of sarcoma of the urachus which he had attempted to remove. 
Such cases have, however, a pathological rather than a prac- 
tical interest. 

New growths in the parietes, originating in the muscles or 
fasciae, though they bulge inwards on the peritoneal cavity and 
may require removal of peritoneum before they can be com- 
pletely eradicated, do not require special description. Weir§ 
has operated successfully on one of the most remarkable cases of 
this sort : the tumour weighed nearly fourteen pounds.' Briddon, 
Thomas, Heineke, Czerny and others have had similar cases. 
Sarcoma is the form of new growth most frequently met with in 
the parietes. Around or in the umbilicus are found polypus, 
papilloma, fibroma, and epithelioma. I have seen a case of 
epithelioma of the umbilicus complicated with intestinal fistula. 

For all such rare and peculiar conditions, definite and pre- 
cise rules for operative treatment cannot be laid down. Most 
cases come upon the surgeon as a surprise ; and their operative 
handling must be decided upon on the spur of the moment, and 
carried out according to broad principles established for ab- 
dominal operations in general. 

* For further information concerning Allantoic cysts, consult Bland 
Sutton's Introduction to General Pathologv, where also further references may 
be found. An exhaustive paper on Abnormalities of the Urachus, by James A, 
Freer of Washington, is published in the Annals of Surgery for Feb., 1887. 

t Brit. Gycec. Soc. Joimi., Nov., 1886, p. 348. 
J Kilian. Berlin. Klin. IVoch., xxv., 18S6. § N.Y. Med. Rec, Dec. 3rd, 1887. 

42 



Section XIII. 



SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 



I HAVE adopted this name for the operation to be described 
because it is the one generally used. Epicystotomy is not 
definite enough : it might be applied to the gall-bladder as well 
as to the urinary bladder. Hypogastric cystotomy is the 
name I prefer : it is sanctioned by historic usage (cystitomia 
hypogastrica) ; it is the name most commonly used in France 
(taille hypogastrique) ; and, as naming the operation from the 
region in which it is performed, it runs parallel with a similar 
operation performed in another region — the perineum. But 
there is no strong objection to the term adopted, and, as I have 
said, it is the one best known. The "High Operation" (Sectio 
alta) is a name frequently employed. 



HISTORY. 643 



HISTORY. 

In this, as in other historical enquiries, we have to discrimi- 
nate between the man who ignorantly stumbled on the invention, 
and him who knowingly elaborated it ; a third individual, who 
follows, imitates, modifies, or perverts, also requires con- 
sideration. 

It is a curious fact that Pierre Franco (or de Franco, as he 
is sometimes named), the surgeon who first performed the 
operation, deserves no credit as its inventor; while its real 
inventor, Roussetus, never performed it. Franco was a surgeon 
who practised at Tourrieres, in Provence, and at Lausanne, 
during the middle and latter portion of the sixteenth century. 
In 1556 (not 1561 — a later edition — or 1581, as is sometimes 
stated) he published at Lyons a book on Hernia.''' A re- 
impression of this first edition was printed during 1884 in the 
Revue de Chivurgie. In the course of his narrative he makes the 
following "reciteray:" "I will recite what once happened to 
me, intending to extract a stone from a child of two years old, 
or thereabout ; in which, having found the stone, of the bigness 
of a hen's egg, or very near, I did all I could to bring it down 
[on the gripe] , and finding that I was not able to bring it 
forward by all my endeavours, the patient being exceedingly 
tormented, and also the parents desiring that he should die 
rather than live in such misery ; add to this, that I was not 
willing to be reproached with not being able to extract it 
(which was great folly in me), I determined, with the impor- 
tunity of the father, mother, and friends, to cut the said child 
above the os pubis, since the stone could not fall down ; and he 
was cut above the pubis, a little on one side (un peti a coste), upon 
the stone ; for I lifted it up with my fingers, which were in the 
anus, and on the other side holding it down, by the hands of a 
servant, which pressed the belly upon the stone, by which 
means the stone was extracted, and a little after the patient 
was cured (notwithstanding he had been very ill), and the 
* Petit Traitd suy Us Hcrnies. 
42 * 



644 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

wound healed. However, I do not advise anj^ man to do the like." 
This is Cheselden's very correct translation of Franco's words. ^' 
In 1590 Roussetus published his great work on Caesarean 
Section, in which he gave a minute and accurate account of the 
anatomy of the parts concerned. Roussetus was the greatest 
physician of his day, possessed of an insight and knowledge 
which came very near to being genius. It is not surprising, 
therefore, that his studies in the anatomy of Cesarean Section 
suggested the hypogastric route for entering the bladder. Rous- 
setus kneAv of Franco's operation, and sharply censured him for 
dissuading others from following in his footsteps, while he 
sensibly combats the generally received opinion that wounds 
of the bladder were necessarily fatal. Finally, he elaborated the 
operation which he recommended by experimenting on the dead 
bod}' ; and this operation is, to all intents and purposes, the 
operation as it is performed to-day. The patient is laid on his 
back, the bladder is filled with milk, or barley-water, or a 
" vulnerary decoction," by means of a syringe which fits on to a 
silver catheter ; the penis is grasped by the hand of an assistant, 
or tied by a " soft twist of cotton." He then accurately 
describes the supra-pubic incision, and the mode of exposing 
the bladder. The puncture in the bladder is made by a sharp- 

* I give Franco's own words because, in the only recent English monograph on 
the operation (Sir Henry Thompson's), the method Franco employed is said to 
have been " to inject the bladder forcibly with water, the presence of which 
was insured by the assistant grasping the penis during the operation, and to 
dissect the bladder in the median line without a staff, opening the organ at 
the anterior aspect behind the symphysis." Franco distinctly says he did not 
cut in the median line, and his simple words can scarcely be elaborated into 
describing injection of the bladder and grasping the penis. Thompson's 
historical remarks are in other respects open to criticism. Thus, he confuses 
John Douglas, the surgeon who first operated, with his brother, James 
Douglas, the physician who first publicly brought forward the operation. The 
sentence (p. 9) : "About this time several provincial surgeons pubHshed cases 
of the high operation, such as Pye and Thornhill of Bristol, Middleton, and 
Macgill of Edinburgh, 1722-24," contains several errors. Middleton was 
not of Edinburgh, but of Bristol, and he was not a surgeon, but a pure 
physician of the old-fashioned type, who probably never performed an opera- 
tion in his life. It happened that he wrote for his friend and colleague, 
Thornhill the surgeon, the work to be presently described. A copy of this 
work (annotated apparently by the author) is now before me, and is dated 1727. 



HISTORY. 645 

pointed, sickle-shaped knife ; through this puncture a curved, 
probe-pointed knife, blunt at the point, so as to pull the bladder 
upwards while it did not cut it, is insinuated to enlarge the 
incision. An assistant pushes the stone forwards with his 
finger in the anus in men, and in the vagina in women, and 
the surgeon extracts the stone by fingers, forceps, or scoop, as 
seems most convenient. An alternative method, to meet cer- 
tain cases of difficult)', is to use a greatly curved and furrowed 
sound, on the point of which the incision into the bladder may 
be made. He thus anticipates certain subsequent procedures. 
Gradual distension of the bladder by ligating the penis and 
preventing the discharge of urine, he speaks somewhat dubiously 
about. It is physiologically sound, but practically intolerable. 

Hildanus (1682) and Dionis (1714) finding it necessary to 
introduce a description of the operation into their works, did so, 
but without discrimination or even accuracy. Bonnet, a surgeon 
to the Hotel Dieu, previous to this time, is said, chiefly on the 
authority of Tolet, to have operated b}' the high method ; but 
he has left no literary proof to this effect. Simon Pietre, a Paris 
physician, wrote a short treatise in favour of the operation in 
1635 ; and various references in general works subsequent to 
this time would seem to show that the subject was simmering in 
the minds of surgeons in Paris. At length Francis Collet was 
authorised to make experiments and report to the faculty at 
Paris ; he reported unfavourably, and the operation was pro- 
hibited. Elsewhere a few stray operations were performed, 
rather from necessity than choice. Thus, Groenvelt, a Dutch 
surgeon, who wrote a treatise on Lithotomy, in English, in 1710, 
relates how he was once driven to perform the operation. 
Proby, a Dublin surgeon, published in the Philosophical Trans- 
actions, in 1700, an account of a case in a woman where, having 
failed to remove a long pin through the urethra, he cut down on the 
point, which was made to bulge over the pubes, and removed it in 
this way. These and similar operations had no influence on the ad- 
vancement of the operation, and it may be said steadily to have 
declined in favour till 171 8, when the brothers Douglas took it up. 

On January 23rd, 1718, Dr. James Douglas read a paper on 



646 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

the high operation for stone before the Royal Society, of which 
he was a Fellow. No doubt he, the physician, wrote on behalf 
of his brother John, the surgeon and lithotomist to Westminster 
Hospital : it was a common practice in those days for the 
cultured physician to do the literary work of the practical 
surgeon. In 1723 John Douglas published his treatise on the 
operation. Douglas was truly an inventor. When he began 
working at the operation he was ignorant of Roussetus's work, 
although he knew of Franco's bungling operation. The name 
he adopted, " Lithotomia Douglassiana," clearly indicates the 
position he assumes ; and its admission by his compeers shows 
that they did not grudge him the title of inventor. The brothers 
were anatomists and scientific men of a high order, and they 
set about working out the anatomical basis of the operation in a 
thoroughly workmanlike manner. He describes his method in 
ten pages, and relates three cases, with drawings of the stones. 
The bladder is to be filled with warm water ; the catheter being 
withdrawn, the assistant instead of grasping the penis bends it 
" down towards the anus, which will hinder the water from 
spurting out, and also keep his hand out of the way." The rest 
of the operation is essentially that of Roussetus. He makes 
the error of advising the completion of the incision into the 
bladder by running the knife upwards towards the fundus, 
whereby the danger of penetrating the abdomen is increased. 
He points out the superiority of forceps to fingers in withdraw- 
ing the stone, as the fingers take up more room. Douglas's 
patients were shown at the Royal Society, and their fame soon 
spread. He had a good many followers in England, some of 
whom wrote treatises on the operation. The most important of 
these are Cheselden of London and Thornhill of Bristol. 

Cheselden must have been familiar with Douglas's work 
before Douglas wrote his treatise, for, in 1723 he wrote his book 
on the high operation ; and having greater opportunities of put- 
ting the operation into practice, he was able to publish nine cases 
of operation. His description of the operation occupies ten small 
pages ; the rest of the book is occupied with descriptions of his 
cases and dissections, and translations of the writings of Rousse- 



HISTORY. 647 

tus, Le Mercier, Hildanus, and others. Cheselden gives Douglas 
the credit of being, if not " the inventor, surely the first man that 
ever practised it upon living bodies." Cheselden's description of 
the operation, though short and somewhat defective, is clear and 
practical. It differs in no important point from Douglas's. 

The next important name in the history of the operation is 
that of Thornhill of Bristol, who performed his first operation 
in February, 1722. When his work was published (by his 
friend and colleague John Middleton, physician) in 1727, he had 
operated on at least fifteen cases. In Thornhill's (or Middleton's) 
treatise, the description of the operation, with some preliminary 
anatomical matter, occupies 23 quarto pages; and his cases, 
criticisms, and plates occupy 47 pages more. The description 
of supra-pubic lithotomy as performed by Thornhill is marvel- 
lously good. From his description of how the assistant is to 
hold the penis, " with a rag between the fingers and thumb, 
that it may not slip " ; his warning against over-distension of an 
ulcerated bladder ; his accurate description of the contraction 
of the ends of the recti, and how this may be obviated ; the risks 
of cutting upwards ; the manner in which the peritoneal fold is 
pushed downwards by straining ; how to keep up the collapsing 
bladder after it is incised ; and, more particularly, by his fertility 
of resource in treating his cases and their complications : one 
cannot avoid the conclusion that Thornhill was in his own time, 
and, indeed, for a century and a quarter later, the best exponent 
of supra-pubic lithotomy. He had greater experience than any 
of his age ; he showed a finer appreciation of the difficulties and 
peculiarities of the operation ; and undoubtedly, as a perusal of 
his cases must show, he exhibited more daring, and at the same 
time more caution, than any of his predecessors. '^' 

* The excellence of Thornhill's work so impressed me, that I have taken a 
good deal of trouble in elucidating his history. Fortunately, there are ample 
means of doing so in the very full records of the Bristol Royal Infirmary, which 
are now in its Library. Thornhill was its first surgeon, appointed in 1737 ; 
and he was the most conspicuous surgeon of his day in Bristol. He was highly 
prosperous, somewhat of a dandy, almost independent of his profession ; a 
brilliant operator, but apparently careless of reputation, and following inde- 
pendently the bent of a genius that was clearly somewhat erratic. It was in 
complete harmony with his nature that he should not take the trouble to say 
a word about his work, but leave the writing to his friend Middleton. 



6i8 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

To give an idea of the keenness of Thornhill's insight 
into the essentials of the operation, I quote the following 
remarks, which appear as a foot-note in his work (p. 17) : "I 
was in hopes that the place for the puncture might be fixed to 
the satisfaction of everybody, by searching gently with the 
finger, for the insertion of the urachus in the bottom of the 
bladder, which in an adult subject I have observed to be pro- 
minent, like a little knob, pretty firm, and as big as a large pea, 
only somewhat flatter ; and the finger being placed upon it, the 
puncture might be made immediately below it with an absolute 
certainty. But I find this direction is fallible in live subjects, 
where, the fibres being all in action, the part seems so equally 
tense, that it is hard to distinguish the insertion of the urachus. 
However, I mention this as a theory, which perhaps may be 
improved, and in adults is not entirely to be neglected." This 
is a highly important observation which, so far as I know, has 
never been made before in respect of this operation. And it is 
literally correct. With a little practice in the dead-house, I 
think it is always possible to make out the insertion of the 
urachus : and if we cut in the middle line below this point, we 
cannot injure the peritoneum. It must be remembered that in 
Thornhill's da}' there was no anaesthesia. 

Samuel Pye* of Bristol, in 1725, wrote a small pamphlet on 
the operation, which does little more than show his own failure 
to grasp its principles or to put it properly into practice. Of his 
four cases, it is noteworthy that in one he got primary union of 
the wounds, and the boy, aged five, was playing in the street on 
the fifteenth day. Macgill of Edinburgh wrote letters recording 
a few cases to Middleton and to Cheselden, which were printed 

* Samuel Pye was a Bristol surgeon, who had a great reputation for the 
treatment of venereal diseases. 

" The home-bred documents of Old Sam Pye 
Were standing rules to treat their buboes by." — Chatterton. 

He was a rival of Thornhill ; and his pamphlet was clearly directed mainly 
against Thornhill himself. He had very little experience of the operation 
(four cases), and his objections to it were mostly fanciful and stupid. " Old Sam. 
Pye" had the somewhat dubious honour of being reviled by Chatterton in 
an unpublished, and unpublishable, poem now in the library of the Bristol 
Royal Infirmary. 



HISTORY. 649 

in their books. In France, Morand performed the operation on 
Roussetus's principles, and in 1728 wrote a treatise on " Cutting 
by the High Apparatus," as it was sometimes called. Several 
other surgeons performed the operation, and wrote about it at 
this time ; but no improvement, scarcely any change, in the 
method was recorded till Frere Come (or Cosme), a well-known 
lithotomist in Paris, took it up. Come's book was published in 
1779, after he had finally elaborated his plan. He is said to 
have operated on nearl}' a hundred patients, and with almost 
uninterrupted success. The chief peculiarity in Come's pro- 
ceeding was the use of the sonde a dard introduced into the 
bladder through an opening made in the perineum into the 
membraneous urethra. This instrument was a curved hollow 
sound introduced through the perineal opening into the bladder ; 
by depressing it the point was made to raise the bladder into the 
wound, and the concealed dart or stilet was made to perforate 
the bladder. The aponeurosis between the recti was divided by 
a curved knife with a button point, which pushed the peritoneum 
in front of it. Deschamps suggested that the low opening for 
the introduction of the sound should be made through the 
rectum. 

Le Blanc in 1773* is said to have recommended opera- 
tion a deux temps, a proposal which was revived by Vidal de 
Cassis in 1832, and again quite recently by Neuber of Kiel. 
The advantages of the operation in two stages are not so 
evident in the case of the bladder as in similar ones on the 
intestinal, tract. On the other hand, Professor Rydygier of 
Krakow, ignoring the supposed safety conferred by extra-peri- 
toneal methods, and depending on the known capability of the 
peritoneum for rapid union, has, quite recently, boldly opened 
the bladder through its peritoneal aspect and immediately 
sutured it. 

From its early introduction almost to the present day the 
operation steadily declined, both in favour and in mode of per- 
formance, and we need not follow its fortunes.* Its revival has 
been simply part of the general revival of surgery which has 
* Dulles, Med. and Surg. Rep., Phila., June 30, 1888. 



650 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

marked the last twenty years. At the present day the operation 
is where Douglas and Thornhill left it — improved in the same 
manner and by the same influences as other surgical operations 
have been improved, and not least in the way of discarding all 
ingenious contrivances for doing away with the necessity for 
educated fingers and anatomical knowledge. 

In quite recent days its revival has really been part of the 
quiet resuscitation of many old and neglected operations. If 
anyone more than another deserves credit for its re-introduction, 
it is Sir Joseph Lister. But the most conspicuous stimulus has 
been derived from the experiments of Garson and Petersen on 
the influence of distension of the rectum in increasing the 
depth of the supra-pubic interval. The real value of this 
invention is now openly questioned by many surgeons, while 
there is no doubt as to its occasional risk : but however this 
may be, their experiments have called attention to the operation ; 
and this attention has assisted in placing the operation perma- 
nently among recognised surgical proceedings. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 

Broadly it may be said that the supra-pubic operation may 
be called for in dealing with any conditions which may demand 
cystotomy. Removal of stones, foreign bodies, or tumours may 
be carried out best by the supra-pubic operation ; drainage of 
an inflamed bladder ; the provision of an exit for urine in obstruc- 
tion of the natural passages ; the formation of an artificial 
opening in cases of malignant disease where suffering is caused 
by obstruction from the clotting of blood — may all be indica- 
tions for operation. But they are indications only in compe- 
tition with other proceedings ; and the comparative values of 
these operations must be estimated. 

Stone in the Bladder. — The best operation for stone in the 
bladder is on all hands admitted to be Bigelow's — lithotrity 
with evacuation at one sitting. As experience increases and 
* See Dulles, Lancet, Dec. 3rd, 1887. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 651 

instruments are improved, the range of Bigelow's operation is 
being extended. Stones of a very large size are crushed by 
powerful instruments and completely removed at one operation ; 
while, with the help of very delicate instruments, stones are 
now successfully removed from very small children, almost from 
infants. The operation of election for stone in the bladder is 
undoubtedly Bigelow's : on this there is almost universal 
unanimity. 

Under certain circumstances this operation is out of court. 
Thus, the stone may be so hard that no instrument will crush it. 
or the process of crushing may be attended with danger to the 
vesical walls from the flying off of sharp fragments ; or it may 
demand such a prolonged operation that the patient's life is 
endangered. Again, it may be so large that crushing by any 
instrument introduced by the urethra is out of the question. 
Or, in young children, from smallness of the urethra, it may be 
impossible or dangerous to pass efficient instruments. Or, 
lastly, looking at the general condition of the patient and the 
size of the stone, it may appear that a quick cutting operation 
gives the best chance of recovery. Then the decision is one 
between lateral, or at least perineal, lithotomy, and the opera- 
tion over the pubes. 

Taking the case of young children first, we often hear it 
said that for removal of stones in the bladder we do not want 
a better operation than lateral lithotom}'. Recent work in crush- 
ing would seem to show that here we have already got an opera- 
tion at least as good as, probably better than, lateral lithotoni}^ ; 
while, as regards remote results, there can be no comparison. 
A child who has been cut for stone is not safe from stricture of 
the urethra as he grows up. In the face of actual facts, the 
position of ignorance as to bad subsequent results after perineal 
lithotomy cannot be upheld. In this Bristol district, where 
stone is rare, I have seen in the last nine years five operations 
for perineal fistula following perineal lithotomy, and I have been 
concerned in the treatment of one case of stricture and one of 
fistula from the same cause. And the treatment of these catas- 
trophes is not always easy or successful ; the stricture, at least, 



652 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

may be said to last during the life of the patient. In a very 
successful operation for fistula after lithotomy performed by 
Mr. Board at the Bristol Infirmary, the stricture was not marked, 
and the result may be said to be curative ; but in all the others 
which I have seen the operation did not cure the stricture- 
Knowing what we do of the causation and results of trau- 
matic stricture of the urethra, it is surprising that evil effects 
so seldom follow perineal lithotomy in children. Sexual in- 
competence, or rather sterility, must also be reckoned among 
the possible effects. Haemstadt, according to MacCormac,* 
found that of eighteen married men who had had lithotomy 
performed in childhood, only one had children. 

Stricture, fistula, sexual incompetence — separately or com- 
bined — must be admitted to be rare sequences of perineal 
lithotomy. But that they are possible sequences cannot be 
denied. Now if the supra-pubic operation can show immediate 
results as good as the perineal, and a complete absence of 
remote drawbacks, then the supra-pubic operation should be 
selected. Even if the per-centage against the perineal were as 
small as one, this one case for fixing a rule in sound surgery 
should be decisive. In children, therefore, I should say that 
where the crushing operation is negatived, the supra -pubic 
should be adopted. A further argument in favour of its adop- 
tion in children is the favourable position of the bladder, and 
the usually healthy condition of the involved tissues. 

In the case of adult males, the size of the stone and the 
condition and age of the patient have most influence. Pro- 
longed anaesthesia for crushing and evacuation is full of danger 
for old or enfeebled patients ; and stones over two ounces 
in weight are best removed by the supra-pubic route. Very 
large stone, must be removed in this way. Indeed, the size 
of the stone would seem scarcely at all to influence the 
death-rate in this operation. The patient from whom Mr. 
T. Smith removed a stone weighing 24^ ounces made a better 
recovery than Sir Henry Thompson's patient, whose stone 
weighed 14^ ounces. Here the operation is one of necessity, 
* Lancet, Mar. ig, 1887. 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 653 

not of choice. Such enormous stones can be removed neither 
by crushing, nor by cutting through the perineum. 

For encysted stone the supra-pubic operation has been pro- 
perly commended. 

In elderly patients with stones which it is either impossible 
or unwise to crush, it is mainly a question of saving of life. In 
very young patients it is not so much a question of saving life — 
all the operations are comparatively safe in this respect — as of 
permitting an existence free from future trouble. Now, the 
drawbacks after perineal lithotomy, if small, are undoubtedly 
present : after supra-pubic lithotomy they are simpty non- 
existent. It is probable that increasing perfection of instru- 
ments will admit of crushing in male children of the most 
tender age ; but a small proportion must always remain where 
a cutting operation is best. This operation, with the evidence 
before us, should nearly always be the supra-pubic one. For 
cases in advanced life, or with large stones, the operation 
should, in the majority of instances, be the supra-pubic one. 

In the case of females with stone in the bladder, the question 
of supra-pubic cystotomy is not so frequently presented to us. 
The stone must be a very large one which cannot be crushed 
through the female urethra. For stones of moderate size which 
are too hard to crush, incision of the urethra, with dilatation of 
the neck of the bladder, and subsequent immediate suturing of 
the divided urethra, is, in my opinion, a simpler and better 
operation than supra-pubic cystotomy. Incision through the 
bladder and vagina is not a commendable operation. For very 
large stones, four ounces and upwards, the supra-pubic operation 
is probably the best. 

Nothing need here be said as to the symptoms and diagnosis 
of vesical calculus. 

Foreign Bodies. — Here the operation selected must depend on 
the nature of the foreign body present. In most cases the call 
to operate is not made till the body is coated more or less com- 
pletely with phosphates, and in many the body is completely 
buried in the heart of a stone. In the second case, if a cutting 



654 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

operation is decided upon, it is lithotomy pure and simple ; but 
if lithotrity is the operation selected, and the foreign body is 
metallic, then crushing may result in failure. Of course, if it is 
known that a foreign body is present that cannot be crushed, 
this calamity may be avoided. 

In those cases where attention is called to the presence of 
the foreign body very soon after it has been introduced, and the 
nature of it is known, attempts may be made to extract it by 
means of any of the ingenious Redressors, or Basculeurs, or 
Duplicators, or special forceps invented for the purpose. The 
success which has followed the use of these and such instru- 
ments in removing foreign bodies from the bladder has been 
most encouraging. In Denuce's collection of 249 cases of foreign 
bodies which had necessitated lithotomy or extraction, there 
were, prior to 1830, 100 cases of lithotomy and 27 of extraction ; 
while, subsequently to 1830, there were only 21 lithotomies, the 
rest being extractions. Poulet found in a fuller analysis a some- 
what greater proportion of lithotomies. He points out that 
simple extraction is by no means so free from danger as might 
be supposed ; that the bladder or the passage may readily be 
wounded ; and that, on the whole, there is not much to choose 
between cutting and extracting, at least so far as the male 
bladder is concerned. In the case of the female bladder, if 
dilatation of the urethra is employed and the bladder explored, 
extraction is a far safer proceeding. 

Any attempt to give definite rules for the selection of the best 
mode of removing foreign bodies must fail in the face of their 
almost endless variety. Generally speaking, if the foreign body 
is very long, if it is composed of brittle material, such as a glass 
tube, and more especially if its ends are sharp, or perhaps em- 
bedded in the vesical walls, the supra-pubic operation is the best 
to select. In cases where there is evidence of perforation of the 
bladder, the supra-pubic operation must be extended to ab- 
dominal section in order that the rent may be sutured. Evidence 
of perforation of the bladder usually follows closely on the 
occurrence of the injury. In some cases, however, perfora- 
tion takes place very slowly by ulceration, and reaches the 



INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION. 655 

general cavity only after the formation of peri-vesical abscess. 
In an extraordinary and probably unique case which I have 
recorded elsewhere," one end of the rib of an umbrella, two 
inches in length, lay among the intestines, while the other ex- 
tremity was inside the bladder embedded in a phosphatic stone 
of the size and shape of a plover's egg. The patient, a lunatic, 
had exhibited no symptoms of its presence, and died from another 
cause. Here abdominal section would have been essential to 
the proper completion of the operation, for in no other way 
could the perforation have been closed. 

There can be no doubt that the removal of a sharp or large 
foreign body may be carried out with less risk of wounding the 
vesical walls by the hypogastric than by the perineal method. 
There is more room ; the whole body is within easy reach of the 
finger, and perhaps may be brought into view ; and it is easy to 
ascertain whether the bladder is wounded. The whole question 
is one which must be left to the discretion of the surgeon, acting 
upon such information as to the nature of the foreign body as he 
can gather. The operation selected should be one by which the 
foreign body can certainly be removed ; it is little less than a 
catastrophe to have to resort to the supra-pubic route when the 
perineal fails. All such tentative surgery is to be sternly con- 
demned. There is little to choose as regards actual mortality 
between the supra-pubic and the perineal operation ; if tliere is 
the slightest doubt that one will fail, the other, which cannot 
fail, should unhesitatingly be adopted. 

Tumours of the Bladder. — An accurate and exhaustive classifi- 
cation of tumours of the bladder has yet to be made. Sir 
Henry Thompson,! working upon such material as lay to his 
hand, has given a classification which is admittedly tentative and 
temporary. Looking at such growths in the broadest possible 
aspect, I think the best and simplest division is into polypus, 
papilloma, and cancer. For clinical purposes this division is 
certainly satisfactory ; and it is not unlikely that, with minor 

* Bristol Med.-Chir. Journ., March, 1886. 
+ Tumours of the Bladder, London, 1884. 



656 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

subdivisions, it might be made to include all known varieties of 
bladder-growth. 

Polypus is almost peculiar to the bladder of children. In 
structure it is practically identical with the simple mucous poly- 
pus found on the nasal and other mucous membranes. Some 
of them contain much mucoid substance, being practically myxo- 
mata; while others are more dense, containing varying quantities 
of fibrous tissue. These polypi are often found in great numbers, 
sometimes filling and even distending the bladder. 

Papilloma, also termed "Villous Tumour," is the best known 
of bladder-growths. It is by no means uniform in appearance. 
In some it is represented by an exceedingly fine, almost impalp- 
able, growth of fimbriae or papillae, set upon a narrow pedicle 
and spreading out into a more or less distinct mass, not unlike a 
cauliflower in shape. Sometimes these fine growths are single, 
oftener they are multiple, being three or more in number; rarely 
they are found scattered over the whole of the cavity. Each 
papilla or villus consists of a fine basement membrane containing 
blood-vessels, covered by several layers of columnar cells iden- 
tical with those covering the mucous membrane of the bladder. 
The villi are about the same thickness from base to apex ; the 
apex of the whole growth is broader than the base, on account of 
their dividing as they grow. The vascular v/alls are very thin, 
and easily ruptured. Thompson calls this variety the Fimbriated 
Papilloma. A second variety, in which the fibrous tissue at the 
base of the growth (which, by the way, usually contains in- 
organic fibre) is in considerable amount, forming a conspicuous 
part of the tumour, he calls Fibro-papilloma. Some tumours 
described as myoma would probably belong to this category. 
Here the fine fimbriae, though present, are not usually so long 
or so perfectly developed as in the previous variety. In a third 
variety the fibrous material at the base is still further developed, 
and exhibits in its meshes material suggestive of malignancy. 
It is doubtful, however, whether real malignancy could be proved, 
in these cases, by any test other than tendency to recur, which 
of course may also be described as continued growth after in- 
complete removal. 



PAPILLOMA OF BLADDER. 657 

All forms of malignant disease have been found invading the 
bladder. Sarcoma is rare, although not so rare as is generally 
supposed (Southam) ; encephaloid has been met with ; scirrhus 
of the bladder proper has been described, but is usually an 
extension from a primary invasion of the prostate ; epithelioma 
is probably the most common form of malignant disease met 
with. 

Dermoid tumour has been found in the bladder, as in most 
other structures ; and one case is recorded in which Bryant 
successfully removed such a growth from the female bladder. 

The symptoms of polypus in the bladder in children have 
usually been those of stone, with more than the ordinary 
amount of tenesmus, and with, perhaps, more frequent attacks 
of tenesmus. 

The symptoms of papilloma are very well known, and 
usually sufficiently definite to make a diagnosis highly probable. 
Still, exceptions exist where diagnosis is rendered certain only 
during operation. Symptoms impress men differently. I have 
removed a papillomatous growth from the bladder of a lady 
who was for three years treated by distinguished men for 
"gouty kidney." A colleague who diagnosed the case, and 
sent me the patient, concluded it was papilloma after a few 
minutes' conversation with the patient. Much, therefore, de- 
pends on the point of view from which one looks at symptoms. 

The first, the last, and usually, but not always, the only 
continuous symptom of papilloma is hajmaturia. In some cases 
it is positively the only symptom, the patient showing no signs 
of bladder irritation or inflammation or other trouble beyond 
bleeding, and dying in the end simply from loss of blood. In most 
cases, however, there is increased frequency of micturition; occa- 
sionally there is tenesmus ; and in some cases, where the blood 
coagulates in the bladder, there is complete retention, with con- 
stant and ineffectual attempts to empty the bladder. In one 
case I had to scoop out with the fingers enormous quantities 
of clot, which distended the bladder, before I could reach the 
tumour. The haemorrhage is least profuse in the early stages 

43 



658 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

and increases in amount, not steadily but with remissions, as the 
disease advances. 

In the earher stages the haemorrhage sometimes makes its 
appearance in a manner which is highly characteristic. The 
water first passed is clear, or but slightly tinged with blood ; 
towards the end of micturition the tint becomes a brighter red, 
and as the act ceases, a few drops or a little stream of pure 
blood comes away, with some pain and straining. This appear- 
ance is no doubt produced by compression of the tumour by the 
contracting bladder and rupture of some of its thin-walled 
vessels. As the bladder refills, the villi, soaking in the urine, 
go on bleeding, and cause a general admixture of blood, or the 
formation of small or large coagula according to the amount of 
blood discharged. 

Passing the sound in cases of papilloma usually gives nega- 
tive results. The finger in the rectum if the patient is a male, 
in the vagina if a female, follows the sound as it is moved about, 
and, through the mucous membranes, estimates the even thick- 
ness of the bladder- walls, and notes any fulness or induration 
between it and the metal. Only large and firm papillomata 
can be detected in this way. 

It is important to make frequent and careful microscopical 
examinations of the urine, with a view to the discovery of 
portions of the fimbriae which are constantl}^ being shed. The 
sediment from one or two days' urine is permitted to settle, 
washed to get rid of the blood, and examined in detail. Sir 
Henry Thompson makes the useful suggestions, that the bladder 
should be washed out freely with warm water, or that a lithotrity 
evacuator should be used to obtain portions of the growth for 
examination. The finding of fimbrae in the urine is patho- 
gnomonic. The use of the lithotrite to grasp and remove 
portions of the growth is a somewhat haphazard proceeding. 

In the case of epithelioma of the bladder, signs of vesical 
irritation come on early and are more urgent than in papilloma. 
Bleedmg is more variable as regards both occurrence and 
amount. Pus is found in considerable quantities in the urine, 
and if there is much irritation, ropy mucus as well. Pain is a 



ELECTRIC ENDOSCOPY. 659 

fairly constant and often urgent symptom, referred frequently 
to the hypogastrium, and often to outtying regions, as the point 
of the penis and down the nerves of the thigh. A tumour or 
thickening may sometimes be palpated between the sound in the 
bladder and the finger in the rectum or vagina. Fragments of 
the growth discovered in the urine, or in water after washing 
out the bladder, may confirm the diagnosis. As to the means of 
diagnosing other forms of malignant growth, there is little 
beyond general principles to guide us. 

It would seem that we are now in the way of obtaining, if 
we have not already obtained, a really useful method of exploring 
the cavit}' of the bladder by means of the electric light. Accord- 
ing to Hurry Fenwick,* the incandescent lamp cystoscope of 
Nitze or Leiter is an instrument of real practical utility, by 
means of which the whole cavity may be visually inspected. 
I have not much personal experience of the instrument ; a full 
description of it and the manner of using it is given by Fenwick 
in his work and in the papers referred to. Some practice with 
the instrument on the dead subject and on artificial bladders is 
advisable before employing it in the living. 

As to the occurrence of these growths: polypus is apparently 
almost confined to 3^oung children ; papilloma is found most 
frequently in adult males ; epithelioma, while equally frequent 
in both sexes, is probably most common in late life. No part of 
the bladder has immunity from these growths ; all of them are 
most frequently found in the base and fundus, and this holds 
true more especially of epithelioma. 

In every case where polypus or papilloma of the bladder is 
diagnosed, operation (with the ordinary exceptions) is indicated. 
In the case of males, I consider that the operation selected 
should be supra-pubic cystotomy. In the case of females, 
removal should be attempted through the urethra, except in the 
case of very large or very numerous growths spread over the 
general surface of the mucous membrane. Setting the question 
of operation on the female aside for the moment, we may now 

'Electric Endoscopy, Lond, 1888, and Brit. Med. Jonrn., Feb. 4th, 1S88, and 

May 4th, 18S9. 

43 •■'= 



660 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

discuss shortly the reasons for selecting the supra-pubic opera- 
tion in the male. 

The problem is a double one : firstly, by what route may 
tumours of the bladder most easily be reached ; and, secondly, 
by what route can they most readily and uniformly be removed ? 
In answer to the first question, the present position of the 
surgical mind is probably not in harmony with the most recent 
surgical writings. Thus, in 1884, Sir Henry Thompson'"'' de- 
clared emphatically in favour of the median perineal route. 
The finger, carried through the perineal opening, is, he says, 
practically always capable of exploring the whole cavity, par- 
ticularly with the help of a "a strong and determined assistant" 
to push the contents of the pelvis downwards. That the whole 
bladder may be explored with the finger-tip in this way, there 
can be no dispute; but in the case of fat patients with power- 
ful abdominal muscles, the proceeding must be more one of 
muscular strength than of delicate palpation. But that it can 
be compared with the supra-pubic method as regards ease or 
thoroughness, no one who has tried the two plans will admit. 
Every part of the bladder, after the " Sectio alta," can be ex- 
plored with the greatest ease b}^ the finger, and much of its 
surface can be brought within the range of vision. No force is 
required to push up perineum, or press down parietes ; the 
bladder lies ready and open to the finger. 

And in all seriousness it may be asked. What is the use of 
exploring the bladder at all, except to proceed to removal of the 
tumour ? I have already in this work protested against the too 
prevalent fashion of "exploratory operations": an exploratory 
operation on the bladder that cannot at once be converted into 
the best curative operation should be condemned offhand. 
Exploration and removal should go together. 

As to facility of removal, there can be no doubt that for the 
great majority of tumours the supra-pubic operation is better 
than the perineal. A few tumours could be removed only in 
this way; and as it is rarely possible exactly to locate a tumour 
before operation, we should select the mode of operation which 
* Tumours of the Bladder, p. 11. 



REMOVAL OF GROWTHS. 661 

will always succeed. Some operations begun as perineal have 
had to be concluded as supra-pubic : this ought never to occur. 
Although there is probably little to choose as regards immediate 
mortality between the high and the low operation, there can be 
no doubt that a combination of the two is infinitely worse than 
either separately. If in every case where a tumour can be 
removed by the low operation, it can also be removed by the 
high ; if in some cases (not diagnosable beforehand) the tumour 
could be perfectly removed only by the high route ; and if, in 
every case, manipulation is easier and more precise, the decision 
in favour of supra-cubic cystotomy for removal of tumours in 
the male bladder cannot be in doubt. 

In the case of the female, I think the best routine method is 
to proceed by incision of the outer urethra, followed by suture 
after operation, with dilatation of the neck of the bladder. It 
is surprising how this division of the outer urethra, liberating 
the finger from constriction and setting free an invaluable inch 
or so of its length, facilitates exploration of the vesical cavity. 
The operation is a trifling one as compared with the low opera- 
tion in the male, the bladder is rendered more accessible, 
and in a far less proportion of cases will there be failure to 
remove the growth. Still, the high operation in women may 
be called for in certain rare cases of mal-posed and large-sized 
growths. 

Supra-pubic cystotomy has been proposed and carried out 
as an exceptional operation, (i) as a means of drainage in cys- 
titis ; (2) as a mode of exit for the urine when it cannot be 
passed by the urethra ; (3) by McGill of Leeds for the purpose 
of removmg hypertrophied lobes of the prostate bulging into 
the bladder and obstructing the flow of urine ; and (4) by 
Mr. W, Thomson of Dublin as a means of cure in otherwise 
incurable perineal fistula. It is impossible within the limits of 
this work to discuss these proceedings. The one operation of 
" Prostatectomy," as it has been called, seems to me to have 
proved the possibility of dealing satisfactorily with a very 
troublesome condition which is irremediable by other means. 
Experience alone will show its value. Thus far, although the 



662 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

mortality has not been very low, the success as regards relief of 
symptoms has been encouraging. For the relief and subsequent 
treatment of certain cases of retention, particularly^ when depend- 
ing on enlarged prostate, Packard of Philadelphia has performed 
some very successful hypogastric sections. 



ANATOMICAL CONSIDERATIONS. 

The part of the bladder concerned in this operation is that 
portion which lies behind the pubes, between the neck and the 
insertion of the urachus. Betv/een the anterior wall of the 
bladder behind, and the posterior surface of the pubic bones 
and the abdominal muscles in front; is a pyramidal -shaped 
space filled with connective tissue and blood-vessels : in and 
around this space take place the surgical manipulations in this 
operation. This space varies in size and shape, not only ana- 
tomically in different individuals and at different ages, but 
also according to the condition of the bladder as to emptiness 
or distension. 

The posterior wall of the sheath of the rectus definitel}'^ 
ends at the curved margin of the semi-lunar fold of Douglas, 
between the umbilicus and the pubes ; from this margin arise 
two laj'ers of fascia, which pass downwards between the rectus 
and the peritoneum. The anterior layer is continued as a thin 
covering to the rectus and pyramidalis, and lines the space 
between the bladder and the symphysis pubis (Braune) ; the 
posterior lamina passes across behind the urachus on to the 
bladder, in order to invest it, and to join the prostatic capsule 
and pelvic fascia. Into the potential space between these two 
laminae the expanding bladder arises : they may, in fact, be 
regarded as the fascial boundaries of the area of operation. 
On the posterior lamina lies the peritoneum, following it in all 
its movements. 

The parietal peritoneum is reflected on to the bladder at its 

summit, at a point which, in the middle line, alwa3'S corresponds 

. to the insertion of the urachus. Behind this point the peritoneum 

is firmly attached to the bladder-wall ; in front of it, the peri- 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 663 

toneum can scarcely be said to be attached to the bladder at all, 
though, when the bladder is empty, it lies closely apposed to its 
anterior surface as low down almost as the neck of the organ. 
The level at which the peritoneum is reflected from the parietes 
on to the bladder may be, as regards the bladder itself, at any 
point between the neck and the fundus, as high up as its summit 
represented by the insertion of the urachus. As regards the 
parietes, the level of peritoneal reflexion is more variable, but 
may extend to any distance between zero and three inches 
above the pubes. 

Distension of the bladder is the palpable means of elevating 
this peritoneal fold ; and as, almost from the earliest conception 
of the operation, the danger of wounding the peritoneum, and 
this means of avoiding it, were fully recognised, it might be 
supposed that the anatomical descriptions would, by this time, 
have been exhaustive. They are certainly abundant, but they 
are by no means harmonious. 

One of the earliest proved points was, the difference in the 
shape and position of the child's bladder as compared with that 
of the adult. In 1756, Heuermann of Copenhagen''' pointed 
out that the child's bladder was more elongated than the 
adult's ; that it was practically an abdominal and not a pelvic 
organ ; and that the peritoneal reflexion from it when the bladder 
was full rose higher than, and when empty did not descend so 
low as, in the adult. 

Cruveilhier, Malgaigne, Richet, Paulet, Sappe}', and others 
made observations on the anatomy of the bladder in confirma- 
tion and extension of the views of Heuermann. I\Iore recently 
Langer,t Chauvel,:[: Mannheim, $ and others have devoted special 
attention to the subject. 

The topographical anatomy of the bladder in general, and 
more particularly in adults, has in the last twenty years received 
important additions from the study of frozen sections. Those 

* See Gross of Nancy, Metn. Coiigi'cs Franqais de Chir., 1887, ame Sess. 1886. 

t Zeit. der Gesellsch, der Aertzte in Wein, 1882. 

\ Art. " Cystotomie," Diet. Encyc. des Sc. Med., xxv., p. 106. 

§ Uebey den Hohensteinschnitt bei Kinderen, Berlin, 1884. 



664 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

of Pirogoff and Braune are among the best known ; and among 
their followers, special mention must be made of Garson, who 
devoted particular attention to the bladder during emptiness 
and distension, and also when displaced by an air-bag distended 
in the rectum. Garson's sections were made in Vienna in 1877, 
and his paper was read by Braune at the Congress of German 
Surgeons in 1878." Petersen of Kiel heard Garson's paper, and 
used on the living body the rectal bag as Garson had used it on 
the dead.f The practice of rectal distension seems to have 
rivetted the attention of surgeons ; and the general revival of 
the operation may be said to date from the reading of Garson's 
paper in 1878, or more correctly perhaps from the publication 
of Petersen's paper in 1880. 

In respect of all these studies in children and in adults, I am 
bound to say that a perusal of most of them does little more than 
convince one that the topography of the bladder is surely the 
most variable in all human anatom3^ It would be both tedious 
and unprofitable to recapitulate all the measurements which 
have been given ; I shall therefore shortly summarise the 
average results. 

In children up to eight years of age the peritoneal fold, when 
the bladder is empty, never descends below the upper margin of 
the pubes, and often rises a few lines higher ; with a distended 
bladder the fold will rise, according to the degree of distension, 
from one to two and a half inches above the pubes. Now, 
as a supra-pubic space uncovered by peritoneum of two inches 
in length can never be necessary in the performance of the supra- 
pubic operation in children, and a space of an inch or an inch 
and a half is quite sufficient for all practical purposes, it is clear 
that, in children at least, there is no difficulty whatever, with 
moderate distension of the bladder, in avoiding the peritoneum. 
In the 300 operations on young children collected by Gross of 
Nancy, there were only nine cases of wound of the peritoneum, 
and only four deaths in consequence. When we recollect that 
most of these operations were performed in the last centur}-, 

* Archiv.f. Anat., 1878, and Edin. Med. Joiirn., Oct., 1S78. 
t Archiv, f. Klin. Chiv., 1S80, xxv. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 665 

we must admit that the risk of wounding the peritoneum, in 
children at least, is very small. As a matter of fact, a surgeon 
with some experience in abdominal work would treat very lightl}^ 
the risk of wounding the peritoneum in children ; indeed, the 
operation would seem to be equally easy in these, whether the 
bladder is distended or not. 

As regards adults, these statements must be modified a 
little. The neck of the bladder, the internal orifice of the 
urethra, in male adults lies about two inches below the 
upper margin of the pubes. Now, the peritoneum between the 
pubes and the bladder cannot descend lower than the external 
longitudinal muscular layer of the bladder, which is inserted 
into the lower border of the pubes. This distance is nearl}^ 
always under an inch in length. Indeed, in most the reflexion 
of peritoneum in a perfectly empty bladder takes place very 
near to the upper margin of the pubic bones. In old men it is 
lowest, and in these sometimes the whole upper surface of the 
bladder appears cupped and concave, without the appearance 
of any peritoneal folding at all. With Barwell,* I cannot believe 
it other than impossible that the peritoneal fold could lie as low as 
two and a quarter inches below the upper margin of the os pubis. 

This refers to the lower limit of the peritoneal fold in the con- 
tracted state of the bladder ; we must now turn to the effects of 
distension of the bladder alone, and of this combined with in- 
flation of a bag in the rectum. Of the influence of distension 
of the bladder in raising the fold there is no doubt whatever. 
With different degrees of distension, that is to sa3^ after injec- 
tion of varying amounts of fluid up to 21 ounces, we get an 
elevation from zero up to nearly 2h inches. But there is no 
constancy. Thus, two males of 34 and 35 respectively after an 
injection of 10 ounces into the bladder give elevations off inch 
and if inches respectively. One male of 30 with 15 ounces in 
the bladder gives an elevation of i\^ inches; while another, 
aged 35, with 16 ounces gives an elevation of 2f inches. 
Petersen's table I confess I cannot understand. Thus, with 
21 ounces of fluid in the bladder, one patient has the supra- 
* Med.-Chiy. Trans,, 1886, p. 354. 



666 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

pubic fold one finger's breadth heloiv the pubic margin, while 
another has it i^ inches above. There is no use in striking an 
average between extremes such as these, when we are told 
nothing about the anatomical conditions. In fact, according 
to Petersen, the chances are about even that a pint of fluid in 
the bladder will not raise the peritoneal fold at all. (In ten cases 
the elevations in inches are: .33, 1.49, o, o, .669, .29, — .66, 
.39, o, .6.) Until these observatious are confirmed by others 
I cannot accept the validity of Petersen's results, more especially 
as they contradict the clinical and operative experience of many 
years and many men. 

A. B. Strong'* of Chicago has made special experiments on 
this point with the same object as those of Petersen, Garson, 
and Fehleison. A study of Strong's results serves to further 
confirm the validity of my arguments. 

One criticism must be made on Strong's paper. In Plate I. 
of it, he places the peritoneal reflexion at the level of the middle 
of the symphysis, a position described in the text as " one and 
a half inches below the crest of the symphysis pubis." In plate 
II. the peritoneal reflexion is at the junction of the upper and 
middle thirds of the section through the symphysis, and this 
position is described in the text as " one inch below the crest 
of the symphysis pubis." These statements are in harmony 
with other measurements given in the paper. Now these 
measurements are either erroneous, or the depth of the sym- 
physis must be estimated at three inches — an estimate which is 
manifestly excessive. 

Strong's experiments clearly showed that "distension of the 
rectum alone elevates the base of the empty bladder, but does 
not raise materially the vesico-abdominal fold of peritoneum." 
A bladder distended with fluid tended to fall backwards into the 
pelvis ; and he found that distension with air had a more potent 
influence in elevating the peritoneal fold. This is an obser- 
vation full of significance. I suspect its true interpretation is 
to be found in the absence of all muscular influence in post- 
mortem experiments. It is scarcely credible that, in the living 
* Annals of Surgery, Jan., 1887. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 667 

subject with normal abdominal pressure and contracting vesical 
and parietal muscle, the mere presence of gas, as compared 
with an equal amount of fluid in the bladder, should influence an 
anatomical displacement. It is surely more likely that the dif- 
ference of conditions in the living and the dead must explain 
this difference. Strong considers that the operation is simplified 
by crowding the bladder against the abdominal wall by means 
of distension of the rectum, and considers that from lo to 12 
ounces in the rectal bag, and 8 to 10 in the bladder, are the best 
quantities of fluid to use. In his cases an average of 14 ounces 
in the rectum and 12 in the bladder elevated the peritoneal fold 
an average of 1^ inches above the crest of the pubes. Com- 
paring Kelrauth's experiments with Strong's, we may note that 
in 25 cases, with an average quantity of water in the bladder of 
27 ounces and no rectal distension, the fold was raised 2 inches. 

One observation of Strong's I must heartily endorse, and that 
is the wisdom of using thin rubber for the rectal bag. A thin 
bag follows up the gut in its windings ; it tends to straighten it 
between the anus and the sacral promontory; and, he might 
have added, it cannot burst the bowel, while it utilises to the 
full any special distensibility which the rectum may possess. 

A careful stud}^ of these post-mortem experiments almost 
forces one to the conclusion that they are not to be entirely 
trusted as guides in performing the operation on the living sub- 
ject, and that we must ultimately depend on the carefully 
recorded experience of practical surgeons. 

I think it will be within the truth if we assume that, in an 
adult male, an injection of from 15 to 20 ounces of fluid will 
elevate the peritoneal fold at least one inch above the upper 
pubic margin, probably nearly two inches, and possibl}^ over 
two inches. 

The influence of distension of the rectum in adding to the 
elevation of peritoneum caused by distension of the bladder has 
been, in my opinion, much exaggerated. Petersen's table I 
cannot believe to be trustworthy, for reasons already stated ; 
but even giving him the status of a special pleader in favour of 
distension of the rectum, we find that the average increase of 



668 



SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 



elevation is a fraction of an inch. Supposing 14 ounces are in 
the bladder, and 21 ounces are injected into the rectal bag, we 
find elevations given of i, 1.4, .23, .23, .83, .59, .29, .57, .24, .7 
inches. Garson's table is even less satisfactory ; ] Barwell's 
table shows that the elevation is ver)^ slight, and not such 
*' as would be of any value to the operator." Theoretical!}', 
I have failed to understand why distension of the rectum 
should cause much elevation of the peritoneal fold. A blad- 
der distended by fluid-pressure from the inside naturally 
assumes the globular shape ; and this globular shape neces- 
sitates, for anatomical reasons, elevation of the peritoneal 
fold. Supposing this globe is compressed between the rectal 
bag behind and the parietes in front, the first thing that 
happens is that it is flattened against the parietes; and this 
flattening can 
take place just 
as easily over the 
folded perito- 
neum as by bur- 
rowing under it. 
There is no 
physical neces- 
sity why flatten- 
ing of the bladder 
should elevate 
the peritoneal 
fold ; only gen- 
eral increase of 
its dimensions 
will do this. And 
practically, my 
own experience, 
as well as that of 
a few others, is, 
that if rectal dis- 
tension does ele- 
vate the perito- 




FlG. 79. (C. Langer.) 

Sagittal Median Section through the Pelvis of a Young 
Man, the Bladder being Contracted. 



SURGICAL ANATOMY. 



669 



neum, it is to an unimportant extent. One thing rectal distension 
will do, and that is, to push forwards the posterior wall of the 
bladder : in the removal of tumours this displacement is of great 
value. It may also aid the operation by causing the full bladder 
to rise well forward under the parietal opening. For the pur- 
pose of elevating the peritoneum I am convinced that it is of 
little value. 

A comparison of the accompanying engravings will bear out 
my argument. Figs. 79 and 80, from drawings of frozen sections, 

by Langer, 
show the re- 
lations of the 
bladder to 
the parietes 
when the or- 
gan is con- 
tracted and 
when it is 
distended. 
Fig. 81 is 
reduced by 
photography 
from a plate 
of Garson's 
to the same 
scale as Lan- 
ger's, and 
shows the 
effects of 
combined 
rectal and 
vesical dis- 
tension. It will be seen that the supra-pubic interval is prac- 
tically as large after simple vesical distension as after combined 
rectal and vesical distension. On the other hand, the base 
of the bladder is pushed forward by the rectal bag, and the 
neck of the bladder is greatly elevated from its natural position 




(C. Langer.) 

Sagittal Median Section through the Pelvis of a Young 
Man, the Bladder being Distended. 



670 



SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 



under the symphysis. Flattening of the bladder over the folded 
peritoneum without elevation of that membrane is also well shown 
in Fig. 8i. 

The structure of the bladder-wall is well known, and need 
not be dwelt upon. In operating, it must not be forgotten that 
the fibres of the external muscular coat arise in front from the 
posterior surface of the body of the pubes, and may easily be 

torn from their 
insertion by 
rough manipula- 
tion. Two large 
veins, continua- 
tionsof the dorsal 
veinsofthepenis, 
pass through this 
insertion, one at 
each side of the 
symphysis, about 
three-quarters of 
an inch apart ; if 
the knife is not 
kept carefully in 
the middle line, 
one of these may 
be wounded. The 
three muscular 
layers — external 
longitudinal, 
middle circular, 
and internal lon- 
gitudinal — form 
the bulk of the bladder-wall. The submucosa is intimately 
united to the mucous coat ; the mucous coat is, by comparison 
with that of the intestines, thin and anaemic. In some cases 
of old-standing calculus, however, it becomes greatly thickened, 
with the submucosa. 




Fig. 8i. (Garson.) 

Sagittal Median Section of Male Pelvis, ivith Distention 
of Bladder and Rectum. 



MORTALITY. 671 



MORTALITY AND APPRECIATION. 

The early mortalit}^ of the operation in the hands of those 
who studied its methods was under 15 per cent, for all cases, 
and some of these cases were very bad indeed. Dulles,* up to 
1875, ^^^*^ collected records of 478 cases. An analysis of these 
cases showed that the results of supra-pubic lithotomy were 
as good as the lateral operation for calculi weighing between 
one and two ounces, and better for calculi weighing above 
two ounces. In 1881 his collection of cases amounted to 636, 
and the results continued unchanged. Dennis's collection of 
127 cases operated on since 1879 gives a mortality of 9 per cent. 
It must not be forgotten that these cases include the very worst 
examples of stone. Dr. Ussendelft of Nijni-Novgorod t who, 
since 1883, has performed exclusively the high operation, has 
had 102 operations with two deaths, one being left with fistula 
and one with pyelitis. He had no fewer than 20 cases of 
primary healing. 

At the present day the operation is chiefly coniined to cases 
of very large stones, and to young children. To strike an 
average between these classes of cases, and draw conclusions 
therefrom as to the general mortality of the operation, is absurd. 
For children the cases are as yet too few to be entered in com- 
petition with other operations. Most surgeons who have had 
experience of the operation prefer it to all others, and many 
regard it as the only cutting operation which should be per- 
formed on the bladder. The operation is at present on the crest 
of a wave of popularity, and is perhaps just a little over-praised. 
Some maintain that it is much easier to perform than perineal 
C3'stotomy : this is a matter of opinion and of experience ; it is 
certainly not, as compared with manj' other operations, difficult. 
Special consideration as to its value in saving life, and not 
interfering with subsequent comfort, has been given under 
" Indications for Operation," and need not here be repeated. 
The whole question may be summed up in the conclusion formu- 

* Amer. Journ. Med. Sc, July, 1875. 
t Abstract from Vratcli, St. Petersburg, in Annals of Surgery, May, 1S89. 



672 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

lated by Dulles, whose words must carry great weight : " I have 
come to the conclusion that a temperate view of the subject will 
lead to the conviction that the supra-pubic operation deserves 
to rank above all other methods of lithotomy for stones of large 
size, and that its applicability to any case should be carefully 
discussed before deciding to cut through the perineum." 



THE OPERATION. 

Preparatory. — The patient's bowels must be well opened, and 
the rectum cleared by enema immediately before operation. 
Pubic hair must be shaved off, and the skin in the neighbour- 
hood thoroughly purified. The patient is laid on an operating 
table in the supine position, and the operator and his assistant 
stand on the right and left of the patient, as in an ordinary ab- 
dominal section. The steam spray is not essential, as the cavity 
of the bladder can rarely be rendered aseptic ; but in young 
children, and in cases of papilloma with healthy or only blood- 
mingled urine, the spray may conduce to an ideally aseptic 
course. 

The coverings of the patient should be so arranged that the 
thighs may be separated and access given to the rectum without 
uncovering any part of the body. A blanket rolled round each 
limb, and a third over the chest and abdomen, will be found 
efficient. A small table for setting irrigating reservoirs upon 
should be placed near the foot of the operating table. A box, 
or small chair, or other simple piece of furniture placed on this 
table, will serve to place the reservoirs upon when it is desired 
to raise them three or four feet above the level of the patient. 

Instruments. — The instruments requisite are few and simple. 
A sharp scalpel, a pair of scissors, a sharp-pointed tenaculum, 
and half a dozen pairs of catch-forceps, with the apparatus for 
distending bladder and rectum (if necessary), will suffice for the 
performance of most operations. For the extraction of calculi, 
lithotomy forceps and scoops ; and for the removal of tumours, 
curettes, or scrapers, or bent forceps, will complete the list. 



DISTENSION OF THE BLADDER. 673 

Some surgeons recommend the use of special instruments : Sir 
H. Thompson, for instance, uses an "ivory separator" and a 
director, and for special conditions a hollow sound with a bul- 
bous stilet ; but none of these instruments are essential. 

Distension of the Bladder. — This will usually be the first step of 
the operation. If the rectal bag is to be used, it may be inserted 
as the first part of the operation ; but I think it should not be 
filled till the parietes are divided. It is an advantage to make 
the dissection with the fascia and cellular tissue as lax as pos- 
sible ; the rectal bag crowds forward the neck of the bladder and 
compresses the tissue against the abdominal wall, so that vessels 
are not easily seen and layers are not easily recognised. The 
employment of the rectal bag for cases of calculus is of doubt- 
ful utility. For bringing up the posterior wall in the removal 
of tumours, the rectal bag is valuable. But it cannot do this 
efficiently till the bladder is opened, at least not while there is 
vesical distension. 

Distension by hydrostatic pressure is, in my opinion, far 
superior to distension by hand pressure ; and for these reasons : 

(i) We know exactly what amount of pressure we are putting 
on the vesical walls. An elevation of three feet above the bladder 
is about one-twelfth of an atmosphere, or a little over a pound 
to the square inch ; of two feet, one-eighteenth of an atmo- 
sphere, or about twelve ounces ; and so on. Now, the amount 
of fluid injected is, for a diseased bladder, absolutely no criterion 
of safet3^ In many cases of large stone the bladder is enor- 
mously thickened at some parts, and almost ulcerated through 
at others, while it is frequently tightly closed around the stone. 
To force eight or ten, or even fourteen, ounces, as is often recom- 
mended, into such a bladder, is full of risk, and should never be 
done. In a case such as this, an elevation of two feet above 
the bladder would be safe ; if this amount of pressure will not 
distend it, then it should be left undistended. 

(2) The distending force is applied with perfect continuity, 
and with any degree of rapidity required. Hand pressure is 
bound to be irregular and intermittent ; and if the injection is 

44 



674 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

made as a part of and during the operation, it will almost cer- 
tainly be given too rapidly. If the reservoir is placed at a height 
of two or three feet above the bladder before the surgeon begins 
to make the first incision, a gentle, steady, distending force, not 
unlike that naturally produced by the ureters, but more rapid, 
will be gradually filling the bladder. 

(3) The pressure can be removed instantaneously simply by 
lowering the reservoir to the level of the bladder, and increased 
to any extent simply by elevating it. There is no time wasted 
in adjusting or removing the syringe. The apparatus is always 
ready ; and by the simple proceeding of elevating or depressing 
the reservoir, without attaching or detaching apparatus, can 
either empty the bladder or fill it to distension. 

The way in which I now carry out distension of the bladder 
is as follows : a soft rubber catheter, English make, of size as 
large as the urethra will admit, is passed into the bladder, and 
any urine present is withdrawn. The tube of the irrigator is 
then placed over the end of the catheter, and after a few ounces 
of boro-glyceride solution have trickled in it is removed, and the 
fluid permitted to run into a receiver. If the urine is very foul, 
this may be done again once or twice. The reservoir connected 
with the catheter is then placed permanently on its stand, three 
feet or so above the level of the patient, and left there gradually 
to distend the bladder while the cutting operation is going on. 
An elevation of three feet will be found enough for children ; for 
adults with thicker and less distensile bladder-walls, four feet 
will be the upward limit of safety. 

Any form of reservoir or fountain syringe that will stand is 
suitable. It is convenient to have it fitted with a glass tube as 
a gauge outside, marked in ounces, to indicate the amount of 
fluid that has escaped into the bladder. It ought to contain, 
at least, two quarts, in order that it may be used for washing 
out the bladder after operations. 

The bladder is kept distended by the elevated column of 
fluid. The catheter is not removed ; if of full size, no fluid will 
escape by its side. The somewhat barbarous proceeding of tying 
the penis with an elastic cord, so as to prevent escape of the fluid, 



DISTENSION OF THE RECTUM. 675 

is thus done away with. Should the patient strain much, and 
the abdominal pressure be increased, the iluid is squeezed out of 
the bladder into the reservoir ; it is better that this should take 
place than that the bladder should be overstrained, or even 
ruptured. When the straining ceases, the fluid will pass in 
again. 

The rubber tubing which joins the reservoir to the catheter 
should be at least six feet in length, and should be fitted with a 
stop cock, or similar contrivance, to check the flow when this 
is necessary, as, for instance, when the bladder is opened. 

The lotion employed should be of the warmth of the body. 
No antiseptic for employment in the bladder is superior to boro- 
glyceride ; and it may be used of considerable strength. A full 
tablespoonful of boro-glyceirde to the quart of water is by no 
means too strong. The soft catheter attached to the irrigator 
need not be removed during the whole operation. It can 
scarcely be in the way, and it is useful for conducting fluid into 
the bladder for a final washing out, and also for testing the 
securit}^ of the bladder-suture should this be inserted. Finally, 
if it is considered advisable to keep the bladder empty for some 
time, the catheter need not be removed at all, but may be 
tied in. 

Nothing is said as to the amount of water to be injected. 
The capacity of the bladder is not to be measured by amount of 
fluid, but by its distensibility within limits of safety. Five or 
six ounces of injection might be dangerous in a bladder greatly 
contracted, and perhaps ulcerated, as in cases of large calculus: 
while a full pint might easily be borne in such a case as one of 
simple papilloma. The only safe criterion of measurement is 
that of force of distention ; and this, I maintain, cannot be 
estimated accurately by the hand, but it can undoubtedly be 
measured by the means described. 

Distension of the Rectum. — The ordinary rectal bag, as supplied 
" by the trade," is a formidable looking affair. It is strong enough 
to cause rupture of the walls of the rectum (as indeed has been 
proved too often), and when rolled up to its smallest dimensions 

44 * 



676 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

it is larger than the largest rectal bougie. Rectal bags are now 
made in which the danger of over-distension is avoided by the 
use of silk webbing incorporated with the rubber. But the 
avoidance of this risk may be attended with a disadvantage, in 
not having the rectum distended to its full capacity. The dis- 
tensibility of the rectum varies greatly in individuals: the 
protected rubber bag, while safe for a small rectum, does not 
utilise to the full the distensibility of a large one. I should 
discard the rectal bag in common use absolutel}', and use 
instead a more delicate apparatus. A child's air-balloon or 
a delicate soft rubber urinal, fitted on to a celluloid catheter, 
answers the purpose admirably. While strong enough for the 
purpose intended, it is not strong enough to rupture the gut. 
It must be remembered that the chief virtue of the rectal bag is, 
not to increase the supra-pubic interval, but to bring the 
posterior wall of the bladder up into the wound. As usually 
employed the rectal and vesical bags are little else than two 
fluid globes mutually undergoing a compressing and flattening 
process between the parietes and the sacrum. The rectal bag 
can scarcely bring the bladder-wall forwards till the bladder is 
opetied ; then it does so with ease and without the obstacle of a 
globe of fluid under high pressure. For this purpose the air- 
balloon is quite strong enough ; and its use is attended with no 
danger, for it will give way (as I have ascertained) before the 
rectum will. 

The balloon, fitted to the catheter, is greased (oil injvu'es the 
rubber tissue) and introduced well into the rectum. The end of 
the catheter is attached to the rubber tubing coming from a 
reservoir similar to that for the bladder. A pint of fluid in the 
reservoir will usualh^ be found sufficient. Distension is produced 
in the same way as for the bladder simply by elevating the 
reservoir two or three feet. When the bladder is opened, and 
while the tumour is being explored with the finger, the reservoir, 
already placed on the elevated stand, is connected with the 
rectal bag by removing the clamp from the rubber tubing : dis- 
tension to the necessary extent takes place in a minute or two. 

It is no small recommendation of this method of distending 



PARIETAL INCISION. 677 

bladder and rectum that it may be carried out from beginning to 
end, not only without any interference at the hands of the surgeon 
(beyond insertion of catheter and bag), but even while he is 
actually engaged in the cutting part of the operation. The tubes 
from the reservoir being attached to the catheters in bladder 
and in rectum, the bladder reservoir is elevated and he proceeds 
at once to make the parietal incision. By the time this is 
finished, and before the bladder is exposed, distension will have 
been completed. Should extra distension seem desirable, this 
can at once be supplied by an assistant or nurse raising the 
reservoir a little higher. 

The Incision through the Parietes. — A vertical incision from twc> 
to three inches in length, according to the size of the patient, is 
made exactly in the middle line over the pubes. The lower end 
of the incision should pass below the upper border of the sym- 
physis for a distance of at least a third of an inch. The thick 
fascia forming the linea alba being exposed, a small transverse 
incision is made through it close to the symphysis. This inci- 
sion is made transversely partly because it is the easiest and 
safest way of dividing the fascia, and partly because it at once 
exposes the actual division between the two recti, but chiefly 
because it opens up the field of operation, which is often cramped 
by the strong, tense and closely set fibres. Through this trans- 
verse opening the point of the scalpel (or scissors) is insinuated, 
and the fascia divided upwards in the middle line to the top of 
the wound, the edge of the knife being directed forwards. The 
recti are now separated, and the transversalis fascia appears, and 
is divided as in abdominal section. At this stage one is usually 
struck by the great power of these muscles, and how vigorously 
they resist separation, even when the patient is fully an^s- 
thetised. If their tension is so great as to hamper subsequent 
proceedings, part of their insertion into the pubic bones should 
at once be divided. This greatly increases the space. For 
the purpose of keeping the recti apart, I have devised strong 
wire retractors (Fig. 82), of different sizes, so shaped that they 
will retain their position when placed. One end of the retractor 



678 



SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 




Fig. 82. 

Retractor for Supra-Pubic Cystotomy. 



(the ends are of different sizes) is placed longitudinally in the 
vertical opening between the muscles; it is then rotated through 
quarter of a circle, so that its free end is over the pubes. By 
this afction the recti are separated, the retractor is then pulled 
down towards the symphysis to be out of the way, and in this 
position it will remain without any attention. This instrument 
is very useful when consider- 
able space is wanted by 
keeping apart the recti and 
opening up the field of oper- 
ation : usually, however, it 
will not be required. 

When the transversalis 
fascia is divided, or rather 
the anterior layer of fascia 
which is continued downwards from the fold of Douglas, the 
3'ellow peri-vesical fat comes into view. The scalpel is now 
laid aside, and the forefinger, keeping close to the symphysis, 
and undermining it so to speak, teases apart the fat with the 
numerous vessels, mostly large veins, which lie in it. At this 
stage, while the pulp of the forefinger rests on the bladder- 
wall, the distension reservoir is elevated a foot or two higher, 
and the bladder is felt steadily to expand and to become more 
tense. While this is being done, the finger may sometimes feel 
the peritoneal fold gliding upwards quite plainly. The fingers 
during this process of final distension, aided, perhaps, by catch- 
forceps, will have teased the fatty and cellular tissue aside, and 
thoroughly exposed the wall of the bladder. Much of the tissue 
should be pushed upwards, carrying the peritoneum in front of 
it, and acting as padding and protection to that membrane. 
While the bladder-wall is gradually becoming more tense, and 
rising upwards, and the finger is teasing an opening in the 
fibrous tissue, the sense of touch somehow carries to the mind 
an impression of security, or rather of certainty, as to the positive 
limits of vesical tissue proper. Fat, fibrous tissue, and peri- 
toneum may be moved about anywhere, but the bladder- wall 
itself remains stable and increasingly firm under all. 



OPENING THE BLADDER. 679 

When a sufficient amount of bladder surface has been 
cleared we proceed at once to the next step. 

Opening the Bladder. — Several methods of making the opening 
into the bladder are in vogue, and I have tried most of them. 
In several cases, I have employed a Lister's sinus forceps for the 
purpose, first gently insinuating it through the outer muscular 
coats, and then sharply pushing it into the cavity. As the 
blades are separated the opening is distended, and the vesical 
wall may be pulled forward into the wound. I found that the 
opening so made was liable to be irregular and lacerated, and 
not suitable for subsequent suturing. A good many surgeons 
begin by placing thick fixation threads of silk in the bladder by 
curved handled needles, and make the division by knife while 
the bladder is pulled forwards. Besides the palpable objection 
to the making of more openings in the bladder than are necessary, 
there is another objection to the use of threads in the tendency 
which they have to tear the vesical tissue. Several other plans 
have been mentioned and recommended, but the best, on the 
whole, is probably by a clean incision made through the walls, 
which are held forward by a tenaculum. The tenaculum, held in 
the left hand, is pushed sharply through the coats, its entrance into 
the cavity being signalised by the exit of a few drops of fluid (if 
this fluid is tinted blue with litmus, it is more easily seen), and 
its point is turned upwards. Immediately below the tenaculum, 
into the same opening it may be, the point of a sharp scalpel, 
held in the right hand, is gently insinuated, and the opening 
made by a steady cut downwards. This opening will var}^ in 
length according to the work to be done through it : at first it 
need never be longer than an inch ; it may be extended after- 
wards. It must not be forgotten, however, that as the bladder 
empties, the peritoneal fold falls downwards, and it may then be 
difficult and dangerous to extend the opening in an upward 
direction. Therefore, the tenaculum should be inserted not 
lower down than the uppermost limit of the incision. It is 
sometimes not easy to define this limit. In a thickened and 
contracted bladder, which is not safe to distend, the supra- 



680 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

pubic interval may be short or absent, and the peritoneum has 
to be undermined, first downwards under the pubes and then 
upwards over the bladder, as in the operation for tying the 
external iliac artery. In such a case the urachus may often 
be felt as a round, somewhat tense cord, and a small knob repre- 
senting its insertion into the summit of the bladder is occasion- 
ally perceptible. Peritoneum never passes the urachus ; it is 
always safe to go as high as this point. This practical hint, 
thrown out by Thornhill a century and a half ago, is by no means 
to be despised in the surgery of to-day. 

As the opening is made the fluid flows from the bladder, and 
its walls collapse. To prevent retraction two catch-forceps are 
made to grasp the lips of the wound, and the tenaculum is 
removed. Loops of silk inserted by a needle are usually em- 
ployed for this purpose ; the tendency of these to tear, and the 
formation of further openings in the bladder, are objections to 
the use of threads. At first I was afraid that the pressure ex- 
erted by the blades of the forceps might cause sloughing. True, 
proof against this is abundantly afforded in the fact that catch- 
forceps are constantly being left hanging to pieces of tissue for 
long periods without endangering their vitality ; and, as a matter 
of experience, forceps do no harm whatever. Compression need 
not be employed to the fullest extent, and traction must be no 
more than sufficient to keep the bladder opening upwards in the 
parietal opening. 

Placing the forceps is very quickly done, and not much of 
the fluid will in the meantime have escaped. It matters very 
little, however, if the whole has escaped. If, as can seldom be 
the case, it is desirable to explore with the bladder full, the 
finger can at once plug the opening, and the bladder may 
be refilled simply by permitting the distending apparatus to 
work. 

Intra-vesical Manipulations. — These vary according to the 
purpose for which the operation is performed ; namely, removal 
of a stone, a foreign body, or a tumour, or the hypertrophied 
prostate gland. 



EXTRACTION OF CALCULUS. 681 

Extraction of Calculus. — The extraction of a calculus by the 
supra-pubic route is usually a proceeding of the simplest possible 
nature. If the rectal bag is not employed, and the lips of the 
wound in the bladder are held forward in the grasp of catch- 
forceps, the bladder when empty will form a simple elongated 
sac, at the bottom of which the stone will be found. 

In children, where the stone is usually small and the bladder 
walls lax and distensile, extraction may be performed with great 
ease. Some surgeons recommend the employment of the 
fingers, or the finger with a scoop, for removing the stone ; I 
should advise the use of small lithotomy forceps. The finger or 
fingers quite unnecessarily add to the dimensions of the body to 
be extracted, and so cause needless dilatation or tearing of the 
wound in the bladder. Forceps of proper dimensions, while 
quite efficient for the purpose, do not add to the bulk of the 
stone so much as the fingers. Nearly always the stone is caught 
between the blades at the first trial, without the insertion of the 
finger at all ; if there is any difficulty in grasping the stone, the 
finger introduced along the blades may place the stone between 
them, but should be removed before the stone. In view of the 
extreme desirability of getting union of the vesical wound in 
children, it is important that there should be as little traumatism 
and as small an opening as possible. The rectal bag raises the 
base of the bladder so as to make it become convex towards the 
the front ; the stone falls off this convexity into some part of 
the encircling sulcus, and is not so easily found as when the 
bladder remains as a simple sac. However, in very few cases 
can the finding of the stone be difficult. In cases of real diffi- 
culty, as when the stone is encapsuled, the finger in the rectum 
is the best means of pushing the stone out of its bed. 

In adults, and particularly in old men, the stone in most cases 
will be very large, the bladder walls very thick, and perhaps 
ulcerated, and the situation of the viscus will be well back in 
the hollow of the sacrum. Vesical distension to any great ex- 
tent will then be either dangerous or impossible, and the incision 
through the front of the bladder will probably at once expose the 
stone. It is then a question of how to remove the stone through 



682 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

the smallest opening, and with the greatest possible delicacy. 
Towards this end, one or two fingers in the rectum are more 
useful than the rectal bag. One or two fingers of the right hand 
in the rectum, with the fingers of the left hand through the 
bladder wound, may, by judicious and careful manipulation, 
disturb the stone from its bed, and place it so that its smallest 
diameter lies transversely to the bladder wound. By the com- 
bined manipulation the stone may often be pushed out of the 
bladder ; if manipulation do not readily succeed, a suitably 
shaped lithotomy forceps may be made to grasp it, and help in 
the extraction. Force must not be employed ; if the vesical 
walls appear to be stretched, and likely to tear over the shoulders 
of stone or forceps, they must be divided by a scalpel cutting 
down on the stone or the steel to what extent is necessary. In 
this operation there is no excuse whatever for the production of 
bruising or laceration. If the stone is of small or moderate 
size, it may readily be removed by forceps without the aid of 
the finger in the rectum or in the bladder. 

Extraction of Foreign Bodies. — Here the insertion of the finger 
for exploratory purposes is always advisable. The nature of the 
body, and the possible existence of ulceration or even perfora- 
tion of the vesical walls by sharp points, are made out. 
According to the information thus conveyed the mode of removal 
is decided upon. A small, blunt, or rounded foreign body may 
easily be removed by forceps. A long foreign body which can- 
not easily be tilted on end should, if possible, be divided. In 
such manipulations we must always bear in mind the possibility 
of perforating the bladder, and proceed with extreme circum- 
spection. If actual perforation exists, or is produced, the 
parietal incision should at once be prolonged upwards, the 
peritoneal cavity opened, and the wound in the bladder sutured 
in the manner to be described for rupture of the bladder. 

Removal of Tumours. — Most tumours may be removed with 
the instruments provided for the general operation. Medium- 
sized Wells' forceps, with blades set at right angles to the 
handles, will be found useful for grasping pedunculated tumours 
at their attachment to the bladder, and for twisting them off. 



REMOVAL OF TUMOURS. 685 

Volkmann's spoons or ordinary curettes will be necessary where 
scraping is emplo3^ed. Sir Henry Thompson invented several 
special forceps for removing tumours by the perineal route : 
these may be found useful in the hypogastric operation. The 
electric light introduced into the bladder may be useful for 
examining the tumour before removal, or the pedicle after it 
has been removed. 

Polypi should be twisted off. A bent catch-forceps, guided 
by the fingers of the left hand, is made to grasp the pedicle- 
close to its attachment to the bladder, and handed over to 
an assistant. A second similarly shaped forceps is placed on 
the growth immediatel}^ above the first, and twisted round, while 
the lower forceps is held stationary xmtil the pedicle is twisted 
through. Small polypi may be at once twisted off the bladder. 
Large polypi are, I believe, most safely removed by twisting 
between two pairs of forceps. The twisting of a tumour with 
considerable attachments to the vesical walls of necessity does 
considerable injury to the tissues, and may result in ulceration 
or sloughing of the vesical walls. The red-hot galvanic wire 
has been used for the purpose of dividing the pedicle. 

Papillomata with pedicles are most conveniently removed 
by twisting, as described for polypi. Small, very soft dendritic 
papillomata are best removed by scraping or curetting between 
a suitable instrument and the forefinger. Indeed, the finger- 
nail alone will suffice for the detachment of many of these 
tumours. Of larger size, these growths must be attacked with 
sharp spoons or forceps, like the "gouge" bone-forceps (which 
suits admirably). A fibro-papilloma is detached piecemeal by 
scoops or curettes guided and assisted by the finger. If a 
pedicle can be grasped, it may be twisted off. Epithelioma can 
only be scraped and curetted in the same wa3\ Most of these 
tumours lie on a bed of hypertrophied muscular tissue, so that 
there is little danger of perforating the vesical walls ; still, the 
finger should always be alongside of the instrument, to make 
certain that it does not advance too far. 

Detached tumours are subsequently removed by the stream 
of fluid sent into the bladder through the irrigator. It unneces- 



684 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

sarily adds to the length of the operation and the traumatism to 
remove every particle from the cavity as it is detached. 

Bleeding in these cases, though sometimes free at the moment, 
rarely continues over any length of time. Should it continue, 
and be at all alarming, a careful application of the actual cau- 
tery to the bleeding area through a small cylindrical speculum 
is probably the most effectual and least harmful mode of check- 
ing it. Topical application of powerful astringents may set up 
troublesome cystitis. 

It must be noted that benign tumours of the bladder have a 
tendency to return. Recurrence has taken place in at least one 
in five of all the cases operated upon. This was Guyon's pro- 
portion in 15 cases of operation ; and a study of scattered cases, 
including those of Sir Henry Thompson, shows a similar pro- 
portion. Looking at the condition which obtains in cases of 
numerous soft scattered polypi, this is not at all surprising ; for 
many of these tumours must be imperceptible to the sense of 
touch, or even microscopic. Recurrence in these cases may be 
a continued growth of the undetected tumours, as much as a 
renewed growth of imperfectly removed ones. Repeated opera- 
tion may then result in perfect cure. In the larger single growths, 
recurrence is most likely a sequence of imperfect removal. In 
the case of epithelioma that is scraped, we can expect nothing 
more than temporary amelioration of symptoms. In one such 
case on which I operated, the amount of relief from pain and 
tenesmus which followed, and continued for nearly six months, 
surprised all concerned in the treatment. If the pain and 
tenesmus had recurred, the patient would certainly have 
requested repetition of the operation : death took place from 
haemorrhage. 

In the case of malignant tumours involving the fundus, the 
propriety of resection would have to be considered. This will 
be dealt with further on. 

The operation of partial pvostatedomy has not yet been fully 
elaborated. In McGill's latest description of his operation, '■= 
three distinct varieties of prostatic enlargement are described 
* Luncet, Feb. 4th, 1888. 



PROSTATECTOMY. 685 

as being possible indications for operation. The}^ have all one 
common characteristic — " they are all growths which protrude 
into the bladder cavity, and may consequently be described as 
vesical and not as perineal outgrowths." The varieties are — 
" (i) A uniform circular projection surrounding the internal 
orifice of the urethra. . . . (2) A sessile enlargement of the 
middle lobe, situated partly in the posterior half of the prostatic 
urethra and partly in the position of the uvula vesicae. . . . 
(3) A pedunculated enlargement of the middle lobe." 

" The operation consists of two parts : (i) The opening and 
drainage of the bladder ; and (2) the removal of the prostatic 
valve, which prevents the egress of urine." For the fulfilment 
of both these conditions the supra-pubic operation is the best. 
This is performed in the way described above. The rectal bag 
should be employed. The neck of the bladder and the region of 
the prostate are carefully examined by the finger, and the actual 
variety of enlargement diagnosed. According to the nature of 
the enlargement we adopt measures for its removal. "A pedun- 
culated middle lobe can obviously be removed with ease, its 
pedicle being divided with curved scissors. A sessile middle 
lobe can be removed iij the same wa}-, helping the scissors by 
tearing with forceps. The collar enlargement is removed with 
greater difficult3\ It is, I think, advisable to divide it longi- 
tudinally by inserting one blade of the scissors into the urethral 
opening and dividing the portion above, and then passing the 
other blade into the same opening and dividing the portion 
below. We now^ have that part of the gland which projects 
into the bladder divided into two lateral halves ; these can 
be removed separately by scissors curved on the flat, or enu- 
cleated with the tip of the forefinger. Care must be taken not 
to leave any portion of the projecting valve untouched. When 
the operation is completed, whichever form of growth has been 
removed, it is advisable to see that the urethra is patent, and to 
pass the forefinger, as far as the first joint, into its canal." 
Haemorrhage is not excessive, and may easily be arrested by 
the injection of a hot antiseptic solution. The bladder is drained 
by a rubber tube carried out through the lower angle of the 



€86 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

wound, which is removed at the end of forty-eight hours. Four 
cases treated in this way by McGill made excellent recoveries, 
and were completely cured of their troubles, being able to pass 
water without the aid of the catheter, and being cured of the con- 
dition of purulent, foetid, and alkaline urine ; and in one case the 
patient was freed from symptoms of uraemia and surgical kidney. 

When intra-vesical operations are concluded, the bladder is 
washed out by irrigation through the catheter still lying in the 
urethra. The lotion in the reservoir will by this time have 
cooled down, and a sufficient amount of hot water to raise it to 
temperature of the body should be added. As the lotion flows 
out through the hypogastric wound it may be collected either 
in sponges or wet cloths, or in a properly shaped vessel held 
under the wound while the patient is turned a little on one side. 
Fragments of growth and pieces of blood-clot are washed away 
in the stream. Irrigation may be stopped when the lotion 
returns as clear as when it left the reservoir. 

Suturing the Wound in the Bladder. — The propriety of suturing 
the bladder wound has been very much discussed. Some 
surgeons absolutely condemn the proceeding under all circum- 
stances ; others as universally recommend it ; while a third 
class would limit its application to suitable cases selected 
according to the judgment of the surgeon, guided by the 
leading principles of sound surgery. 

It is unnecessary to follow the numerous arguments for and 
against the operation of vesical suture.*' It may here be 
remarked that many of the condemnatory arguments are based 
on erroneous and imperfect modes of suturing, and should not 
prevail against well-devised modes ; while too hasty generalisa- 
tions in favour of suture in general are based upon one or two 
successes in particular instances. 

That successful suture of the bladder, followed by primary 

* Those desirous of pursuing the subject will find it exhaustively handled 
by Gross of Nancy in the Memoires clu Cong/es Francais de Chirurgie. 2e Sess. 
Paris, 1886, 



SUTURE OF THE BLADDER. 687 

union, greatly adds to the comfort of the patient and the 
rapidity of recovery there can be no dispute. And, if a suffi- 
ciently large number of cases could be compared, no doubt it 
could be shown that it adds to the chances of recovery as well. 
To base an argument (as has been done) in favour of the reduced 
mortality after suture is misleading ; because suture has been 
applied chiefly in the most favourable cases and in children. 
On the other hand, although it would be difficult to prove it, 
there can be no doubt that an injudicious application of the 
suture adds to the patient's danger. 

In speaking of the indications and contra-indications to the 
employment of vesical suture, only very general statements can 
be employed. We must take into account such circumstances as 
the condition as to health or disease of the vesical walls, with 
respect to their capacity for uniting ; the condition of the vesical 
mucous membrane, as to whether it is likely to secrete inflam- 
matory products ; and the power of the bladder-muscle to 
contract and empty the viscus. 

In more than one case primary union of the bladder wound 
has taken place without the employment of any suture. -■= 

In cases where the vesical tissues are greatly thickened or 
inflamed or oedematous or gorged with blood, no attempt at 
suture should be made. Such an attempt will almost certainly 
fail to give union, and will unnecessarily add to the traumatism. 
In other cases, chiefly of very large stone, there may exist 
ulcers or abrasions on the mucous surface in the region of the 
wound : here also suturing is not likely to be successful, and 
may aggravate the ulceration, and even cause sloughing. If 
cystitis has existed for some time, and we apprehend the secre- 
tion of muco-purulent products into the cavity after operation, 
suture should not be employed. Drainage is, in fact, one means 
of treating this inflammation ; and even if suture were successful, 
the cure of the inflammation through the urethra with a closed 
bladder is not likely to be so rapid as through the bladder 
wound. Finally, if, from repeated or long-continued over- 
distension or inflammatory infiltration, the vesical muscle has 
* Amcr. Pract. and News, Feb. i6, 1889. 



688 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

lost its tone, and cannot completely empty the viscus, we should 
hesitate before adopting primary suture. Such a case would 
be where there is excessive haemorrhage, and the bladder is 
frequently filled to distension with clotted blood which cannot 
be passed in the urine. Even with a catheter passed through 
the urethra into the bladder, residual urine collects, and will 
undergo decomposition and cause cystitis. 

On the other hand, given a case in which the tissues in the 
wall of the bladder are healthy, the muscles capable of con- 
tracting naturally, and the mucous membrane not likely to 
secrete inflammatory or noxious products, then we may suture 
the bladder wound. The great majority of these cases will be 
found in children with calculus which has not set up much 
cystitis. In adults with bleeding tumour which is not associated 
with inflammation, another class favourable to vesical closure 
will be found. In old men, the most favourable conditions to 
suture can scarcely be found with stone, and rarely with tumour. 
The practice of complete closure of the wound in the bladder 
will, therefore, be mainly confined to children. A mode of partial 
closure, suitable for doubtful cases, and advisable with the view 
of closing up opened areolar spaces, will be described. A good 
many are best treated without any suture at all, while the bladder 
is, as far as possible, maintained in the condition of an open and 
exposed wound. One purpose of suture of the bladder is to 
prevent infiltration of urine : if the suturing is not perfect, it 
adds to the danger of infiltration ; and the risk therefrom being 
greatest in old men with unhealthy bladders, in these the treat- 
ment by open wound is most frequently called for. 

Of modes of suturing the bladder, a good many have been 
described. In most the practice adopted has been founded on 
the principles which guide the suturing of wounds of the intes- 
tine. It may be pointed out that the outer coverings of the 
bladder in this operation are not peritoneal, and do not exhibit 
the same tendency to rapid healing ; that the whole bladder 
wall is thicker than the intestine, although perhaps it is not 
more tough ; and that the mucous membrane of the bladder, 
unlike that of the intestine, is too thin to act as a plug against 



SUTURING THE BLADDER. 689 

the escape of fluid. Further, the actual line of incision in the 
bladder, if cleanly cut and straight, provides two broad surfaces 
of tissue prone to unite if properly approximated. 

One of the most ingenious modes of suturing the bladder is 
that described by Maynard.* The sutures are placed in two 
double rows by a special needle before the bladder is opened, 
and are used, during the opening and in the subsequent manipu- 
lations, to pull the bladder-walls forward. An obvious objection 
to this plan is, that by the traction the stitch-openings are 
stretched and dilated. The important advantages of his plan 
are, that it gives apposition, not only at and beyond the margins 
of the wound, as in Lembert's mode, but also at the cut edges. 
The most generally adopted plan is Lembert's. 

I should, with Maynard and a good few others, here prefer 
chromicised gut to silk as suture-material. Suture holes in the 
bladder are more likely to leak than in the intestine, for the 
reasons that the plug of mucous membrane below them is not 
so efficient, and that sealing up of the openings by exuded 
lymph is not so rapid. The gut swells and blocks the opening ; 
and if it should come in contact with the urine, does not carry it 
through the tissues by capillary action as silk does. Chromicised 
gut will last for a week or ten days at least, and by this time the 
full benefit of suturing will be secured. Ordinary carbolised 
gut is too rapidly absorbed. 

I would recommend the application of a double row of 
sutures : the inner row to transfix the cut muscular surface, but 
not the mucous membrane ; the outer row, after the manner of 
Lembert. Two blunt tenacula or aneurism needles are placed, 
one at each end of the wound in the bladder, and handed over 
to the assistant while the catch-forceps are removed. The 
wound is gently kept on the stretch by this means, and the walls 
at the same time kept forward. A round semicircular needle, 
with piercing but not cutting point, held in a needle-holder, is 
the best instrument for inserting the stitches. Each suture 
passes through the edge of the wound obliquely from the 
outside, close to but not piercing the mucous membrane, and 
* Glasgow Med. Journ., Dec, 1887. 
45 



690 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

picks up as much of the muscle as possible without encroaching 
too much on the limit to be covered by the second row of 
sutures. These stitches are, in fact, placed in a manner not 
unlike the " flange-stitch " of Tait. This stitch would, in fact, 
be the best of all were it possible to separate the wall of the 
bladder into layers, and were the friable muscle competent to 
bear sufficient strain ; the approximation to flanging described 
would probably be the best practical method. About four 
stitches to the inch are inserted in this way. While the 
tenacula continue to hold the wound forwards the second row 
is now placed, after Lembert's method, the terminal stitches 
passing a little way beyond the ends of the wound. They 
should alternate with the stitches of the inner row. When 
inserted the ends of the sutures are gathered together in the 
hands of the assistant, the tenacula are removed, and the sutures 
are then tied systematically from one end of the wound to the 
other. When all have been tied, their ends are cut off, and the 
bladder permitted to fall backwards to its normal position when 
empty. The whole supra-pubic space is now thoroughly 
cleansed of blood and fluid, and the tap removed from the 
irrigating reservoir, so as to distend the bladder and test the 
efficiency of the suturing. 

There is no objection to the employment of the continuous 
Dupuytren suture, if the surgeon thinks it can be properly 
applied. I have on two occasions employed, it to supplement an 
interrupted suture, and found primary healing to follow. 

The parietal wound is now sutured, after a drainage-tube has 
been placed over the line of suture in the bladder. If the ends 
of the recti have been divided, a good deal of tension may be 
required to bring the lips close ; it is better to have a little space 
gaping, than exert too much traction. The tube not only drains 
the exudations from the supra-pubic space, but acts as a safe- 
guard in the event of the suturing of the bladder not proving 
perfectly efficient, and some of the urine escaping. 

Partial suture of the bladder is not recommended unless the 
bladder is at the same time sutured to the parietes, as in the 
ordinary treatment of an abdominal cyst which is not removed. 



AFTER-TREATMENT. 691 

In old men the bladder lies low and far back, and it prevents 
unnecessary infiltration of urine to have the fundus kept well 
up in the wound by means of a stitch or two. I have on two 
occasions treated the bladder in the same way as the peri- 
toneum in laparotomy — including its walls bodily in the stitches 
which pass through the parietes. On several occasions I have 
spoken of the possible advantage of treating the whole bladder- 
wound in this way; but the lower part of it I have always found 
to lie too low down to be easily brought up to the parietes. 
Engelbach and Rollin* have written in favour of this combined 
mode of suturing bladder and parietes, while a drainage-tube 
resting in the bladder passes through the middle of the wound. 
The risk of this method is that drops of urine passing along the 
stitches may get into the peri-vesical space. One or two stitches 
at the top of the wound placed in this way could do no harm, 
and might, by keeping the bladder forward and diminishing the 
wound- area, do much good. 

After-treatment. — If the wounds are sutured, an ordinary 
dressing is applied, and fixed b}^ strapping. Many surgeons 
recommend that the bladder be kept empty by wearing a cath- 
eter in the urethra. Theoretically, this is sound; but practically, 
in children at least, I am convinced it is best to leave the 
bladder to its fate, and let the patient pass water when he de- 
sires to. I have on two occasions seen blocking of the catheter 
cause that very over-distention which we wish to avoid, and on 
the first occasion on which I dispensed with the catheter I got 
perfect primary healing. Barker and others have come to the 
same conclusion ; and, therefore, in every case where the patient 
is young, and the bladder- wound has been satisfactorily sutured, 
I should dispense with the catheter fixed in the bladder. 

If the wound is not sutured it is freely dusted with iodoform 
or boracic acid powder, or smeared with boro-glyceride, and 
covered with large pads of absorbent dressing. The value of a 
drainage-tube in the bladder is doubtful ; I have thought that it 
causes irritation sometimes, and, if the lips of the wound remain 
* Ann. des mat. des org. gen. urin., Sept., 1887, and Med. Chron., Dec, 18S7. 

45 * 



692 SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

open, I dispense with it. A piece of rubber tubing acting as a 
syphon in connection with a vessel by the bedside below the 
level of the patient has been suggested as a means of keeping 
the bladder empty. As soon, however, as the fluid in the 
bladder was exhausted the syphon action w^ould cease. If it is 
desirable to keep the bladder empty, this can be done by capillary 
action, using a small roll of gauze or cotton inside a drainage- 
tube as in cases of abdominal section. The dressing is fixed 
with two long pieces of strapping, and the patient is permitted 
to lie in any position he pleases. Intra-abdominal pressure is 
quite sufficient to keep the bladder empty, and force the secreted 
urine out at the wound ; the urine has no more tendency to 
collect in the bladder in the supine than in the lateral posture. 
Change of position is adopted simply because it adds to the 
patient's comfort. 

If primary healing after suture takes place, the sutures may 
be removed at the end of a week, and the patient permitted to 
get up in ten days. If localised redness and swelling appear in 
the supra-pubic incision, the stitch or stitches in this area should 
at once be removed. In some cases a few drops of urine trickle 
out through the wound, to be followed b}^ the formation of a 
small fistula, which spontaneously closes in a few days. If the 
fistula is large, so as to permit passage of all or the greater 
part of the secreted urine, healing will probably not take place 
for three weeks or a month. In children, even if the bladder- 
suture has completely failed, perfect healing is rarely delayed 
longer than three weeks. In any case the child may be per- 
mitted to get up and run about at the end of a fortnight. In 
one of my patients in whom primary healing was almost, but not 
quite perfect, a free discharge of blood took place into the 
bladder at the end of ten days. Similar experiences have been 
recorded by others. Obvious explanations of this peculiarity 
suggest themselves, but, in the absence of anything like clinical 
proof, had better be withheld. 

If the wound is not closed there is sometimes a tendency for 
mucus and inflammatory products to collect in the bottom of 
the vesical sac. These should be washed out as often as 



RESECTION OF THE BLADDER. 693 

necessary by means of the irrigator. The wound and every- 
thing in its neighbourhood should be kept sweet by frequent 
cleansing and the emploj^ment of suitable germicides. At the 
end of a few days, if the patient will bear it, he may be lifted on 
a sheet into a warm hip-bath, placed by the side of his bed, and 
left there for half an hour or more. If this can be done daily, it 
not only adds to the patient's comfort, but serves thoroughly to 
cleanse the parts. 

PARTIAL RESECTION OF THE WALL OF THE BLADDER. 

This operation has been performed only three or four times, 
and has scarcely yet attained to the position of a recognised 
proceeding. 

Sonnenberg* was the first to perform the operation, and 
related his case at the Fourteenth Congress of the German 
Society of Surgeons in 1885. Von Antal of Budapest f per- 
formed a partial resection in April, 1885; and Radzimowski, a 
Russian surgeon, has published in the Kief Vrach for 1886 
a similar operation. At least one other operation, not )'et 
published, has been performed. 

Sonnenberg's operation was performed on a man aged sixty, 
who had a malignant tumour in the anterior wall of the bladder. 
The supra-pubic operation was performed in the usual way; and 
the tumour was found to have so broad a base that, to remove 
it, it was necessary to resect nearly two-thirds of the wall of the 
bladder. The tumour was removed in portions, and the peri- 
toneal cavity was opened. The bladder wound could not be 
closed ; but the peritoneum was carefully brought together by 
sutures over it. The bladder was drained both by the urethra 
and by the parietal wound. The patient lived four weeks, and 
died of asthenia. At the post-mortem it was found that a new 
and water-tight cavity had formed, which seemed capable of 
being distended. 

Von Antal's case was a sub-peritoneal resection. His patient 

* " Zur partiellen Resection der Harnblase," Verhandl. d. Deiitsch. Gesel. f. 
Chir., 1885, xiv. 12. 

t Ccniralbl, /. Chir., 1SS5, p. 617. 



694 RESECTION OF BLADDER. 

was a man aged sixty-one, and to remove the growth about 
one-third of the wall of the bladder had to be removed. The 
operation was retro-peritoneal, the whole area of the viscus 
invaded by the tumour having been peeled from the peritoneum. 
Several bleeding vessels had to be tied during the operation. 
The edges of the wound in the bladder were closed by silk 
sutures, drainage tubes were inserted, and the wounds treated 
b}^ constant irrigation with thymol solution. The patient made 
a good recovery, with a fairly capacious bladder. 
Of Radzimowski's case I cannot speak. 

In carefully selected cases there can be no doubt that partial 
resection of the wall of the bladder is both feasible and proper. 
The most satisfactory operation would be where the tumour 
lay entirely in the anterior wall, when it could easily be removed 
without encroaching upon the peritoneum. A tumour lying 
behind the summit of the bladder may be resected if it does 
not involve too large an area of the walls : a base two inches in 
diameter must be the very highest limits even with an easily 
distended bladder. Removal in portions, as done by Sonnenberg, 
does not commend itself tome; and sub-peritoneal resection can 
rarely be advisable if the tumour deeply infiltrates the bladder 
tissues, for then the peritoneum is likely to be invaded with the 
new growth. Complete excision of growth, bladder- wall, and peri- 
toneum by a cutting operation would probably be the best plan 
where that is possible. I should make an attempt to bring the 
growth well into the bladder wound by means of catch- forceps ; 
then by longer forceps with angled blades pinch up the healthy 
bladder-walls behind it, and endeavour to make a closure of the 
health}^ walls all round by means of a shoemaker's stitch, so as 
to close the bladder behind the tumour before cutting it away. 
The supra -pubic incision should always be prolonged into 
abdominal section, and the bladder wound is then more thor- 
oughly closed by Lembert sutures placed on the outside. While 
this is being done, a sponge should be placed inside the viscus 
to make it bulge into the abdominal cavity, and so to soak up 
the secreted urine ; and the bowels should be well protected by 
soft flat sponges placed inside the abdomen. 



Section XIV. 



OPERATIONS FOR ABDOMINAL INJURIES AND 
INFLAMMATIONS. 



This section might, not improperly, have been named the 
Reparative Surgery of the Abdomen. It includes the whole 
subject of Abdominal Traumatism, so far as it can be dealt with 
by surgical methods, and those varieties of peritoneal inflam- 
mations which up to this time have been so dealt with. 
Abdominal Injuries are specially considered under the heads of 
Gunshot and Penetrating Wounds, and Sub-parietal Rupture 
of the Viscera, hollow and soHd. Abdominal Inflammations 
are treated as being almost identical with Suppurative Peri- 
tonitis, and specially as originating in ulcerative perforation of 
the hollow viscera, in septic conditions and in tubercular 
disease. Clinically, it is impossible to deal with these on 
identical lines, or with even balance of detail. Thus, special 



696" GUNSHOT WOUNDS. 

consideration must be given to Gunshot Wounds, to rupture of 
the Urinary Bladder, to Rupture of the Intestines, and to 
Perforative Appendicitis. These may be regarded as types of 
classes from the clinical standpoint ; while the position they 
hold in the field of practice makes independent treatment 
desirable. 



OPERATIONS FOR ABDOMINAL INJURIES. 

Gunshot Wounds of the Abdomen. 

The treatment of gunshot wounds of the abdomen by 
laparotomy is one of the latest developments of modern surgery. 
Up to 1885, according to Parkes, only six operations for this 
class of operation were recorded. Dr. Kinloch of North Carolina, 
operated in 1863. Coley* tells us that the first laparotomy for 
gunshot wound of the abdomen was by Baudens in 1836. He 
resected eight inches of the small bowel, and united the ends by 
Lembert's sutures. After the death of the patient three days 
later, an undiscovered wound of the caecum was found. Baudens 
operated a second time for wound of the transverse colon ; in 
this case simple closure of the wound was followed by recovery. 
Kocher of Berne had a success in 1883. Among the most re- 
markable of laparotomies for gunshot wound was one by W. T. 
Bull of New York, performed in 1885, in which no fewer than 
seven intestinal perforations were discovered and closed. The 
patient made a complete recovery.! To this, in the following 
year, he added another success quite as remarkable. | In 
Kocher's case,|l operated on three hours after receipt of injury, 
the stomach was perforated. The subject was forced into 
prominence by the interest manifested and the correspondence 
published in connection with the murder of President Garfield 

* Bostoii Med. and Surg. Journ., Oct. loth, 1888, 

t Boston Med. and Surg. Journ., Nov. 27th, 1885, 

\ Ann. of Surg., Dec, 1885. 

I, Corresp. Bl. f. Schweiz. Aertze, Nov. 23rd and 24th, 1883. 



ANATOMICAL CONDITIONS. 697 

by a gunshot wound of the abdomen ; the usually hopeless 
results of these injuries when untreated, and the success of cer- 
tain operations, combined with the general improvements in 
abdominal surgery, have now resulted in placing the treatment 
of gunshot wounds of the abdomen among justifiable and bene- 
ficial operations. Towards this result American surgeons have 
contributed by far the most importarlt part. 



ANATOMICAL CONDITIONS. 

Although in recent wars there has been no lack of oppor- 
tunity for studying bullet wounds of the abdomen, nor dearth of 
description of the effects produced, yet, from the fact that these 
reports have been compiled from the pathological rather than 
the operative standpoint, we have few definite data to guide us 
in making inferences from the nature of the external wound as 
to the character of the lesion produced. Studies of the results 
of certain experiments on the lower animals, and of the details 
furnished in the descriptions of operations, provide valuable 
supplementary knowledge which may be used to guide us in 
undertaking these operations. 

It may be inferred that a ball, entering the walls of the 
abdomen, pursues a straight course through it. It is true that a 
ball, entering the parietes at one point, may pass in a curved 
direction under the skin and make exit, or be embedded at a 
position not in the line of trajectory. But this is rare, and can 
occur only when the skin is struck very obliquely, and the force 
of the ball is somewhat spent. If the ball has made an exit, 
the practical inference must be that its course has been in a 
straight line between the points of entrance and exit, unless 
there are positive evidences — in sub-cutaneous discoloration, or 
the course as indicated by a probe — that the reverse is the case. 
If the ball penetrates the parietes, but makes no exit, we must 
infer injury, greater or less, to the underlying organs. 

Some information may be derived from the character of the 
parietal wound. A large wound argues a large ball from a large 
firearm, and, in the majority of cases, the most extensive 



698 GUNSHOT WOUNDS. 

injuries. It is true that shots from guns are usually fired at a 
considerable distance; but their initial force is usually much 
greater than those from revolvers which are fired close. From 
any sort of firearm a close shot will, in most cases, cause deep 
penetration ; close discharge may often be inferred from the 
presence of powder marks around the wound. A wound that is 
clean cut, and equally stained all round, usually indicates that 
the ball has struck the parietes at right angles to the surface. 
Unequal staining of the edges, with want of uniformity in the 
lips of the wound, suggest oblique impaction. A long, abraded, 
or bruised track of surface, leading up to the perforation, sug- 
gests very oblique impaction, with a possibility that the cavity 
has not been penetrated. 

It is rarely possible to get trustworthy information as to the 
course of the bullet from the position which the wounded person 
held when the shot was fired. We may be told that the shot 
was fired from the front, or the side, or the back ; but anything 
like an estimate of the angle at which the body was struck is 
rarely provided by patient or onlookers. Where there have 
been struggles, this difficulty is increased ; and in such cases 
also the injury may have been inflicted while the patient's body 
was bent or contorted, so that the track of the ball, with the 
patient in bed, may be devious, while it may have been per- 
fectly straight in the position held during the infliction of the 
injury. 

It will be seen, therefore, that, in the case of one wound, a 
consideration of external circumstances will at best supply only 
probable deductions as to the two important facts of penetration 
of the parietes and direction of the ball. In a few cases both 
probabilities may rank almost as certainties ; in a greater 
number, one inference may be made with certainty, while the 
other cannot ; certainty in every case can be secured only by an 
examination of the wound by probing, or even by incision. 

The nature of the injuries inflicted, varying according to the 
size of the bullet and the force of it, and according to the angle 
of impact on the organ, is yet fairly constant for each individual 
organ. The chances of any individual organ being struck var}^ 



ANATOMICAL CONSIDERATIONS. 69» 

directly according to the surface it presents. A ball traversing 
the anterior parietes can scarcely fail to injure bowel, while the 
chances of injury to liver, spleen, kidney, stomach, or bladder 
vary according to the route of the ball and the size of the organ. 
Again, a ball passing perpendicularly through the renal cortex 
produces very different results from one passing obliquely along 
the renal vessels and through the pelvis. A ball passing clean 
through the right lobe of the liver produces very different effects 
from one crossing the track of its great vessels. It is unneces- 
sary to multiply examples of effects, which must suggest them- 
selves to every surgeon. For practical purposes, the size and 
rapidity of the projectile may be ignored. Although a large 
and nearly spent ball produces more extensive injuries than a 
small or rapidly moving ball, yet the effects of the latter are 
quite serious enough to greatly endanger life, and make an 
almost equally urgent claim for operative treatment. In the 
case of a rapidly moving and small ball passing obliquely 
through the thicker walled hollow viscera, such as the stomach 
and the duodenum, it has occasionally been noted, once during 
operation, that oblique perforation need not be followed by 
extravasation. But this possibility cannot be counted upon as 
a probability : if the contents do not escape at once, they may 
do so later on, when suppuration or sloughing has set in. For 
practical purposes, therefore, perforation of the hollow viscera 
by bullet-wound must always be reckoned as leading to extrava- 
sation of visceral contents. 

It has truly been said that the tendency of every gunshot 
wound of the abdomen is towards death. In the great majority 
of cases death is due to a form of peritonitis which is usually 
described as septic. No doubt the peritonitic fluids are septic ; 
but it is doubtful if the death is owing to true blood-poisoning, 
rather than to severe shock. In more than go per cent, of the 
cases attacked with peritonitis, death takes place within fort}'- 
eight hours. It is true that the peritoneum has a limited power 
of disposing of septic fluids. The experiments of Grawitz and 
Wegner showed for the lower animals this fact, which has occa- 
sionally been observed in human beings. But this power of the 



700 GUNSHOT WOUNDS. 

peritoneum has an infinitesimal influence in lessening the 
death-rate from this class of injuries. Even if there has been 
a moderately perfect plastic closure of a perforation, the edges 
of a bullet-wound are so liable to undergo sloughing, that a 
secondary perforation usually takes place. A separated slough 
cast loose into the cavity has great dangers of its own; a slough 
of the mesentery which cannot fall into the bowel is, in this 
sense, more dangerous than one on the intestinal wall. 

Bleeding is, in itself, rarely fatal ; but the extravasated blood, 
when infected by free visceral fluids, provides pabulum for the 
extension of septic inflammation, and so adds to the danger. 
A small number of deaths has been caused from loss of blood 
through division of some of the large vessels. This is more 
likely to result from wounds involving the solid viscera and 
their vessels than from injuries to the hollow viscera. 



SYMPTOMS AND DIAGNOSIS OF VISCERAL INJURY. 

As recent practical experience and accurate clinical records 
thereof have done much to discredit the value of the usually 
accepted symptoms of perforations of viscera, and as incontro- 
vertible physical signs are very rarely met with, the diagnosis 
must in many cases be matter of inference from the ascertained 
course of the ball. 

Definite physical signs are afforded when there is escape 
through the parietal wound of the fluid contents of any of the 
hollow viscera, such as bile, faeces, urine, or partially digested 
food, and when there is a discharge of large quantities of blood 
in vomit, faeces, or urine. Both sets of signs are very rare : 
and the value of the escape of blood, as a sign of injury to the 
hollow viscera, is diminished by the fact that a severe contusion 
may cause a considerable intra -visceral haemorrhage. The 
escape of a large quantity of gas from ruptured bowel, which 
rises to the top of the cavity, and causes increase of resonance, 
and perhaps does away with liver dulness by getting between 
liver and parietes, has been spoken of as an unequivocal sign. 



SYMPTOMS. 701 

Tympanites, however, may produce signs very closely simulating 
the presence of free gas. 

Senn of Milwaukee,'" after a series of carefully conducted 
experiments, has recommended the method of inflation by 
hydrogen gas for the purpose of diagnosing visceral perforation. 
He himself has employed it in three cases of shot-wound, and 
with most satisfactory result in all. In one, perforation of the 
stomach could scarcely have been diagnosed without inflation ; 
and in the two others rectal inflation was of value, not onl}^ 
in proving the perforation, but in showing that a perforation 
low down in the sigmoid flexure had been overlooked after the 
operation was considered concluded. Mackie of Milwaukee,! 
Taylor of Philadelphia,! and a few others who have employed 
the method, have found it of value. The gas is contained in a 
rubber balloon, and in the tube connecting the balloon with 
rectum or stomach is a manometer to register the pressure 
exerted during insufflation. The parietal opening being made 
patulous, the gas escapes audibly, and may be ignited. The 
flame is easily extinguished by placing a wet sponge over it. 
Hydrogen gas is preferred on account of its low specific gravity, 
thus always rising to the surface ; its harmless nature, and its 
being readily ignited. 

Dulness on percussion, either in the track of the ball, or 
in the dependent portions of the abdomen, is, if present in 
marked degree, evidence of extravasation of fluids or blood. 
Localised dulness would usually be taken as indicating haemor- 
rhage: diffuse dulness, extravasation of visceral fluids. But either 
sign must be of rare occurrence, and where the}^ do occur might 
only indicate that certain portions of bowel are at that moment 
more full of fluid than other portions. The rapid occurrence of 
tympanites, too, which is most marked on the anterior abdominal 
surface, may leave the dependent portions relatively dull to 
percussion. Emphysema of the abdominal wall in the neigh- 
bourhood of the wound is occasionally observed, but it is rare, 
and it may occur without penetration of viscera. 

* Phila. Med. News, August 25th and Nov. loth, 1888, and Trans. Amer. 
Med. Assocn., 1888. t Phila. Med. Neivs, June 9th, 1888. J Ibid. 



702 GUNSHOT WOUNDS. 

The presence of blood in the urine indicates, according to 
the position of the wound, injury to kidney, ureter, or bladder. 
But extensive injury to any of these organs may exist without 
the appearance of haematuria. 

Injury to nerves or spinal cord will show itself in paralysis 
of the supplied parts. Injury to vascular trunks is inferred 
from the absence of pulsation in the femoral vessels. 

Shock is frequently mentioned as an invariable sequence 
of perforating wounds of the viscera. Experience has shown 
that it is an exceedingly variable symptom, being frequently 
marked in unimportant cutaneous wounds, while it may be 
completely absent in the worst cases of perforation. In some 
cases, it is nothing more than nerve-prostration from terror ; 
in others, it is produced by free haemorrhage, or rapid extra- 
vasation of visceral fluids. In no case can its immediate 
occurrence be said to be indicative of visceral perforation. 
Further help may be derived from an observation of the 
condition, as to its increasing or diminishing in degree, and 
as to its capacity to be influenced by mental stimulus. It is 
sometimes observed on the battle-field that a man found in a 
condition of profound shock, on being told by the surgeon that 
he has received only a slight contusion on the abdomen, has his 
nervous vigour at once restored, and returns to the fighting. 
Reassurance may help to remove nerve-shock. True " abdo- 
minal shock" from extravasation of fluid into the cavity cannot 
thus be charmed away. It is probable, however, that, in spite 
of many notable exceptions, perforation of any of the abdominal 
viscera would, in the majority of instances, be followed by shock 
more or less severe. 

One of the most important symptoms is a feeling of nausea, 
frequently accompanied with vomiting. This is not common in 
false shock, while in a considerable number of cases of un- 
doubted perforation it was present in greater or less degree. 
Our estimate of the value of this symptom is certainly not 
diminished by a knowledge of its import in other abdominal 
lesions. 



MORTALITY. 703 

MORTALITY. 

Morton of Philadelphia,* Sir William MacCormac,t N. B. 
Carson| of St. Louis, and Barker § of London, have compiled 
elaborate tables of all the cases of operations performed for ab- 
dominal injury. Morton's tables, including cases of shot-wound 
recorded up to the end of 1886, give 22 operations with 5 recov- 
eries. MacCormac's tables, extending up to May, 1882, include 
32 cases, with seven recoveries, one (Pirogoff's) being doubtful. 
Carson's tables, extending to June, 1887, include 43 cases: of 
these, 13 recovered ; one (Pirogoff's) was progressing favourably 
at the end of four days, and was then lost sight of. Barker's 
tables add 26 cases to MacCormac's 32, giving 58 cases alto- 
gether with 35 deaths. Of these 26, 16 recovered and 10 died, — 
a marked improvement on the earlier results. W. B. Coley |1 
has collected 74 cases with 29 recoveries. The most recent and 
most complete statistics of abdominal section for traumatism, 
presented at the Newport meeting of the American Medical 
Association by Morton in i88g, give no cases of section for 
perforating gunshot-wounds, with 36 recoveries — a mortality of 
62 per cent. The total mortality, considering the nature of the 
injuries, the usual condition of the patient when placed on the 
operating table, and the necessarily tentative nature of the 
earlier operations, cannot be regarded as other than exceed- 
ingly satisfactory. 



INDICATIONS AND CONTRA-INDICATIONS TO OPERATION. 

Of all penetrating gunshot-wounds of the abdomen, nearly 
eighty-eight per cent, are fatal. When involving the stomach 
or intestines, " these wounds may always be expected to 
cause death, generally from peritonitis following extravasa- 

* Journ. Amer. Med. Assn., Feb. 26th, 1887. 

t Abd. Sect- for the Treatment of Intra-Peritoneal Injury. Lond., 18S7. 

\ Jour. Amer. Med. Assn., Nov. 5th, 1887. 

§ Brit. Med. Journ., March 17, 1888. 

II Abst. in Journ. Amer. Med. Assn., Nov. 10, 1888, 



704 GUNSHOT WOUNDS. 

tion, or from very acute septicsemia." Otis " tell us that 
only six or seven unequivocal recoveries from shot-wounds 
of the stomach are known, iistulse being left in two of them ; 
while he doubts if there is even one "incontestable instance 
of recovery from wound of the small intestine." In shot- 
wounds of the large intestine the prognosis is more favourable ; 
about 20 per cent, recovering, with or without stercoral fistula. 
Wound of the gall-bladder is almost certain to cause death 
from extravasation. Under the best palliative treatment, death 
almost inevitably takes place. Therefore, if a desperate remedy 
is ever admissible in a desperate disease, it certainly is so in 
gunshot wounds of the abdominal viscera. Operation by ab- 
dominal section is certainly a desperate remedy, but it has 
already been proved to be far better than none. 

The known tendencies of penetrating ball-wounds of the 
viscera being admitted, the indication to operate follows of 
necessity on proof of the receipt of injury. By operation alone 
can the parts be put into such a condition that spontaneous 
recovery is probable, or, it might almost be said, possible. By 
operation we can check haemorrhage ; we can prevent extra- 
vasation if it has not already taken place, and remove noxious 
fluids if it has taken place ; and we can provide free drainage 
if septic peritonitis has set in. A mere recapitulation of the 
anatomical conditions provides the indications for operation. 

But contra-indications exist. Firstly, we must have regard 
to the condition of the patient. Profound collapse which is not 
due to haemorrhage is a contra-indication of weight corresponding 
to the gravity of the condition. Such collapse existing a few 
hours after receipt of injury is not so favourable as when it 
has continued for a day or more. In the former case the vital 
powers are not so much exhausted, and are more susceptible to 
resuscitating influences ; in the latter case diffuse peritonitis 
ma}^ be present, which demands a somewhat tedious manipula- 
tion during operation, and makes a prolonged call on the 
energies of the patient during cure. Undoubted and severe 
peritonitis existing on the second or third day is by most 
* P. S. Conner, Internat. Cyc. Surg., vol. ii., p. 193. 



WHEN TO OPERATE. 705 

authorities recognised as a contra-indication. In such cases, it 
is improbable that the sites of perforation would be found ; and 
if they were, that they could be dealt with without the production 
of excessive traumatism. There is little use in cleansing the 
cavity if it is to be at once refilled, and there is little use in 
looking for the perforations if they can neither be closed nor 
fixed in the wound, while there is positive danger in adding to 
the risk from traumatism. In such cases the most that can be 
done is to make a small parietal opening with the help of local 
anaesthesia, and permit the discharge of the noxious fluids and 
secretions, giving the patient the benefit of the remote chance 
of spontaneous cure with intestinal fistula. 

An important practical question is as to the best time for 
operation. In a general way, it may safely be said that operation 
should be performed as soon as possible after it has been ascer- 
tained that there is perforation of peritoneum. Coley's statistics 
show that of 39 cases operated upon within twelve hours i8 recov- 
ered, while of 22 operated upon after twelve hours only five recov- 
ered. The chance of recovery would thus seem to be greatly in- 
creased by early operation. Symptoms must not be waited for; they 
are often misleading when present, and their continued absence 
is compatible with the receipt of injuries which must inevitably 
lead to death. If there is much shock, the operation may be 
put off while the patient is closely watched and treated for an 
improvement which would justify operation. The possibility of 
the shock being due to haemorrhage must not be overlooked. 
In this, as is in so many other conditions, nearly everything must 
be left to the educated judgment of the surgeon ; it is impossible 
to provide specific or absolute rules for guidance. 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT. 

If the patient is feeble or collapsed, an enema containing 
brandy should be given before the anaesthetic is administered. 
The parietes must be thoroughly cleansed, and the pubic hair, if 
it lies near to the seat of injury or operation, must be shaved. 

46 



706 GUNSHOT WOUNDS. 

The perforated rubber sheet, if it can be used without encroach- 
ing on the field of operation, should be fixed in position. 

The instruments are the ordinary ones in use for abdominal 
section, with the addition of four or more of Makins's intestinal 
clamps. At least a dozen of the. round milliner's needles 
recommended for enterorraphy, ready threaded with silk of suit- 
able size, are provided. Thick prepared catgut should be in 
readiness, in case it is necessary to close wounds in the solid 
viscera. A number of sponge-cloths and flat and round sponges 
are kept ready, in warm antiseptic lotion. A large fountain 
reservoir, with rubber tubing and glass nozzle attached for 
irrigation, is placed in a convenient situation some feet above 
the level of the patient. A receptacle placed under the operating 
table, for collecting the fluid which escapes from the abdomen 
during irrigation and trickles over the large macintosh, will be 
found convenient. 

The Parietal Incision. — Nearly all writers on the subject re- 
commend the median incision. MacCormac, Parkes, Nancrede, 
Bull, and Morton insist upon the median incision, and give 
numerous cogent reasons for their views. Morton says that in 
nearly all the successful operations the median incision was em- 
ploj-ed. Since he wrote, however, at least five successful 
operations through incisions not median have been recorded. 
Professor McGraw of Detroit vigorously protested against the 
uniform wisdom of this plan ; but his protests seem to have been 
ignored by subsequent writers. 

There can be no doubt that, as affording most space for a 
general exploration of the whole cavity and its contained viscera, 
the median incision is best. In cases where the course of the 
ball has been across the middle line, entering at one side and 
passing towards the other ; and in others where the ball, enter- 
ing near the middle line, passes either directly backwards, or in 
an uncertain direction, vertically or laterall}^ then the median 
incision is indicated. Also, in all cases where the course of the 
ball is unknown, the median incision is the best. On the other 
hand, there are cases where an incision not median is indicated. 



PARIETAL INCISION. 707 

A ball injures only such organs as lie in its course. Reason and 
experiment combine to show that balls passing through the soft 
tissues of the abdomen pursue a course that is almost straight. 
If there is deflection, it is in the great majority of cases in ac- 
cordance with the law of equality of the angles of incidence and 
reflection. The erratic courses of balls sometimes met with 
occur in cases where the skin is perforated at a very oblique 
angle, and can rarely apply to gunshot wounds of the ab- 
domen. It may be safely inferred that a ball passing through 
the abdominal cavity follows the course it had on perforating the 
parietes ; if deviations take place after it has struck bones or 
hollow viscera, these do not influence the scheme of operation. 
Thus, in such a case as that of Barker,* where the ball entered 
three inches internal to the anterior iliac spine, the lateral in- 
cision which he adopted was better than a median incision could 
have been. A case of McGraw's, in which the colon only was 
wounded, is evidence in the same direction ; and several similar 
cases might be quoted. 

It is not, however, a question of mere convenience of ex- 
amining viscera, but also of adding to traumatism. The whole 
length of the intestine and all the fixed viscera cannot be 
systematically examined with impunity. Only those fixed 
organs which lie in the course of the ball need be examined ; 
and in the case of the movable intestines, common sense must 
be our guide in deciding as to the extent to which examination 
must be carried. Thus, if a ball passes through the right lum- 
bar region, perforating the ascending colon on its anterior and 
posterior aspects, there is no necessity for examining the 
stomach, or transverse and descending colons, or more of the 
small bowel than lies near to the seat of injury. It is unnecessary 
to multiply examples ; they will at once suggest themselves. 
It is true that the intestines may move some distance away 
from the track of the ball, and this distance may be increased 
according to the length of time which has elapsed since the 
receipt of injury. But intestines can scarcely move from epi- 
gastric or umbilical regions to the bottom of the pelvis ; or 
• Brit. Med. Jount., Nov. 26th, 1887. 
46 * 



708 GUNSHOT WOUNDS. 

from the right lumbar region to the left. And the fixed organs 
cannot move at all. We need not overdo the certainty of proving 
integrity of viscera at the expense of increasing the patient's 
risks. 

The line of incision must be guided by reasonable deductions 
from the indications as to the course of the bullet. To the 
operator the major premise in this course of reasoning must be 
the course of the ball through the parietes. I entirely fail to 
appreciate the force of the arguments so frequently urged 
against probing of the wound. Where a ball has passed, surely 
a probe may follow without much increase of danger. I should 
always probe the wound, using a very blunt instrument, which 
cannot be insinuated into the inter-muscular spaces ; and this 
probe I should leave in the track of the ball if its presence were 
of the slightest assistance in showing the line of injury. To lay 
open the track is in most cases unnecessary. 

The line of incision should be guided by a simple process of 
reasoning as to the inferred and probable course of the ball, 
deduced from the site of the aperture of entrance and the 
course of the ball. To the skilled operator (and no other should 
undertake these cases) it is a matter of absolute indifference 
where entrance into the abdominal cavity is made. The 
objections of increased haemorrhage, and division of muscular 
planes, usually urged against incisions made not in the linea 
alba or the linea semilunaris, are not for a moment to be 
considered against increased facility of access to abdominal 
organs. 

What is to be the exact line of incision it is impossible in 
general terms to indicate. In every case the inference should be 
that the organs injured lie in the line of the ball, as shown by 
the course it pursues through the parietes, and the incision 
should be made accordingly. It is probably true that the line 
of incision will in most cases fall to be made in the middle line ; 
but in an important minority the incision will be guided accord- 
ing to the principles indicated. In general terms it may be said 
that the middle of the line of parietal incision should lie over an 
imaginary point situated midway between the point of the probe 



THE OPERATION. 709 

in the ball-track resting on the peritoneum and the opposite 
wall of the cavity. 

The length of the incision must be regulated by the thickness 
of the parietes, the firmness and tension of the muscles, the 
degree of distension of the bowels, and the amount of injury 
probable or ascertained. It need be neither vertical nor trans- 
verse, but be regulated in length and made in direction entirely 
as the reasoning of the surgeon, based on the premises indi- 
cated, directs. Beyond this it is probably unnecessary to 
specify directions. 

The parietes being incised to the length desired, the lips of 
the wound are kept apart by retractors in the hands of the 
assistant. The self-retaining retractors recommended for 
certain cases of supra-pubic cystotomy (Fig. 82) will suit the 
purpose admirably, and do not require holding. 

The end of the bullet-track where it strikes the perito- 
neum is first examined, to see that no haemorrhage is going 
on, and to make finally certain as to the fact of perforation. 
The ragged, and perhaps foul, opening is cleansed with an 
antiseptic, and, if it is large, is at once closed by a con- 
tinuous crossing stitch. Any blood-clot which obscures the 
field of operation is mopped up gently, without disturbing the 
intestines. A systematic examination of all the viscera which 
lie in or near the track of the ball is now carried out. If 
haemorrhage is going on, the source of it should at once be 
sought for before doing anything else. It must be remembered 
that manipulation may set up vermicular contraction of the 
intestines, leading to displacement of their wounds from the 
line of injury; therefore, any wound or serious contusion 
observed during the exploration for bleedmg points should at 
once be grasped in catch-forceps, which are left attached. 
Again, when the bleeding point has been discovered, it may 
be temporarily secured by pressure-forceps while an opening in 
the bowel which is discharging faeces is being closed. No defi- 
nite order of procedure can be laid down. The most urgent 
calls are attended to first : the less grave injuries, while they 
may be temporarily diminished by judicious placing of forceps 



710 GUNSHOT WOUNDS. 

or sponges, are left to the end. A rapid survey of all the parts 
is made when the dangerous haemorrhage or abundant extrava- 
sation has been checked, and the full extent of the injuries 
inflicted is finally ascertained. We now proceed to the surgical 
repair of these injuries. 

At this stage, if there has been extravasation of visceral 
contents, I should recommend that abdominal irrigation should 
be commenced and continued while the closure of visceral 
wounds is being carried out. The irrigating fluid, if conducted 
over the macintosh into the receptacle provided, need not be in 
the way ; it is cleansing the abdomen, and so saving time ; and, 
perhaps most important of all, if the fluid is used at a tempera- 
ture of 105°, it will be found an excellent means of treating 
shock. The stream should be a gentle one, such as an elevation 
of the reservoir of a foot and a half above the patient would 
give. An excellent method of conveying the irrigating fluid 
into the abdomen for this operation would be to employ the 
long rubber double tubes now in use for washing out the 
stomach. As the parietal wound does not closel}'' fit the tube, 
only a portion of the fluid would escape out of the evacuating 
tube ; but this is of small moment. 

The assistant will meanwhile be looking after the forceps 
attached to the wounds of bowel or other organs, holding them 
in a bunch at the position requiring least traction in the wound. 
This plan of operation is not that usually recommended. Sur- 
geons hitherto have almost uniformly advised immediate and 
complete suture of an injury as soon as it is discovered. But 
this suturing is a tedious and irritating process, and during the 
carrying out of it the intestines will be acting violently, dis- 
placing other injured portions and adding to the amount of 
extravasation. The only advantage of immediate suturing is 
that no perforation is afterwards overlooked : forceps attached 
to the edges of the perforation, or the middle of the contusion, 
secure this advantage just as well. 

Sponge-cloths are now arranged round the opening : the 
surgeon pulls one pair of forceps to the surface, and examines 
the wound in the intestine. The other forceps are now gathered 



THE OPERATION. 711 

together and laid between the folds of a cloth, while the assistant 
prepares to help the operator. The injured bowel is care- 
full}' examined, and the mode of treatment decided upon. A 
slight contusion may be left to its fate. A moderately severe 
contusion may be doubled inwards, and Lembert's suture or a 
continuous Dupuytren suture placed in the healthy bowel beyond 
it, so that if it does become gangrenous the slough will be dis- 
charged into the lumen of the gut, and cannot escape into the 
general cavity. In cases of perforation at the free border of 
the bowel, we may adopt simple closure after cleansing of the 
edges of the wound, or closure after resection of the bruised 
edges, as seems at the time most convenient and safe. Lem- 
bert's suture (see Enterorraphy) will, in the great majority of 
cases, be found the best. For a small perforation, a continuous 
suture will be found perfectly efficient. The direction of the line 
of suture would seem to be of little importance. Multiple 
perforations occupying a small piece of bowel may require a 
more extensive resection, up to complete removal of the 
whole calibre. This is carried out exactly after the manner 
described for Enterectomy and Enterorraphy, and need not 
again be described. 

During these manipulations the bowel will be lying on a soft 
sponge-cloth placed by the side of the parietal wound. Usually 
no clamp will be required, the fingers of the assistant being 
quite efficient. If resection is to be carried out, I should recom- 
mend the employment of Makins's clamps. During the operative 
proceedmg, a sponge or two placed over the viscera will prevent 
their being extruded. A small space should be left by the side 
of the irrigating tube to permit the outflow of fluid. 

A wound at the mesenteric border is a more serious affair. 
A wound passing through the mesentery close to the bowel, or 
through the mesenteric border of the bowel, will usuall3^ by 
occlusion of the intestinal vessels, lead to gangrene of portions 
of intestine involved. For this injury the treatment must be 
resection of bowel, along with the perforated wound of the 
mesentery. If it be not necessary to remove a piece of mesen- 
tery that is actually wedge-shaped, the lines of incision should 



712 GUNSHOT WOUNDS. 

at least go well beyond the seat of injury. The wounds are 
united exactly as described for Enterorraph}^ 

Each wound after it is closed is thoroughly cleansed, and 
the bowel is returned to the cavity. When all the intestinal 
wounds discovered at the first examination have been closed, 
the bowels are pushed to one side, and kept there by a large 
sponge, while the underlying solid viscera are examined. If 
the site of lodgment of the ball can be detected, an attempt 
should be made to remove it. Bleeding vessels are, of course, 
secured. 

Perforations in the stomach are dealt with in the same way 
as in the intestine. A perforation in the posterior wall can be 
reached only after making an opening through the layers of the 
gastro-colic omentum. If it cannot be sutured by this route, it 
may be reached from the front after gastrotomy, as recommended 
for perforating ulcer of the stomach on its posterior aspect. 
In these cases extravasation of gastric contents nearly always 
takes place, and irrigation and cleansing will have to be 
specially thorough. 

Wounds of the omentum are occasionally attended with free 
bleeding, which may form a large hgematoma between its layers. 
In such a case complete amputation of the omentum above the 
site of injury would be the best treatment. A small perforation 
without bleeding should be excised, to prevent the risks of gan- 
grene, and the opening should be closed by a continuous suture. 

Wounds of the liver are by no means necessarily fatal : 
Edler's elaborate tables"'' show that of uncomplicated cases 
of shot-wound only 39.1 per cent, died, while of all cases ^^ 
per cent. died. The duration of cure was usually prolonged 
from the presence of foreign bodies in the wound, and particu- 
larly splinters of bone from the ribs : this fact suggests the 
propriety in such cases of seeking for foreign bodies, and 
removing them if found. Suppurative inflammation was the 
most frequent cause of death (37.5 per cent.) ; haemorrhage was 
the cause in 20 per cent, of the cases. Therefore, cleansing of 
the wound should be as perfect as possible, and should be carried 
* Langenbeck's Archiv. f. Klin Cliir., Bd. xxxiv. 



WOUNDS OF THE KIDNEY. 715 

out, not only by means of irrigation with a soft catheter of small 
size introduced along the track of the wound, but also by friction 
with a small pledget of cotton rolled around the end of a probe 
and saturated with an antiseptic. Bleeding must be checked 
either by the insertion of deep catgut sutures, or by plugging the 
wound with a strip of antiseptic lint or gauze, the end of which 
is carried through the perforation in the parietes. Murphy, in 
a successful case, employed suture alone. 

Wounds of the spleen cause death, according to Edler, almost 
invariably by haemorrhage. Of uncomplicated cases, 65 per cent, 
died ; of all cases, 83.3 per cent. Suppuration is rare, and then 
mostly from the presence of foreign matter. The friability of 
the splenic tissue renders closure of a gaping wound, so as to 
check haemorrhage, difficult. Parkes, however, found that deeply 
placed sutures of catgut held fairly well. If the suture fails, 
plugging with lint or gauze must be employed. Should these 
measures fail, the organ must be removed. In all cases of 
serious injury to the spleen, primary removal is indicated ; the 
results of removal for injury are far more favourable than for 
disease. 

Shot-wounds of the kidney are not so dangerous as is gener- 
ally supposed. According to Edler, death most frequently results 
from pyaemia, accompanied with peritonitis and suppuration. 
Recovery is usually very tedious, on account of the frequent 
complication of urinary extravasation. Of uncomplicated shot- 
wounds of the kidney, 85 per cent., according to Edler, get well; 
of compHcated cases, only 16 per cent.; and of all cases, 56 per 
cent, recover. If only 15 per cent, of cases of uncomplicated 
shot-wound of the kidney die, it is doubtful whether operation 
is ever indicated in this class, except on undoubted signs of 
haemorrhage or peri-nephric or peritoneal suppuration. The 
complications of renal injuries are likety to be severe — on the 
right side, wounds of liver and colon ; on the left side, wounds of 
spleen and colon — and the results of operations are therefore 
not likely to be favourable. In cases of doubt as to the wisdom 
of removing the whole organ, or of the ability of the patient to 
bear the operation, the chances of successful issue may be 



714 GUNSHOT WOUNDS. 

increased by free drainage carried out through a wound made 
in the loin. In some cases bullets have been found embedded 
in the renal tissue. 

Wounds of the urinary bladder are closed by Lembert's 
suture in the same way as wounds of the other hollow viscera. 
The whole subject of cystorraphy will be more thoroughly 
dealt with under the head of intra-abdominal rupture of that 
viscus. 

Wounds of the gall-bladder are easily diagnosed from the 
presence of bile in the cavity. If the wound involves only the 
fundus, and is not large or lacerated, it may be closed at once 
by suture. If the wound traverses both sides of the bladder 
and the liver as well, then it may be best to remove the whole 
viscus. To reach the upper wound, it would be necessary to 
partly detach the bladder from the liver, and this detachment 
would predispose to gangrene. Therefore, in such a case, 
cholecystectomy would be the safest procedure. 

Supposing now that the whole of the visceral wounds have 
been satisfactorily dealt with, and that the parts are in a con- 
dition in which repair is possible, a final cleansing of the cavity 
is carried out, and the wound is closed, with or without drainage 
as seems best. A larger nozzle may be put on to the irrigating 
tube, and the reservoir is elevated a foot or two higher, so that 
a larger and more rapid stream is conveyed inside the abdomen. 
While the fingers move the intestines about, the stream is con- 
ducted successively to all parts of the cavity, and is not checked 
till it returns as clear as it went in. Then all superfluous fluid 
is pressed out, and a few large sponges with sponge-holders 
attached are placed in the abdominal hollows, and left 
there while the stitches are inserted. They are removed, 
with any free fluid that has been left, before the stitches are 
tied. 

In some cases the state of the patient may be so grave that 
resection, or any prolonged operation of suturing, may not be 
permissible. In such cases the wounded bowel, resected or 
not as may seem best, is fixed in the wound, so as to produce 



STAB WOUNDS. 715 

an artificial anus. Temporary closure of the intestinal wounds 
in the parietal opening may always be carried out, so that 
the peritoneal cavity may be sealed off by plastic exuda- 
tions before the artificial anus is made. This proceeding is 
carried out in the manner already described for enterotomy 
and enterectomy. 



OPERATION FOR STAB-WOUNDS OF THE ABDOMEN. 

The whole subject of stab-wounds being in many respects 
similar to that of shot-wounds of the abdomen, it will be un- 
necessary to do more than specify the points of difference. 

Here again we are indebted to Morton,''' MacCormac,* and 
Gaston* for drawing up tables of recorded cases of operations. 
Morton collected ig cases, including one by a splinter of 
wood; of these, 12 recovered. MacCormac gives 18 cases, with 
10 recoveries. Gaston's table, which most nearly brings the 
operations up to date, contains 28 cases, with 16 recoveries: 
19 cases had wounds involving one or more of the viscera; 
of this number, 10 recovered and 9 died. Morton's most recent 
statistics (1889) give 79 cases, with 48 recoveries — a mortality of 
39.24 per cent. This must be regarded as a very satisfactory 
mortality, considering the nature of the injuries. 

Any sharp instrument forced through the parietes may 
perforate hollow viscera. But the effects vary widely, according 
to the nature of the instrument. A stab with a bodkin or a 
stiletto has very different immediate results from a deep gash 
with a large broad-bladed sword. But the ultimate results may 
be the same. I have seen death take place in five days from 
suppurative peritonitis, caused by puncture of the intestine by 
a fine exploring needle ; and I have known of another case in 
which a triple wound in the intestinal coats, as broad as the 
jack-knife which caused it, was not fatal in so short a time. 
In a large wound there may be protrusion of viscera — an accident 
which may sometimes be fortunate, as exposing an intestinal 

* Loc. cit. 



716 STAB WOUNDS. 

wound, and permitting, to some extent at least, escape of its 
contents outside the abdomen. Every variety of wound may be 
caused by a diversity of instruments. A jagged piece of wood, 
the spike of a railing, or the prongs of a pitchfork, will each 
have its variety of wound, partially to be inferred from the 
character of the instrument. 

Now, it has been found that stabbing wounds are by no 
means so uniformly fatal as perforations caused by bullets. The 
danger would seem, in such cases, to depend as much on the 
condition of the viscus as to fulness or emptiness, as on the 
amount of injury it has received. Through a wound of fair size, 
a viscus distended with fluid will at once empty itself into the 
peritoneum ; and, further, a distended viscus is more liable to 
be ruptured than an empty one. The rapidly-moving bullet 
goes straight through everything, full or empty ; while the com- 
paratively slow-moving instrument, pushed by hand or pene- 
trating after a fall, will push an empty viscus aside. 

The conditions vary according to the organ penetrated, just 
as they do in gunshot wounds. Cutting wounds have more 
blood effused, and death from haemorrhage is more common in 
them than in other penetrating wounds. 

Looking at the recorded cases of operation, we find that in 
several the manipulations included nothing more than cleansing 
of the abdominal cavity from blood-clot and suturing of the 
parietal wound. In Carson's case, a liver-wound was sutured, 
and death took place on the fifth day from iodoform poisoning ; 
the peritoneal cavity being found very nearly normal. In two 
cases excision of intestine had to be carried out : one died and 
one recovered. In nine cases suture of intestine or stomach was 
carried out : in one the spleen was excised ; and in several 
various wounds of omentum, mesentery and other parts had to 
be dealt with. 

Resection of the margins of the wound is not called for so 
frequently after stabbing as after gunshot injuries. In a clean- 
cut wound, simple suture without much inversion of margins 
will be efficient. Bleeding, being a more frequent and a more 
dangerous result of stab -wounds, requires correspondingly 



AFTER-TREATMENT. 717 

minute attention. In a greater number of cases than after shot- 
wounds, operation may be successfully carried out through the 
original stab-wound enlarged in whatever direction is most 
convenient. 

As to indications for operation in stab-wounds of the 
abdomen, there is a very general consensus of opinion that every 
case of undoubted penetration of the abdomen should be at once 
treated by laparotomy. The indication is only a little the less 
urgent if there is no perforation of viscera ; cleansing of the 
cavity from blood-clot, and checking haemorrhage, put the patient 
in a far more favourable condition for recovery than when these 
operations are not carried out. In any case, perforation of viscera 
cannot certainly be diagnosed till abdominal section has been 
performed. 



AFTER-TREATMENT OF OPERATIONS FOR GUN-SHOT AND STAB WOUNDS 
OF THE ABDOMEN. 

The first principle in the treatment of these cases is intestinal 
rest. If there are wounds of the stomach or upper portion of 
the small bowel, all food by the mouth must be withheld for 
from four to six days, and rectal feeding instituted. The first 
foods given by the mouth should be either dilute peptones or 
beef jellies, or peptonised milk. The patient should be kept as 
quiet as possible in bed ; change of position should be made by 
extraneous help, and not by personal muscular effort. If opium 
is to be recommended anywhere in abdominal surgery, it should 
be in such cases as these which are frequently attended with 
considerable mental disturbance. It should be given as morphia, 
and by hypodermic injection. 

When drainage has been employed either for incipient 
peritonitis or for a very abundant extravasation of intestinal 
contents, the management of the tube will demand considerable 
care and judgment. At frequent and stated intervals the cavity 
is emptied by the exhausting syringe, and the nature of the 
discharge observed. On the slightest evidence of the oncome of 



718 SHOT AND STAB WOUNDS. 

suppurative peritonitis, irrigation with a mild antiseptic (I should 
select boro-glyceride) should be carried out, and some of the 
fluid should be permitted to remain inside the cavity. The 
formation of intestinal adhesions, which is one of the chief 
dangers in acute peritonitis, is not so likely to occur if the 
intestines are kept floating in a mild watery fluid ; and the risks 
of septic absorption are lessened by the presence of an antiseptic 
in the cavity. The irrigating process may be repeated with 
advantage every few hours. With a little judgment in the 
arrangement of the contrivances, it is possible to employ irrigation 
without disturbing the patient or soiling the bed-clothing. In 
such cases stimulants in small quantities may be added to the 
nourishing enemas, and the use of the rectal tube and the hot- 
water enema for the removal of gas may be called for. 

If acute peritonitis develops soon after operation, and no 
drainage tube has been inserted, the best treatment will in most 
cases be to at once insert the tube and commence irrigation with 
hot (105° — 110°) antiseptic fluids. Several authorities in such 
cases recommend the employment of considerable doses of 
atropia alone, or combined with morphia. I should place more 
v.alue on free stimulation by the rectum, frequent turpentine 
enemas and the use of the rectum tube. The employment of 
leeching in the earlier stages has been highly spoken of, and 
Leiter's cold-water tin coil is said to have given good results. 

The parietal wound is treated exactly as in other abdominal 
operations. 



Rupture of the Intestine. 

Although only a very few operations have been performed 
for this condition, its extreme importance and the preparedness 
of surgery to deal with it will justify a somewhat detailed con- 
sideration. Our knowledge of the whole subject has recently 
been much advanced by the publication of a prize essay on 
" Contusion of the- Abdomen, with Rupture of the Intestine," by 
B. F. Curtis of New York,"^' which is founded upon numerous 
experiments, and a careful and analytical study of ii6 cases of 
recorded rupture of the intestines. MacCormacf has collected 
13 cases of operation for rupture of the intestine, simple and 
complicated, thus far without a single success. The case of 
Croft of St. Thomas's Hospital recovered from the immediate 
effects of the operation, but died from the effects of a second 
operation performed a month later for the cure of the artificial 
anus which remained. 

Pathological Anatomy. — As a result of his experiments, Curtis 
came to the conclusion that the injur}^ is not a true rupture, 
a bursting of the gut over its contents, but a contused and 
lacerated wound made by crushing between the contusing body 
and the bony parts. The danger of rupture was diminished by 
partial distension of the gut. The possibility of rupture from 
forcible impaction of the liquid contents against a fixed loop of 
bowel must not, however, be overlooked. Rapture of the 
duodenum would seem to take place in this way. I have seen 
two cases of rupture of the duodenum, caused, in one instancCj 
by a fall on the back, and in another by a severe blow on the 
back ; in neither was there fracture of spine, nor any injur}^ in 
front. 

The most common cause of the injury — in about 28 per cent. 
of all the cases — was found by Curtis to be the kick of a horse 
or a man. Next to this, and in about equal proportions, are 
' Internat. Journ. Med. Sc. Oct., 1887. t Op. cit. 



720 RUPTURE OF THE INTESTINE. 

run-over accidents, blows on the belly by weights, and falls on 
projecting points. Great velocity and small area of striking 
surfaces would seem to be most likely to cause rupture. In 
113 cases, the relative frequency of parts injured was: — 
duodenum, 6 cases ; jejunum, 44 ; ileum, 38 ; other portions of 
the small intestine, 21 ; and colon, 4. The danger of rupture 
was found to be greatest in those parts of the intestine which 
are most fixed, excluding the large intestine on account of its 
being sheltered. 

The extent of the rupture varies considerably. In about a 
fifth of the cases the rupture extended either completely, or 
almost completely, across the bowel. In a tenth of the cases, 
the ruptures were multiple. The size of rent most frequently 
observed was about an inch in length. There is a somewhat 
uncertain relation between the extent of injury and the violence 
of the blow, the more extensive injuries being caused by the 
more violent blows. This, however, in no way influences prog- 
nosis ; for small ruptures are as certainly fatal as large ones. 
The mucous membrane, in the large majority of cases, was 
found everted and bulging through the peritoneal rupture. 

Extravasation of intestinal contents is almost invariably 
found. Faecal fluids were found in two-thirds of all Curtis's 
cases ; and the existence of peritonitis in nearly all the others, 
rendered it probable that extravasation of contents had taken 
place in these also. In two cases of complete rupture, the open 
ends were so entirely closed by muscular contraction, prolapse 
of the mucous membrane, and rapidly formed adhesions, that 
the bowel was actually found to be distended above the seat 
of rupture. In some of the cases, contusions of the gut were 
found, in addition to the rupture. 

The most serious complication is injury, either as laceration 
or as contusion, to the mesentery. A laceration of the mesen- 
tery may cause death in a few minutes from haemorrhage ; and 
contusion, followed by haemostasis in its vessels, may result in 
gangrene of the bowel. In 16 per cent, of Curtis's cases there 
was either laceration or contusion of the mesentery, and these 
were among the most rapidly fatal of all. Of 15 cases of 



SYMPTOMS. 721 

laceration of the mesentery, ail but three were fatal within 
twenty-four hours. The importance of these observations, from 
a practical point of view, is self-evident. 

Symptoms. — The symptoms may be conveniently considered 
as those immediately following the injury and those occurring 
subsequently. The symptoms first observed are usually shock, 
restlessness, nausea and vomiting, retention of urine, consti- 
pation, and local pain and tenderness. In the great majority of 
cases, shock is present in a marked degree. In a few, however, 
it is described as absent. A certain amount of restlessness is 
usually noted in the early stages, but a great many cases do not 
exhibit this symptom at all. Vomiting in the early stage is one 
of the most constant of the symptoms, and where there is no 
vomiting there is usually nausea. In a few cases, blood is 
mingled with the vomit. In most, the vomit is simply the 
contents of the stomach, which, as time passes, show a com- 
mingling with bile. If the patient lives long enough, the 
vomit may become faecal ; but this is usually a concomitant of 
developed peritonitis. Urinary retention is present in about 
half the cases. No doubt this is part of the general condition 
of abdominal shock. Pain is present almost universally. It is 
nearly always of a severe character, and variously described as 
twisting, lancinating, burning, or griping. It comes on in 
gusts, and occasionally remits or intermits. Tenderness on 
palpation is nearly always complained of at the outset ; later 
on, when inflammation supervenes, it is a constant and marked 
symptom. 

Distension of the abdomen comes on soon, and is marked 
according to the duration of the case. In the later stage, when 
peritonitis is fully developed, distension becomes drum-like, and 
the abdom.en is tense and hard. With this distension tympanitic 
resonance is always present. One feature of this resonance is 
sometimes described as a disappearance of the dulness over the 
site of the liver. It would seem, however, that this symptom is 
a very variable and uncertain one. It is caused by the escape 
of gas from the intestine into the general cavity, and must take 

47 



722 RUPTURE OF THE INTESTINE. 

place in the early stages before adhesions have formed to limit 
its dffusion. 

The later sj^mptoms are essentially those of peritonitis. The 
temperature, as is usual in severe cases of peritonitis, may not 
show any rise, or may be subnormal. In most cases, however, 
there is a moderate rise of temperature, which takes place during 
the first twenty-four hours. 

The vomiting becomes faecal some time during the second 
day: constipation is then, of course, alwa3^s present. In fact 
the whole of the late symptoms are identical with those following 
peritoneal suppuration. 

Curtis distinguishes three sets of cases, according to the 
symptoms they present. In the first set, the patient never 
passes out of the condition of profound shock, and rapidly dies. 
In these cases free haemorrhage usually accompanies the injury ; 
but cases with abundant faecal extravasation without haemorrhage 
frequently die without recovering from the primary collapse. 

The second set includes those cases in which local pain and 
tenderness are marked, and in which the patient rallies to an 
attack of acute peritonitis. 

The third set includes those in which there are no very 
definite symptoms of peritonitis, but which keep the surgeon in 
constant apprehension of the development of grave conditions. 
The patient rallies very slowly, and then passes, by imperceptible 
degrees, into a condition indicating the oncome of severe peri- 
tonitis. 

Diagnosis. — The diagnosis will be assisted by a consideration 
of the cause which produced the injury, and the site of it. A 
rupture of the intestine is liable to be confoimded with simple 
contusion of the abdomen. The symptoms of contusion are 
more acute at first than those of rupture ; but in most cases the 
patient soon exhibits signs of improvement. Profound and 
immediate shock is probably more frequent in cases of simple 
contusion than in cases of genuine rupture. Restlessness is not 
so frequent in contusion ; vomiting is present in about half the 
cases. Faecal vomiting is never observed. Occasionally blood 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT. 723 

is noticed in the urine and in the stools. Abdominal distension 
is not so marked, and tympanitic resonance is rarely observed. 
Dulness on percussion has been noted as a rare symptom. The 
symptoms are thus very similar to those following rupture of 
the intestine — only they are, with the exception of the primary 
shock, less acute, and they do not last so long. 

Operative Treatment. — The prognosis of intestinal rupture 
being utterly hopeless, surgical operation gives the patient the 
only chance of life. This operation should be performed as 
early as possible. The average duration of life being only 
forty-eight hours, and the condition of the patient becoming 
rapidly worse during this time, it is evident that every hour 
which elapses lessens the chance of a successful issue to opera- 
tion. The whole question is one of diagnosis ; and in cases of 
doubt it may be permissible to wait while symptoms develop, to 
show that it is not a case of simple contusion. 

Occasionally the symptoms point clearly to haemorrhage, 
and in these cases it may be justifiable to wait while means 
are adopted to check it. Compression of the abdomen by 
bandages over a firm pillow has been recommended for this 
purpose. The amount of success which is likely to follow such 
a proceeding is, however, very uncertain. In every case the 
patient is kept at perfect rest. Examination is made as gently 
as possible ; unnecessary manipulation of every sort must be 
condemned. Stimulating enemas ought to be administered if 
the patient's condition demands it. Food by the mouth had 
better be withheld. The therapeutic value of morphia is 
doubtful : as masking the evolution of symptoms, it may be 
harmful. In the great majority of cases, however, the pain is 
so intense that the administration of morphia has usually been 
the first practical step in the treatment. 

The incision is made in the middle line ; it should be about 
four inches in length, and the middle of it should be at the 
umbilicus. If necessary, the incision may be prolonged — 
upwards or downwards, according to the site of injury. Before 
the peritoneum is divided, the presence of blood in the cavity 

47 * 



724 RUPTURE OF THE INTESTINE. 

may be apparent. If gas is present, it will rush out on making 
the opening. Pus, faeces, or intestinal fluids make themselves 
evident either at once or after the exploration of the cavity. 
For this exploration the best means is, probably, at first to pass 
the sponge on a sponge-holder into the pelvis and the lumbar 
hollows. The position of a collection of extravasated fluid will 
frequentl}'' indicate the site of rupture. Should haemorrhage be 
going on, the bleeding point must be at once looked for and the 
vessel secured. It is recommended, if the bleeding is free, that 
the abdominal aorta and the root of the mesentery should be 
compressed while the bleeding point is being looked for. In 
such a case it will usually be necessary to turn the whole of the 
intestines outside the abdomen. When the bleeding vessel has 
been secured, the intestines are now carefully examined for 
injuries. Should the haemorrhage have proceeded from a wound 
in the mesentery, the question of resection of the bowel will 
have to be considered. The decision will depend upon the 
amount of injury to the mesenteric vessels, and the condition of 
the gut supplied thereby. In most cases resection of the intes- 
tine will have to be followed by the formation of an artificial 
anus ; for the patient will rarely be able to bear complete suture. 
Where the seat of injury to the intestine is discovered on first 
inspection, and it is possible to suture it without turning the 
bowels outside the cavity, this should always be done. In every 
case where bowels have been turned outside, we should endea- 
vour to return them to the cavity as soon as possible after 
the injury has been discovered. It is unnecessary to keep the 
whole of the bowels outside while the rupture is being closed ; 
and it has been found in experiments that shock is less likely to 
be severe if the intestines are returned as soon as possible after 
the injury is discovered. 

The intestine being returned, the ruptured portion of bowel 
is brought to the surface, isolated by sponges and sponge-cloths, 
and steps are taken for its immediate closure. If there is much 
shock, it will be wise, at this stage, to start irrigation of the 
abdominal cavity with hot lotion, as recommended for cases of 
gunshot wound. In any case, by saving time in the removal of 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT. 725 

extravasated fluid, the immediate application of the irrigator 
must always be of advantage. In looking for the injured bowel 
the seat of the blow will have to guide us ; but it must not be 
forgotten that the intestine may slip away to some distance, and 
also that the injuries are occasionally multiple ; therefore the 
examination should be very extensive and very thorough. 

If simple suture of the rent is likely to suffice, this is carried 
out in the manner already described for Enterorraphy. If there 
is much bruising around the site of rupture, resection, total or 
partial, according to the position and extent of the wound, must 
be carried out. If the rupture lies on the free margin of the 
bowel, simple excision of the lips of the contused wound will 
suffice ; if, however, it lies at or near the mesenteric attachment, 
resection of the whole calibre will be required. Every case 
must be judged on its own merits ; it is impossible to lay down 
general laws applicable to all cases. 

As a matter of practice, it will probably appear that many 
cases of rupture of the intestine will be best treated by the 
formation of an artificial anus. Usually the operation will have 
to be performed while the patient is in a most unfavourable 
condition, and prolonged manipulation will be full of danger. 
The quickest operation compatible with tiding the patient over 
the period of danger will probably be, in the long run, most 
successful. It may turn out that the use of a hot irrigating 
fluid inside the abdominal cavity will considerably improve the 
patient's condition ; then the rupture may be closed while irri- 
gation is going on. 

However, as these ruptures are usually short and will rarely 
require even partial resection, their closure by suture may be 
very rapidly effected. Should it be decided to conclude by 
the formation of an artificial anus, the ends of the gut are fixed 
to the wound by means of ligatures or clamps, and left there 
for twenty-four hours, or longer, until adhesions form. 

The employment of drainage must be left to the judgment 
of the surgeon. In most cases drainage is indicated, both 
as a remedial measure for giving exit to peritoneal secre- 
tion, and as a precautionary measure by providing an opening 



726 RUPTURE OF THE INTESTINE. 

through which the cavity may be washed should peritonitis 
supervene. 

The after-treatment and general management of the case is 
the same as for penetrating wounds. 

RUPTURE OF THE STOMACH. 

Rupture of the stomach does not require special description. 
It is more rare than rupture of the intestine, on account of its 
smaller size, deeper situation, and protection by the ribs. Rup- 
ture may be complete, traversing the whole of the. coats; or 
incomplete, affecting only one or two. Peritoneal ruptures, 
according to Devergie, occur principally at the lesser curva- 
ture, and are usually multiple. The same condition may exist 
on the mucous coat, and "it is remarkable that these often exist 
just on the point opposite the external tear." Occasionally the 
mucous lining of the stomach is completely detached, and hangs 
in shreds inside the stomachic cavity. 

The symptoms are very similar to those of ruptured intestine. 
The treatment requires no separate description. The seat of 
rupture, if it lies in the posterior wall of the stomach, can be 
reached only by division of the gastro-colic omentum, and is 
dealt with in the same manner as shot or stab- wounds of the 
same part. 



Rupture of the Urinary Bladder. 

Although Laparotomy for this condition is, comparatively 
speaking, a new operation, it has been in men's minds for many 
years. Benjamin Bell proposed suture of the bladder for rup- 
ture in 1789. Blundell of Guy's Hospital, in 1824, wrote as 
follows : " Should the bladder give way in the peritoneal sack, 
why should we not lay open the abdomen, tie up the bladder, 
discharge the urine, and wash out the peritoneum thoroughly 
by an injection of warm water? " Blundell fortified his sugges- 
tion by numerous experiments ; and Grandchamps, about this 
time, performed similar experiments with the same end in view. 
A good many surgeons since then have advocated suture of the 
bladder for rupture ; among them have been mentioned Larrey, 
Gross, and Cusack. Holmes, among modern surgeons, has 
perhaps been most outspoken in his recommendation of the 
operation. Heath and Willett were the first to perform the 
operation in England. 

MacCormac has collected reports of 16 operations : of these, 
six recovered, two of the recoveries being cases of MacCormac's 
own. I have seen records of six more cases, with three re- 
coveries and three deaths. Norton has collected 27 operations, 
giving 10 recoveries and 17 deaths, a mortality of 62.9 per cent. 
The mortality after operation will always be high ; but, con- 
sidering the almost necessarily fatal termination without opera- 
tion, a very high mortality would not be a contra-indication. 

Pathological Atiatomy, — A knowledge of the pathology of rup- 
tured bladder has been greatly advanced by the monograph of 
Walter Rivington. He has collected a total of 322 cases of 
rupture of the bladder. Of these, 152 were simple fatal intra- 
peritoneal ruptures ; 30 complicated fatal ruptures ; 90 extra- 
peritoneal ruptures, simple and complicated ; and 5 in which 
the position was uncertain. The simple intra-peritoneal rupture 
is the most common, extra-peritoneal being more often asso- 



728 RUPTURE OF THE URINARY BLADDER. 

ciated with fracture of the pelvic bones. Of 288 cases, 240 
were males and 48 females. 

He found that rupture occurred most frequently in the prime 
of life, in persons between twenty and forty years of age. The 
period of survival after injury was longer in extra-peritoneal 
rupture than in intra-peritoneal. 

The causes may be divided into predisposing and acute* 
Among the former, distension of the viscus must be regarded 
as the most potent ; indeed, it v/ould seem to be almost essen- 
tial for the simple intra-peritoneal rupture to take place that the 
bladder should be full. This does not hold true for cases of 
extra-peritoneal rupture. 

Another predisposing cause is drunkenness. In a very large 
proportion of the cases, the patient has been described as pro- 
foundly or partially intoxicated. In such cases the bladder is 
usually full, sensibility is blunted, and the individual will prob- 
ably have been indulging in horse-play with companions. Under 
these circumstances, it frequently happens that an exact account 
of the mode in which the injury was produced cannot be 
obtained. 

The acute or determining causes are divided by Houei into 
idiopathic and traumatic, the large majority being idiopathic. 
The usual traumatic cause is a sharp blow of some weight 
inflicted on the lower part of the abdomen. Kicks, blows 
received in fighting, treading on the prostrate individual, bodies 
falling on the abdomen, sharp collision with prominent objects, 
are described in the category of causes. A few cases of simple 
concussion have been described as causing the rupture. 

Of idiopathic causes, by far the most common is excessive 
muscular action, combined with over-distension of the bladder. 
A few cases of simple rupture of the bladder from over-disten- 
sion have been described. Houel denies that spontaneous 
rupture from over-distension can occur in the normal bladder. 
It would appear, however, that there is no doubt that this does 
occasionally occur. Frequently the injury is predisposed to by 
the existence of so-called tunicary hernia.; that is to say, where 
the muscular fibres become separated, so as to leave a gap in 



SYMPTOMS. 729 

the continuity of the bladder-walls, and thus permit a local 
over-distension, which is afterwards easily converted into a 
complete rupture. 

It would seem that such spontaneous ruptures are, in about 
an equal proportion of cases, extra-peritoneal and intra-peri- 
toneal. 

As to the possibility of rupture taking place through exces- 
sive muscular action on an over-distended bladder, there can be 
no dispute. Lifting heavy weights ; struggling during the ad- 
ministration of ether ; straining at stool ; and straining efforts 
at micturition, are described amongst the active causes of rup- 
ture from muscular action. 

In the female, over-distension and rupture have been caused 
by retroversion of the gravid uterus. 

In most cases the rupture is on the posterior surface of the 
bladder, and is usually between one and two inches in length. 
Other positions, lateral, superior, and deep, are described ; and 
lengths of tear, varying from a quarter of an inch to three 
inches, have been met with. 

Symptoms. — The symptoms are frequently masked by the 
intoxicated condition of the patient. He may be unaware of 
the occurrence of any injury, and hours may elapse before the 
gravity of his position is discovered. 

Occasionally he exhibits no shock whatever, and is able to 
walk some distance. In a surprisingly large number of cases 
the patient has been able to walk a considerable distance with- 
out any appearance of illness, and serious symptoms have come 
on as late as twenty-four hours after the infliction of the injury. 

If the patient is sober, or only slightly intoxicated, intense 
pain is usually complained of at the moment of injury. Very 
soon faintness, sickness, and profound collapse supervene. In 
a few cases there has been a sensation as of something bursting 
inside the abdomen. The patient usually staggers and falls, 
and is unable to raise himself up or stand without support. If 
he is able to walk, he is doubled up, and leans upon any object 
he can grasp. 



730 RUPTURE OF THE URINARY BLADDER. 

Usually the shock temporarily abates, the pain diminishes 
and the patient describes himself as feeling better. Very soon, 
however, an urgent desire to pass water comes on ; but the 
patient on attempting to do so finds that it is impossible. 
Repeated attempts are followed by the passage of only a few 
drops of blood or bloody urine. Along with much tenesmus, 
there is acute pain in the hypogastric and umbilical regions, 
which is aggravated by the erect posture. The countenance 
becomes pallid and anxious and pinched ; restlessness, nausea, 
vomiting, and thirst, with great constitutional disturbance, and 
quick, small, and irregular pulse, now appear, and the gravity of 
the case is evident. The patient by this time will have sought 
for medical relief, and the surgeon will usually pass the catheter. 
Only blood or blood and urine escape in drops, and the patient 
gets no relief. The catheter, in passing, either enters with great 
ease, passing upwards for an abnormal distance, or it is checked 
near the neck of the bladder, and it is found impossible either 
to rotate the instrument or to depress it between the patient's 
thighs. These different conditions depend on whether the 
catheter passes through the rent in the bladder, or impinges 
against the walls of the collapsed viscus. Should the point of 
the catheter enter the peritoneal cavity, it may be moved about 
in all directions, and its point may be felt with abnormal dis- 
tinctness through the parietes. In such a case there can be no 
doubt as to the existence of rupture of the bladder. In cases 
of doubt, before removing the catheter a measured quantity of 
warm antiseptic lotion — say, about eight ounces — should be 
injected through the catheter. The use of the rectal bag, by 
pushing the viscus forwards against the parietes, will here be 
found of advantage. While the fluid is being injected, the 
supra-pubic region should be percussed for evidence of in- 
creased dulness. When the full quantity, has been injected, the 
fluid is permitted to flow out. If there is rupture, only a portion 
of the fluid will come away ; if there is no rupture, the whole of 
it will be collected. 

In cases of extra-peritoneal rupture, the symptoms are not 
so severe ; shock is not so great ; and symptoms of peritoneal 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT. 731 

inflammation do not come on so rapidly, and are not so 
severe. 

In cases of complete intra-peritoneal rupture, symptoms of 
peritonitis very quickly appear, with abdominal tenderness and 
distension, sickness and vomiting, feeble, irregular, and rapid 
pulse, and hurried thoracic respiration. The patient is tor- 
mented with a strong desire to pass water, and makes frequent 
but ineffectual efforts to do so. Pain is usually severe, some- 
times agonising. 

In making the diagnosis, it is important to find out whether 
the bladder was full at the time of the accident. Many cases of 
haematuria, depending upon simple contusion of the bladder, 
are attended with symptoms of collapse, depending usually on 
serous injuries of another sort. In all cases of abdominal injury 
it must be noted that secretion of urine is liable to be diminished 
or even suppressed. In any case of doubt, the rapid aggrava- 
tion of the symptoms and the increasing gravit}^ of the patient's 
condi4;ion will help to clear up the diagnosis. 

Operative Treatment. — It is now universally admitted that, on 
the diagnosis of intra-peritoneal rupture of the bladder, opera- 
tion should be immediately performed, and that the best 
operation is abdominal section and suture of the rent in the 
bladder. The sooner the operation is performed, the better. 
The chances of recovery are greatly diminished after twenty- 
four hours have passed, although a few cases of recovery after 
operation later than this have been recorded. 

The technique of the operation is of the simplest possible 
description. An incision is made in the middle line immediately 
above the pubes, and the cavity entered in the ordinary way. 
The lower end of the incision may have to be carried down to 
the pubes. 

The existence of rupture will usually be signalised by the 
escape of blood-stained urine mixed with serum. Should the 
recti muscles be very tense, part of their insertion into the 
pubes may be divided, and the size of the opening may be 
further increased by the use of suitable retractors. The incision 



732 RUPTURE OF THE URINARY BLADDER. 

will usually require to be a long one, as it happens that a 
majority of the patients are stout or powerful men. 

The posterior surface of the bladder is exposed as fully as 
possible by pushing the intestines upward into the cavity, and 
keeping them there by means of sponges of suitable size and 
shape. The position of the rent will, as already remarked, be 
usually found on the posterior surface midway between the 
summit and the base of the bladder. Should it lie low down, 
it will be found that the rectal bag will materially assist subse- 
quent proceedings by elevating the field of operation. 

We now proceed to close the rent in the bladder. Should 
the rent lie low down, this may be a proceeding of considerable 
difficulty. MacCormac found that transverse incisions made on 
each side through the peritoneum liberated the bladder, and 
permitted it to be raised up higher towards the surface. 

Various methods of suturing the bladder are in vogue. For 
intra-peritoneal rupture Lembert's suture is probably the best. 
MacCormac used it in his two successful cases. Dr. A. Brenner, 
an assistant in Billroth's clinic, has been experimenting on 
dogs, with a view to discover the best mode of suture for closing 
wounds of the bladder. The variety he recommends is a sort 
of purse-string suture made with two threads. . The threads 
are carried round the wound at a distance of an inch or less from 
the margin — one under the muscular coat, the other under the 
sub-mucous tissue, great care being taken that nothing enters 
the mucous membrane. When the sutures are pulled tight 
the wound is gathered together in a rosette-like form, which 
alters the shape of the bladder. This is essentially Tait's 
"flange stitch," which he has used for some time in cases of 
vesico-vaginal fistula, and also in rents of the hollow viscera. 
Numerous other experiments have been carried out with the 
same object in view. The majority of experimenters combine 
in recommending interrupted silk sutures, inserted after Lembert's 
plan, or some simple modification thereof. There is no strong 
objection to the use of catgut, provided it be chromicised ; but, 
for suture of a peritoneal wound, silk is probably, on the whole, 
the best material to use. For the introduction of the sutures a 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT. 733 

curved or corkscrew needle with a handle is best. Keyes of 
New York, in an operation, used a Reverdin needle, and speaks 
very highly of it. The insertion of a blunt hook in the top of 
the rent may add to the facility of introducing the suture ; and 
the wound may further be steadied by first inserting two or 
three sutures at each end of it, and handing the threads over to 
an assistant, who, by dragging on them, keeps the wound on the 
stretch and towards the surface. 

MacCormac very wisely continued the suture for some way 
beyond the angles of the wound, thus adding to the length of 
infolded tissue, and strengthening the whole. The needle used 
should not be very sharp-pointed. Each stitch should penetrate 
the peritoneum and muscle, but no stitch should enter the 
bladder. The sutures must be placed closely; about eight to 
the inch is a fair proportion. 

When the sutures are tied, and the wound is closed, it should 
at once have its security tested by the injection of warm anti- 
septic fluid into the bladder. Should it be found water-tight, 
the abdominal cavity may now be irrigated, and the wound 
closed. Should leakage take place at any point, additional 
sutures should be inserted ; for this purpose Dupuytren's con- 
tinuous suture may be employed. 

Irrigation of the whole cavity with warm antiseptic fluid is 
now carried out. This must be very thorough, and must include, 
not only the pelvic regions, but the whole cavity as high as 
the diaphragm. Extravasated urine soon becomes diffused 
throughout the abdomen, and partial cleansing is likely to be 
ineffectual. If the fluid is of a temperature exceeding loo'", 
such irrigation is further beneficial by improving the condition 
of shock. 

The question of drainage is an important one. Should we be 
fully satisfied as to the trustworthiness of the suture, drainage 
need not be employed ; but it will sometimes happen that the 
surgeon will not be satisfied without the insertion of a drainage 
tube. The tube can do no harm ; while, by permitting the 
escape of any fluid that may leak through an imperfect stitch- 
hole, it may be of conspicuous benefit. At the end of twenty- 



734 RUPTURE OF THE GALL-BLADDER. 

four hours, should it appear not to be wanted, the tube can 
easily be removed. 

It is usually recommended that vesical drainage be carried 
out either through a catheter in the urethra, or through an 
opening made in the perineum. Perineal section adds consid- 
erably to the risk of the operation ; and the retention of the 
catheter has been found to be unnecessary, while it adds to the 
risk of urinary decomposition. 

MacCormac is in favour of leaving the bladder to empty 
itself. He says that if the rent be effectively sutured, the 
patient runs less risk from moderate distension of the bladder, 
which is all that can possibly occur in a case properly watched, 
than he does from the practice of retaining the catheter for some 
days within the viscus. There is less objection to drawing the 
water by means of the catheter at short and stated intervals. 

The making" of an opening in the bladder behind the peri- 
toneum, as in supra-pubic cystotomy, has been recommended 
by several surgeons. This should rarely be necessary; and, as 
it adds considerably to the risk, should not be adopted. 



RUPTURE OF THE GALL-BLADDER. 

Rupture of the gall-bladder will rarely be diagnosed as a 
separate lesion, but will usually be come upon as a complication 
of other abdominal lesions for which operation has been per- 
formed. Although rupture of the viscus at any part may take 
place, and in more than one instance the whole bladder has 
been found completely torn away from its attachment, the most 
common seat of rupture is in some part of the cystic duct. 
Cases of rupture of the common duct, and of the hepatic duct 
or a branch of it, have been recorded." 

Experience and experiment combine to show that the escape 
of bile into the abdominal cavity, from rupture of the gall-bladder 
or its ducts, is not necessarily fatal. Edler gives the general 
mortality at 74.2 per cent. This mortality would certainly 
justify operation for every case, if the operation could be per- 
* See Morris, Intcrnat. Cyc. Surg., vol. v., p. 883. 



RUPTURE OF SOLID VISCERA. 735 

formed early. In most cases of uncomplicated rupture, operation 
will not be called for till some time has elapsed, and peritonitis 
has developed. In every case where the diagnosis is probable, 
and the patient is in a fair condition, operation should be per- 
formed. 

In most cases, the best operation would probably be chole- 
cystectomy, or removal of the bladder. Should the rent be a 
small one, and within convenient distance, it ma}' be sutured. 
Should it lie near the fundus, it may be sutured to the margin 
of the parietal wound, as in cholecystotomy for gall-stones or 
empyema. Should it lie deep down, or involve the cystic duct, 
a ligature should be placed around the duct below the seat of 
rupture, and the bladder cut away above it. Rupture of the 
hepatic or common ducts are beyond the range of surgical inter- 
ference, except by drainage, which ma)' keep the patient alive ; 
while protecting or uniting adhesions may form, and restore 
the continuity of the canal. The formation of a fistulous com- 
munication between the common duct and a portion of intestine 
would, if it were practicable, be sound surgery. 



RUPTURE OF THE SOLID VISCERA. 

Operation in rupture of the solid viscera may be called for 
either on account of haemorrhage, or the formation of an abscess 
in the wound, or suppurative inflammation in the peritoneum. 
The primary operation to check haemorrhage can rarely be per- 
missible, on account of the usually grave nature of such injuries, 
which leaves thepatient in a condition of collapse so profound that 
a serious surgical operation cannot be contemplated. Second- 
ary bleeding may take place after temporary blocking of the 
vessel ; then operation may be possible. Success is most likely 
to follow operation when the patient has rallied to the formation 
of an abscess resulting directly from the traumatism, or to the 
development of peritonitis from the escape of the gland secretions. 
In certain cases of severe injury, removal of the organ may be 
the only feasible operation. 

Rupture of the solid viscera is produced in a manner very 



736 RUPTURE OF THE SOLID VISCERA. 

similar to rupture of the hollow viscera. The characters of the 
lesions are practically the same as in penetrating wounds : their 
progress is similar, and the symptoms are mostly the same. 
Therefore, as but very few operations have been performed for 
this class of injuries, and as these have mostly been already 
described under the organs, a special description need not here be 
given. Morton has collected i8 cases of operation for rupture 
of the solid viscera : of these only two recovered. For further 
information, the reader is referred to Edler's elaborate mono- 
graph,* and to Morris's article on " Injuries and Diseases of the 
Abdomen," in the International Cyclopc?dia of Siirgevy.\ With 
special reference to rupture of the liver and its consequences, as 
a collection either of pus or bile, Briddon I writes in a very 
suggestive manner, and his suggestions are supported by a very 
successful case. Burckhardt,§ in describing his case of suc- 
cessful operation for haemorrhage from a wound of the liver 
produced by a stab from a butcher's knife, deals with the whole 
subject in a very instructive manner. 

* Arh. f. kliii Chir. 1887. xxxiv. t Vol. v., p. 875. 
J N. Y. Med. Journ., Jan. 31st, 1885. § Centvalbl. f. Chir. No. 5. 



OPERATIONS FOR SUPPURATIVE PERITONITIS. 

In this sub-section we have to deal with those conditions 
usually grouped under the name of suppurative peritonitis. In 
all of them peritonitis of some sort exists ; but in some of them — 
as, for instance, in perforating ulcer of the stomach — the inflam- 
mation may not have had time to proceed to positive suppuration, 
although this ending is the inevitable one. Operation performed 
early is then preventive. 

It is remarkable how many cases of suppurative peritonitis 
are caused by perforative ulceration of one or other of the hollow 
viscera. And of other causes of suppurative peritonitis, certainly 
a majority must be attributed to direct contamination from 
escape of purulent or other noxious matter from contiguous 
collections. Suppurative peritonitis, which is not tubercular or 
traumatic, is almost invariably connected with perforation of 
viscera, or bursting of collections of pus or other noxious fluids. 

Cases of perforation by malignant disease, either bi-mucous 
or muco-peritoneal, as not being amenable to surgical treatment, 
or, at least, as not having as yet been so treated, are not 
included. 



48 



Perforating Appendicitis ; Caecitis ; Colitis. 

Much uncertainty exists as to the meaning of the terms usually 
employed in connection with the inflammatory diseases of the 
caecum. Musser "■'' attempts to give definiteness to the names in 
general use by using typhlitis for inflammation of the caecum ; 
peri-typhlitis for inflammation of the peritoneum covering the 
caecum ; and para-typhlitis for inflammation of the connective 
tissue behind the caecum. The confusion starts with the name 
typhlitis: it has no definite meaning. Most anatomists maintain 
that there is no connective tissue behind the caecum ; and the 
term para-tpyhlitis would by them be rejected. Inflammation 
of the caecum can scarcely exist without inflammation of the 
peritoneum which covers it, and therefore the term peri-t3^phlitis 
is superfluous. 

Pathological knowledge now enables us to give names that 
definitely indicate the source of disease, and these I have 
ventured to adopt. The vermiform appendix, the caecum, and 
the whole length of the large bowel are liable, at any part where 
faeces or foreign bodies may rest, to undergo a localised inflam- 
mation which has a tendency to ulcerate and permit extra- 
vasation either into the peritoneum or into the cellular tissue 
overlying the wall of the gut. In this sense, ischio-rectal abscess 
is identical with suppurating peri-typhlitis. The clinical results 
are dependant on the situation where the perforation takes place; 
the pathological origin is essentially the same for all. Naming 
according to locality is therefore permissible, and we may 
properly speak of perforative ulceration of the appendix, the 
caecum, the colon, and the rectum. 

In connection with abdominal surgery, it happens that 
perforative appendicitis is by far the most important. Caecitis 
that perforates, almost of necessity involves the peritoneum; but 
where the seat of inflammation is near the colon, there may be 
cellular infiltration as well. In the transverse colon the con- 
Med. and Surg. Rep., Phila., Jan. 7th, 18S8. 



PATHOLOGICAL ANATOMY. 739 

dition is rare ; but it has been found, and has been described 
as a cause of bi-mucous fistula between colon and stomach. 
In the descending colon it is more common : I have opened 
abscesses, caused by perforatmg colitis, eight times ; and I have 
seen two other cases in the practice of colleagues. 



PATHOLOGICAL ANATOJVTY. 

Inflammation of the vermiform appendix is usually connected 
with all the inflammatory diseases which occur in the right 
iliac fossa : in other words, typhlitis, in the vague meaning 
which it usually has, is said to depend upon this cause. 

Fagge, Wilks, Fitz, Musser, Pepper, and indeed most 
recent writers on the subject, adopt this view. Although 
there can be no doubt that the majority of cases of so-called 
t\'phlitis originate in this way, it is certain that a few do not : 
at least one such, in which there was a double perforation of the 
caecum, was successfully operated upon by McMurtr}^ of Dan- 
ville, Ky."'' Suppurative appendicitis is a perfectly distinct 
disease, having no more relation with the caecum than with the 
ileum, or bladder, or an}- other contiguous organ. The disease 
commences, as is well-known, in a catarrhal inflammation of the 
mucous m.embrane of the appendix, started usually either by 
a foreign bod}' or by faecal concretions. The opening of the 
appendix into the caecum is almost uniformly narrowed, and 
pus cannot escape backwards into the caecum. A small per- 
foration takes place in the appendix: a few drops of putrid, 
perhaps faecal, matter escape into the peritoneum and set up 
inflammation of that membrane. The peritoneum is thickened 
in the neighbourhood of this inflammation, and limits the 
diffusion of the pus. As suppuration goes on, protective inflam- 
mation takes place ahead of it, and successive attempts are 
made to prevent general diffusion of the matter. Should one of 
these attempts fail, the matter escapes into the peritoneal 
cavity, and we get what ma}' be called the acute termination of 
perforative appendicitis. Should the attempts at conservative 
* Journ. Amcr. Med. Assn., July 7th, 188S. 
48 -^= 



740 PERFORATING APPENDICITIS. 

limitation of the matter succeed, we get an abscess surrounded 
by a mass of thickened peritoneal exudate, which may remain 
imruptured for some considerable time. This is a chronic term- 
ination of the disease. Operative treatment is, in the one case, 
instituted to deal with diffused peritonitis; in the other, with a 
chronic localised abscess. In both cases the mischief lies inside 
the peritoneal cavity. It is scarcely conceivable that it should 
force its way through the peritoneum into the surrounding 
cellular tissue. 

Pathological descriptions of the true termination of this 
disease are usually vague. Some would seem to imply that 
the sub-peritoneal cellular tissue has been entered, and that the 
pus has burrowed its way along the pelvic fascia or in other 
■directions ; but there is no actual proof that this has taken place, 
and in the face of the abundantly demonstrated fact that the 
peritoneal membrane is capable of almost unlimited powers of 
thickening and condensation in the neighbourhood of inflam- 
matory mischief, we should want very cogent proof that per- 
foration from the inside actually takes place. 

In the case of early perforation with diffuse suppurative 
peritonitis, there may be a very small abscess sac surrounding 
the seat of perforation. In cases of a chronic nature the abscess 
may be of considerable dimensions ; more than a pint of pus 
has been evacuated. Of course, a chronic large abscess after a 
prolonged course may burst into the general cavity, but before 
this takes place the patient is brought to a ver}' low ebb. In the 
centre of these abscesses, the appendix is usually found in a state 
■of acute and general inflammation. Occasionally a small por- 
tion, or even a considerable part of it, may be gangrenous. 

The foreign body which has caused the perforation may or 
may not be found : of 125 cases collected by Dr. Fenwick, in ^^ 
a foreign body was found ; probably a rigid search would have 
discovered one in a greater number. Of 98 cases of perforation, 
13 were caused by tubercular and 6 by typhoid ulceration. 

In the case of acute perforation with small abscess sac, there 
is no surrounding thickening or sign of inflammation either in the 
abdominal walls or in the contiguous viscera. Dulness on 



SYMPTOMS. 741 

percussion is absent. In fact, increased resonance may be 
present. In a chronic case with a large abscess there is cuta- 
neous oedema in the right lumbar region, with general thickening 
in the abdominal cavity, while the percussion note is usually 
more dull. This last condition is very similar to that produced 
by true caecitis or typhlitis or peri-typhlitis, as the condition is 
impartially named. Here also we may have thickening of 
parietes, with oedema or even redness. The inflammation is here 
caused by the escaping fluids passing, not into the peritoneal 
cavity, but into the cellular tissue between the layers of the 
mesentery of the colon. The induration is more even, it is 
nearer the surface, and, from the fact that it surrounds the colon 
or the caecum like a cup, and is not usually very thick, 
resonance may be given out on percussion. 

On the left side, perforative colitis produces conditions very 
similar to caecitis. 

SYMPTOMS. 

Perforative appendicitis is usually found in boys between 
lo and 13 years of age, although it occurs at other periods of 
Hfe. 

The symptoms of perforation of the appendix vermiformis 
are either very acute, or acute supervening on chronic, or chronic 
throughout. 

In the most acute cases there are either no premonitory 
symptoms whatever, or these are very vague and unimportant. 
The patient is suddenly seized with severe pain in the iliac 
region, symptoms of collapse rapidly set in, and death takes 
place in a few hours. Vomiting, rapid thoracic respiration, 
abdominal distension, and the ordinary symptoms of violent 
suppurative inflammation of the peritoneum are present. 

In the second class of cases the patient will have complained 
for a few days, or perhaps weeks, of vague obscure pains in the 
right iliac region ; he may have continued getting about or even 
doing his work, and may have exhibited few symptoms of illness 
beyond constipation and dyspepsia or other intestinal disturb- 
ances. Diarrhoea is sometimes found. Some patients have these 



742 PERFORATIVE APPENDICITIS. 

symptoms more marked ; they are obliged to stay in bed, appetite 
is capricious, there is a Httle evening temperature, occasionally 
a rigor, and constipation is decidedly troublesome. Suddenl}' 
these symptoms are changed for others of a violent and grave 
character. Rupture of the peri-appendicular abscess has now 
taken place, and the pus is diffused into the peritoneum. A 
few such cases have become acute after an examination by 
medical men. 

In the chronic cases the symptoms, at first not serious, very 
gradually become more grave. In these cases histories of 
repeated previous attacks are not uncommon. Usuall}' there 
is a history of long-standing intestinal derangement, with loss of 
appetite ; occasional attacks of acute pain referred to the right 
iliac region ; and sometimes vomiting. With exacerbations and 
remissions the disease progresses fitfull}^ until finally the patient 
has to take to bed. Evening temperatures (roi'' to 103°) of a 
hectic character, occasionally with rigors, now appear, and the 
patient exhibits the well-known symptoms of abscess formation. 

Locally, there is a distinct swelling or increased hardness in 
the region of the caecum. There is dulness on percussion. The 
overlying skin may be cedematous, but is rarely red, and there 
is great tenderness on pressure. 

A most important sign may be got by examination through 
the rectum. 

As the appendix lies near to the brim of the pelvis, we may 
expect to find any considerable collection of matter in its neigh- 
bourhood within the reach of the finger introduced through the 
rectum. To completely examine the pelvis with this object, 
it has been recommended that the whole hand should, if neces- 
sary, be introduced. The existence of fluctuation may sometimes 
be made out in this way. In any case the detection of an 
inflammatory mass of thickening in the region of the appendix 
is, coupled with the rational symptoms of appendicular inflam- 
mation, a most important diagnostic sign. 

In the case of true caecitis or colitis, either in the neighbour- 
hood of the caecum or on the left side, the pus, escaping into the 
sub -peritoneal connective tissue, at once sets up a diffuse 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT. 743 

cellulitis which, in the majority of cases, proceeds rapidly to 
suppuration. In some cases the inflammation produces that 
hard brawny form of inflammation which we are so familiar 
with in pelvic cellulitis ; the inflammation is diffused along the 
parietes under the peritoneum, either coming up towards the 
front or burrowing towards the back, and most frequently 
tending to point somewhere above the middle of the crest of 
the ilium. There is no large localised collection of matter, it is 
spread over a large area, and lies much nearer to the surface 
than in true appendicular suppuration. I believe that suppu- 
rative pericolitis on the right or the left side is more common 
than is generally supposed. Of eight cases on which I have 
noAV operated six were on the right side, and most of these had 
been diagnosed as perityphlitis. In no case, fortunately, has 
it been possible to verify the diagnosis post-mortem ; but a 
large retro-peritoneal abscess in the lumbar region, with con- 
tents of a foul fffical odour, must have originated in a perfora- 
tion of the colon discharging into the areolar tissue between 
the layers of the mesocolon. 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT. 

Mild cases may get well if the patient is kept in bed at 
perfect rest, if the diet is such that no residual excrement is left, 
and if local depletion of blood or counter-irritation is employed. 
But it must be remembered that, while apparently satisfactory 
progress is being made, acute symptoms may, without any 
warning whatever, come on to indicate that perforation has 
taken place. 

A good many such cases have been recorded, and in some of 
them this evil result has apparently been due to manipulative 
interference from examination. 

When to operate is a very difficult question to answer. For 

recurrent typhlitis Treves* has had the courage to put into 

practice a plan which at once commends itself to favour; 

namely, to remove the appendix after the acute attack has 

• Med.-Chir. Trans., vol. Ixxi., p. 165, and Lancet, Nov. loth, 1S88. 



744 PERFORATIVE APPENDICITIS. 

passed off. In two cases on which he operated each had a 
diseased and distorted appendix, and both made good re- 
coveries. The gravity of the preceding acute attack must 
be the criterion as to the propriety of operation during the 
period of calm which follows. Fitz in his valuable monograph 
puts down the hmit at three days, after the onset of acute 
symptoms, striking the average of all the cases. But it is never 
safe to strike an average between extremes; at least, to act 
practically upon such a calculation would in this case be wrong. 
No definite rule can be laid down as to the time of operation. 
Symptoms alone must guide us. It is true that perforation in a 
few cases takes place while the patient is in apparently good 
health. These cases must be attacked as soon as possible if 
serious symptoms come on. The delay of even a few hours 
may make all the difference between recovery and death after 
operation. In sub-acute cases the patient should be put to bed 
at once, carefully watched, and not too frequently examined. 
Operation should be performed as soon as the patient is palp- 
ably drifting into a condition in which the chances of recovery 
after operation are markedly diminishing. Consecutive evening 
temperatures for four or five days, rising over 102°, would seem 
to justify operation. Always, on the supervention of acute 
s}^mptoms, operation should at once be performed. In the 
more chronic cases delay maj^ not be so dangerous. It is 
rarely possible to say definitely whether the chronicity depends 
on a slight degree of the inflammation, or on the completeness 
with which the suppurating focus is shut off from the general 
cavity. The existence of a mass of inflammatory tissue as 
detected by the rectum or by palpation through the parietes is 
an indication for operation. If the patient is losing ground; if 
hectic supervenes, possibly with rigors ; and, generally, if the 
condition seems to be drifting into one in which operation would 
be dangerous to life, then we should interfere. 

In the case of peri -colic suppurative inflammation, the 
decision need not be difficult : operation simply waits on the 
formation of an abscess in the parietes, as it does on the forma- 
tion of an abscess anywhere else. 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT. 745 

The question of exploration with a fine aspirating needle has 
been both recommended and condemned. If the suppuration 
is deep down around the appendix, the use even of a fine hypo- 
dermic needle is attended with danger ; an aspirator needle, 
under any circumstances, need not be used. In cases of doubt 
as to the existence of pus in the parietes, there is no objection 
to the use of a needle ; but to push the needle inside the 
abdominal cavit)', and through several layers of peritoneum, 
is dangerous. The use of the exploring needle by the rectum 
has not the same objection ; but here also its use is not free 
from danger. The enlargement of the exploratory puncture by 
the rectum into an opening sufficient for drainage, has been 
recommended and carried out ; but as it is impossible through 
this route to make out the actual condition at fault, or to remove 
the diseased or gangrenous appendix, or the foreign body, we 
should always select abdominal section when the patient will 
bear it. 

The site of incision should be selected according to the 
ascertained or probable position of the actual mischief we have 
to deal with. In most cases the best position will be directly 
over, or a little to the inside of, the position of the caecum. 

Parker made an oblique incision above Poupart's ligament. 
Some surgeons recommend a median incision ; others, one 
through the linea semilunaris. No doubt the median incision 
makes it certain that the disease, wherever situated, may be 
reached ; but if the abscess is small and lies deep, this incision 
will have to be prolonged to a considerable length to expose it. 

The incision — vertical, oblique, or transverse, it matters not 
to the practical surgeon which — is made over and a little to the 
inside of the probable seat of the mischief. It is carried through 
the peritoneum in the ordinary way. Great care must be taken, 
at every step of the manipulation, that bowel is not injured, and 
that pus is not diffused through the peritoneal cavity. Should 
pus appear at any part in the field of operation, it should at 
once be mopped up, and the parts infected by it should be 
cleansed by irrigation. Cautiously proceeding downwards 
through the area of matting, teasing bowels apart between 



746 PERFORATIVE APPENDICITIS. 

sponges, never using the knife, isolating the healthy portions 
from the diseased with sponges or sponge- cloths, we ultimately 
reach the seat of mischief. Pus, if lying free in the cavity, may 
be sucked out by a syringe, or mopped out by sponges, or 
washed out by the irrigator. At the bottom of the cavity,- the 
diseased appendix will usually be found. It should always be 
cut away : this is simpler and safer than any possible method 
of suturing the opening. It should be removed close to the 
caecum. It may be cut off beyond a surroxmding ligature, and 
either invaginated bodily inside the caecum, which is stitched 
up over it ; or, after being tied, the serous covering may be 
drawn together over the mucous membrane by means of the 
figure-of-8 suture. 

The parts having been thoroughly cleansed by washing and 
by sponging, the drainage-tube is inserted and carried through 
the opening in the parietes. Adhesions between bowels are, as 
far as possible, left undisturbed. 

The advantage of having the incision in the parietes directly 
over an abscess-cavity is more apparent now that we have to 
institute drainage. 

If the caecum has been perforated, the opening may be turned 
inwards, and the serous coat drawn together by a Lembert's or 
a Dupuytren's suture. The abscess -sac, if there is one, is 
thoroughly cleansed, and a drainage tube placed at the bottom 
of it and carried out through the parietal wound. 

If there is diffuse peritonitis, the whole cavity must at the 
same time be thoroughly cleansed by irrigation. 

Peri-colitis resulting in abscess is practically a retro-peritoneal 
abscess, and its treatment requires no special description. On 
evacuation of the abscess, the opening in the bowel sponta- 
neously heals in the great majority of cases. 



Perforating Ulcer of the Stomach. 

Pathological Anatomy. — It is unnecessary that I should give a 
detailed account of the pathological anatomy of ulcer of the 
stomach. The following points are noteworthy from a surgical 
point of view. The disease occurs in women tv/ice as frequently 
as in men. In women, perforation is most liable to take place 
between the ages of 14 and 30; in men, curiously enough, the 
average age at which perforation occurs is 42, and the propor- 
tion of cases increases up to 50. From a surgical point of 
view, it is important to note that the perforating ulcer lies, in 
the large majority of cases, in the anterior wall of the stomach. 
Dreschfeld '•' says that the ulcer perforates on the anterior 
surface 85 times out of 100 cases ; while, on the posterior 
surface onl}' 2, and in the pylorus only 10, out of 100 per- 
forate. 

It is a pathological fact, confirmed by clinical experience, 
that those ulcers v/hich perforate are usually those which have 
given but slight indications of their presence. Profuse haema- 
temesis occurs in those cases where the ulcer lies near to the 
large vessels close to the curvatures, and here perforation does 
not usually take place. Severe pain is usually an indication of 
peritonitis taking place over the ulcer, and this peritonitis is 
protective against perforation. Dilatation of the stomach arises 
mostly from cases where the ulcer is situated near the pylorus; 
here we usually find enormous hypertrophy of the muscular tissue, 
as well as peritoneal thickening, and here also perforation is 
uncommon. 

Symptoms. — The ordinary symptoms of perforation of sto- 
machic ulcer are — pain, collapse, t3-mpanitic distension of the 
abdomen, with fixation of its parietes, thoracic respiration, and 
frequent retching, but not vomiting. 

The pain is usually very severe, and comes on in paroxysms 
* Med CJiroH., Nov., 1887. 



748 PERFORATING ULCER OF STOMACH. 

similar to those observed in colic. It frequently comes on after 
some violent exertion, but also has a definite relation to fulness 
of the stomach. In many there is no apparent special cause. 
Profound collapse is present at the outset in many cases ; but in 
some the collapse is only nerve-shock, induced by extreme 
pain. As the collapse increases, and becomes profound and 
constitutional, the pain diminishes. 

Tympanitic distension may come on very soon, with hard 
tense parietes. Rigidity of parietes, a sort of reflex spasm, 
affecting the abdominal muscles, and preventing abdominal 
movements of any sort, is described as frequently present. This 
rigidity has been found to accompany a depressed abdomen, 
but more frequently there is distension; in any case, distension 
soon appears. Tympanitic resonance, usually most marked in 
the epigastric regions, is a common sign. Associated with this 
condition we sometimes find the very important sign of dis- 
appearance of the iiver-dulness. This sign is important, because 
it indicates the presence of free gas in the abdominal cavity, 
and can scarcely arise from any other cause than perforation 
of an air-containing viscus, such as the stomach or the intestine. 
The value of this sign is lessened if the case is not seen very 
early after the advent of the acute symptoms ; as, later in the 
case, it is liable to be confused with general intestinal distension, 
or special distension of the transverse colon. It is a presump- 
tive sign in favour of the presence of free gas in the cavity if it 
changes its position with that of the patient, always rising to the 
highest part of the abdomen. 

Vomiting is nearly always absent in perforating ulcer of the 
stomach, though there is usually nausea, with retching and 
eructations. Vomiting is probably a mechanical impossibility ; 
the compressed stomach discharges its contents into the general 
cavity through the perforation, and not through the gullet. 

In a short time unequivocal signs of peritonitis appear. The 
superficial, quick thoracic respiration ; the fixed, hard, tense, 
and perhaps distended parietes ; the quick, thready, feeble pulse, 
and the profound general disturbance, clearly indicate the 
oncome of peritonitis in aggravated form. The temperature is 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT. 749 

misleading ; in the worst cases it is subnormal. Then we 
observe the pinched, anxious countenance, the diminution or 
loss of pain, and the advancing collapse, with cold, clammy 
skin, which indicate the approach of death. 

A very few cases, too few to be for a moment considered in 
drawing up rules as to treatment, have recovered. In these 
cases it is safe to infer that the opening was small, and partly 
protected b}' exudations, and that the extravasation was limited 
in amount. 



operative Treatment. — As to the advisability of operative 
treatment, from a theoretical point of view, there can be no 
dispute ; operation alone will put the patient into a con- 
dition where recovery is possible. The practical drawbacks are, 
the condition of the patient, usually so grave as almost to 
contra-indicate operation, and the frequent uncertainty as to 
diagnosis. It has been suggested that all cases of sudden and 
severe abdominal shock should be treated by operation ; a 
hearty agreement with this suggestion would, however, probably 
add many cases of aggravated colic to the already large list of 
diseases for which abdominal section has been performed. In 
less acute cases, where the patient rallies to an attack of peri- 
tonitis, operation is most likely to be successful, provided tJie 
patient is not permitted to sink too low. 

The operation has as yet scarcely a history. Several sur- 
geons have strongly advocated it, and very few surgeons can 
have been brought into contact with a case without having 
the operation suggested to their minds. Of the few operations 
performed, not more than one, or perhaps two, have been fol- 
lowed by success. Sinclair of Manchester ••' was very near 
having a success, although he did not reach the perforation ; 
the patient lived six days after operation. Czern}-, in a 
case which, like Sinclair's, was sub-acute, and operated on five 
days after perforation had taken place, found odourless gas in 
the cavity, and points out that the presence of gas, with a faecal 
* Med. Chron., May, 1887. 



750 PERFORATING ULCER OF STOMACH. 

odour, would indicate perforation of the large intestine or the 
lower ileum, A second case, more acute, died." In Sinclair's 
case there was no escape of gas on opening the peritoneum. 

From the reports of the cases published so far, it is impossible 
to draw definite conclusions as to the best method of operating. 
The proceeding need not be difficult, but it should be conducted 
in a manner so as to give the most perfect results in the shortest 
possible time. A long incision will usually be necessar3\ As 
soon as the fact of perforation, or of suppurative peritonitis, has 
been demonstrated, it will be a good plan at once to commence 
irrigation with hot aseptic lotion. The value of irrigation with 
hot fluid has already been demonstrated sufficiently to justify 
its adoption in all cases of abdominal operations where shock 
and extravasation of fluids into the cavity exist. In any case, 
irrigation will have to be carried out, and it may as well be 
carried out during the exploration for the seat of perforation, 
and the closure of it, as afterwards. 

As to the technique of the operation, nothing need be added 
to the description of gastrorraphy already given. It is there 
recommended that the edges of the ulcer should be pared. 
Experience may prove this to be unnecessary. But we know so 
little of the true pathology of gastric ulcer, that we cannot 
guarantee a cessation of the disease after operation ; there- 
fore, as it adds little to the difficulty or the danger of the 
operation, the edges of the perforation had better be cut 
awa}'. 

* Beil. ziim Ccntralbl. f. Cliir., No. 24, 1888. 



Perforating Typhoid Ulcer. 

Kussmaul of Strasbourg,* Bartleet of Birmingham (unpub- 
lished), Morton of Philadelphia,! Liicke,]: Volkmann, Mikulicz, 
and Bontecou of New York § have performed operations for 
perforating t3'phoid ulcer. Four years ago, in the Bristol 
Infirmary, I opened the abdomen for a large collection of pus 
and faecal matter, which may have originated in this way. 
There was a double perforation through the large bowel as well 
as the small ; the material of rectal enemas, as well as partly 
digested food given by the mouth, came out through the parietal 
fistula which was formed. The patient lived four weeks, and 
died of exhaustion. As no post-mortem examination was per- 
mitted, it is impossible to say whether the disease was really 
typhoid fever. So far, only one case — that of Mikulicz — has 
recovered ; and it was doubtful if the ulcer was t3'phoid. 
Dr. James C. Wilson ij was the first publici}' to recommend 
operation for these cases. Morton has operated twice, and has 
carefully worked out " the conditions for which, and under 
which, the operation may be performed. 

It is quite impossible to lay down positively the principles 
which should guide us in selecting cases suitable for operation. 
A selection of cases is clearly necessar}-. To perform abdominal 
section on most cases of perforating typhoid ulcer, would be 
little better than performing a post-mortem examination on the 
operating table. Perforation frequentl}^ takes place during con- 
valesence ; a few of these cases may permit of operation. 
Most cases justifying operation will be of the very mildest or 
"ambulating" variety. The operation has undoubtedly a future 
before it ; but it must be undertaken onl}' with extreme caution, 

* Deutsche Zeit f. Chiy., i8S6 — 7, xxv., i., 4. 

t Med. News, Phila., Nov. 26th and Dec. 24th, 1887. 

I Deutsche Zeit. f. Chiy., xxv., i. § Jouyn. Aiitcy. Med. Ass., Jan. 28th, i888. 

II Phila. Med. Times, Dec. nth, 1S86, *1 Loc. cit. 



752 PERFORATING TYPHOID ULCER. 

and under the most favourable conditions as regards the patient's 
condition and surroundings. 

The symptoms need not be described. It may be noted that 
the acute symptoms of sudden perforation, with abundant 
extravasation of visceral contents, are by no means always 
present. In a few the symptoms are simply those of peri- 
tonitis ; and, in some, the symptoms are so obscure that 
perforation is not even suspected. 

As to the operation itself, I cannot do better than utilise 
Morton's description of it : 

" Median incision will undoubtedly prove best in almost 
every case. It should be as long as is necessary for efficient 
work, and commence a little more above the pubes than is 
usual in such incisions. Extreme gentleness will be required 
throughout, as otherwise, perhaps in any case, other ulcers may 
be broken through. Let systematic search for lesions commence 
at once upon gaining admission to the peritoneal cavity, starting, 
in order, at the points most liable to involvement. We should 
examine the caecum and its appendage ; then carefully go over 
the entire length of the small intestine continuously, from its 
termination in the caecum to its origin at the pylorus, by passing 
it between the fingers. This finished, in like manner the colon 
should be examined ; then the mesentery, ovaries, liver, etc. 

" What shall be done with lesions when found ? This is a 
vital, and not an altogether answerable, question. 

" Perforations, in the great majority of cases, will be found 
in the small intestine corresponding to the position of Peyer's 
patches. Occasionally a follicle ulcer will perforate near the 
mesenteric border, but probably never so close to it as to 
produce the trying injuries which are made by a bullet or 
knife. In the caecum, or colon, perforation is equally liable to 
occur anywhere, except close to the meso-colon attachments. 
The usual position of these lesions is fortuitous, as the situation 
permits of most easy reparative treatment. 

" Shall we resect a perforated bowel, simply turn in the 
borders of the perforation, or attempt the production of an 
artificial anus ? 



PERFORATING TYPHOID ULCER. 753 

" In the lack of experience, nothing positive can yet be said 
upon this point. We do know that circular gangrene of intes- 
tine occurred in the single instance where exsection has been 
done ; but this may possibl}^ have been due to some defect of 
operation. A large perforation, or a small opening through the 
base of a very large, deeply excavated ulcer, would probably 
require excision of a portion of bowel. Such an ulcer occurring 
in the small intestine would be in its longitudinal diameter ; 
hence it can be turned into the bowel entire by Lembert 
sutures introduced beyond its lateral borders. This I should 
be inclined to think the best method of dealing with most 
perforations, or ulcers about to perforate. The possibility of 
narrowing the bowel immoderately must be kept in constant 
view ; and where the above suggested mode of repair would 
undoubtedly give rise to it, resection or artificial anus must be 
substituted. 

" It is possible that the necrosis of bowel already alluded to 
resulted from the absence of resistance in tissues so profoundly 
poisoned and malnourished as, of necessity, are those of a typhoid 
individual. We do not even know what course the parietal 
incision itself would follow, but I deem it probable that, with 
thorough cleanliness, such wounds could be induced to heal 
kindly. At the worst, happen what may, the patient can be in 
no more deplorable condition than before operative interference 
was carried out. We know nothing of what possibilities there 
may be in this direction, and I would plead for an attempt to 
reduce a mortality of one hundred per cent. If resection cannot 
successfully be done, and the affected area is too large for 
efficient stitching, then artificial anus would be another resource. 

"Whether any one of these three methods of treatment is the 
one, or whether all will have occasional use, must be determined 
by trial and experience. The order in which I should suppose 
them valuable would be : stitching by Lembert's method, 
resection, and, lastly, artificial anus. 

" In the examination of the intestine I should also be inclined 
to turn into the bowel lumen, by the same method of stitching, 
any seats of disease which appeared likely soon to perforate, or 

49 



754 PERFORATING TYPHOID ULCER. 

to approach dangerously that condition. Caecum and colon 
lesions could, probably in every case, be treated by simple 
stitching. 

" Large irrigations with ver}^ hot distilled or medicated water 
are indispensable before closing the abdomen. Just as important 
will it be to drain these cases thoroughly, and for this purpose 
nothing answers so well as the leaving in of a Keith glass-drain. 
This tube can best be kept in working order ... by 
carrymg a rope of absorbent cotton (medicated, if preferred) 
to its bottom, and removing it as often as a wad of cotton placed 
over the outlet becomes saturated. The rope and superimposed 
cotton must be renewed as it becomes saturated, even as fre- 
quently perhaps as every couple of hours for the first day; 
afterwards, at less frequent intervals, according to circum- 
stances." 

Irrigation with a hot lotion is recommended after the opera- 
tion on the bowel is concluded ; there would probably be no 
objection to irrigating while the operation is going on. A 
drainage tube should always be inserted. 



Perforative peritonitis may be induced by causes other than 
those mentioned above — as, for instance, from ulcer of the 
duodenum, from traumatic ulceration of intestines or intestinal 
diverticula produced by foreign bodies, and from progressive 
ulcerative division of the intestinal coats by constricting bands. 
In the urinary bladder, perforation may result from disease, or 
from ulceration produced by calculus or foreign body ; in the 
gall-bladder, a gall-stone may ulcerate its wa}^ through its walls, 
or an empyema may burst. All these conditions are rare ; and 
as operations have not yet been performed for them, they need 
not be described. 

The rupture of an abscess or a suppurating cyst may be 
reckoned among the causes of perforative suppurative peri- 
tonitis. 

Almost any abdominal cyst may suppurate. Strangulation 
from twisting of the pedicle of a glandular or dermoid cyst of 



RUPTURE OF ABSCESS. 755 

the ovary may cause suppuration of its contents, and these may 
escape into the abdominal cavity. A glandular pelvic abscess ; 
a peri-typhlitic abscess; a hepatic, a renal, or a splenic abscess, 
are all liable to burst into the peritoneal cavity. Ovarian 
abscess untreated is nearly alwaj^s fatal, from bursting into the 
peritoneum : and pyo-salpinx may be fatal in the same way. 
A suppurating extra -uterine foetation is essentially an intra- 
peritoneal abscess, and death is frequently caused by its 
rupture. 



49 



Purulent Collections in the Pelvis. 

To give an adequate account of the whole subject of pelvic 
inflammation would be at once to go beyond the scope of 
this work, and to trench on the domain of pure gynaecology. 
I shall therefore do little more than name the conditions found 
which require surgical operation ; the treatment by operation, 
being simple and very similar in detail to operations just re- 
viewed, will be described very briefly. 

The great majority of suppurative inflammations in the 
pelvis may be grouped under the three heads : Pelvic Peri- 
tonitis ; Pelvic Cellulitis and Abscess ; and Suppurating 
Hsematocele. 

Pelvic Peritonitis, which ends in suppuration, depends, in the 
great majority of cases, on pyo-salpinx. This is a fact not 
sufficiently appreciated, and it is necessary to emphasise it. 
Bernutz, in 1857, first pointed this out, and much pathological 
evidence has since then accumulated. Bernutz published 
reports of 13 post-mortem examinations of patients dying 
with pelvic peritonitis : in g one or both tubes contained pus, 
and in 2 tubercular products. The recent investigations of 
Polk, Coe, Noeggerath, Foster, Emmett, and many others, all 
point in the same direction. Maury''' has collected much evi- 
dence in support of this fact, and considers it so important that 
he prints the conclusion to be drawn from his evidence in Italic. 
He considers that it shows " that the common, every-day form 
of chronic pelvic inflammation which attracts the attention of 
the gynaecologist, as well as the simple acute pelvic inflam- 
mation which is met with unconnected with septicaemia, is 
pelvic peritonitis associated with diseased appendages, and 
is not pelvic cellulitis." 

Pelvic peritonitis, not suppurative and connected with the 
formation of adhesions or localised collections of serum, is 
* Amer. Syst. of Gynac, and Obstet., 1887, vol. i. 



PELVIC CELLULITIS. 757 

referred to in the section dealing with removal of the uterine 
appendages. Here we have to deal only with peritonitis which 
results in suppuration. The walls of such an abscess are partly 
pelvic viscera — uterus, intestines, rectum, or bladder — and partly 
peritoneal adhesions. Somewhere in the abscess-cavity, being 
similarly disposed both as to locality and as to cause with a 
perforated vermiform appendix, lies the diseased ovary or tube 
which is the cause of the mischief. The intestines are matted 
together around the suppurating focus, and their function may 
be so interfered with as to produce s37mptoms of intestinal 
obstruction. 

Pelvic Cellulitis is retro-peritoneal, and involves the whole of 
the para-metric cellular tissue and its extensions; that is to say, 
it may involve the connective tissue which surrounds the cervix 
and upper vagina, passes up the sides of the uterus between 
the layers of the broad ligaments, and outwards between these 
structures as far as the sides of the pelvis, and even beyond this 
in the cellular tissue which rises over the peritoneum under the 
abdominal parietes. In any part of this large area an abscess 
may form either as a direct result of traumatism, or as a septic 
invasion through the abundant lymphatics. In this category 
must be included suppurating pelvic lymphatic glands. 

The abscess may burrow in almost any direction in the 
pelvic cellular tissue, and may point in an endless variety of 
situations in vagina, rectum, or bladder, and through the 
parietes almost anywhere below the umbilicus. The purulent 
collection is always sub-peritoneal, and rarely bursts into the 
abdominal cavity, being usually fatal through high temperature 
and septic absorption. 

Suppurating Pelvic HcBrnatocele is usually extra-peritoneal, and 
situated between the layers of the broad ligament. Intra- 
peritoneal ha^matocele is most frequently fatal before suppu- 
ration can take place ; but examples of degenerations of 
sanguineous fluids, apparently exuded guttatim from an un- 
health}' tube during menstruation, have been recorded. A 



758 PURULENT PELVIC COLLECTIONS. 

suppurating pelvic haematocele is, when fully developed, clini- 
cally and anatomically very similar to pelvic abscess originating 
in cellulitis. 

The symptoms of a collection of pus in the pelvis are 
sufficiently definite, and do not require detailed description. 
The constitutional signs of suppuration are usually well marked ; 
the temperature is usually high, sometimes very high. The 
diagnosis can be made only after a careful digital and, if neces- 
sary, bi-manual examination by the vagina and rectum. It is 
impossible to insist too strongly on the importance of digital 
examination. Percussion through the parietes may be mis- 
leading on account of distension of the intestines, and palpation 
from the front may reveal nothing. A pelvic abscess may, and 
frequently does, kill a patient without producing a single 
external sign to the examining hand or eye beyond abdominal 
distension and fixation of the parietes. In every individual with 
symptoms of suppuration inside the abdominal cavity, whatever 
be the history of the case or the age of the patient, a careful and 
exhaustive vaginal or rectal examination should be made. 

Such an examination will reveal either induration, with a 
localised enlargement somewhere in the pelvis, or a positive col- 
lection of fluid. This collection may occupy Douglas's pouch, 
and bulge into the vagina behind, displacing the uterus forwards; 
or it may lie on one side of the uterus, pushing this organ to the 
opposite side, and forcing downwards the vagina laterally; or it 
may seem to occupy the whole pelvic cup, pushing down its 
floors and surrounding the true pelvic organs. In other cases 
there is only induration along the cellular planes in the pelvis, 
while the purulent collection lies near to the abdominal surface, 
or actually in the abdominal wall. 

The diagnostic examination usually causes great pain, and 
may have to be conducted under an anaesthetic ; in every case 
the surgeon should be prepared to operate at once on the 
diagnosis being made, and while the patient is still anaesthetised. 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT. 759 

Operative Treatment. — The indication to operate in suppurating 
pelvic inflammations is as clear and definite as the indication for 
any other abscess, and should be acted upon without delay. 

As to the mode of operation, two conditions of prime 
importance must be taken into account: one is the condition of 
the patient ; the other, the point at which the abscess may most 
easily be reached and drained. My experience is, that these 
patients, when the surgeon is called in, are very ill, with exceed- 
ingly high temperature (io4°-io6'') and profound constitutional 
disturbance. In some of them there will be symptoms of 
intestinal obstruction. I have had three such cases in my own 
practice, where the condition I was called in to treat was 
described as intestinal obstruction. All these influences com- 
bine to add to the risk of any difficult or prolonged operation. 
Again, the position of the abscess must be taken into account. 
An abscess lying low down in the pelvis cannot be drained 
through the anterior parietes without carrying the pus through 
a health}^ district of peritoneum, and thereby inducing risk of 
general peritonitis. Such an abscess may positively invite 
opening through the vagina. And this invitation, if the patient 
were at all ill, I should unhesitatingly accept, even though I did 
not at that operation discover and remove the cause of the 
mischief. Another advantage of the vaginal opening is, that it 
can be made without the use of an anaesthetize, and very slightly 
upsets the patient. 

I am aware that, in urging these views, I am at variance 
with very high authority, which enjoins a uniform opening of 
pelvic abscess by abdominal incision. I would urge that many 
of these cases are so ill that the administration of an anaesthetic 
and abdominal section are proceedings infinitely more grave 
than a simple puncture through a mucous membrane ; that 
drainage by vagina can efficiently and safely be carried out so 
as to cause immediate collapse of the abscess sac ; and that if the 
issue of the case proves that the origin of the disease — a suppu- 
rating ovary or tube — remains and requires removal, this ma}' be 
done later on, when the patient has escaped the immediate risk 
to life and has gained strength. 



760 PURULENT PELVIC COLLECTIONS. 

In one such case I found, after abdominal incision, that 
the abscess-sac lay so deeply in the pelvis that its walls could 
not have been brought to the surface ; I therefore opened it 
into the vagina, and closed the parietal wound. In another 
case — an enormous pelvic abscess, the horribly foetid contents 
of which spouted over our heads through the long exploring 
needle — I was unable to bring the walls of the sac to the 
abdominal opening, and the drainage tube had to be carried 
through healthy peritoneum. In a case, exactly similar to 
these, about five pints of horribly offensive pus were evac- 
uated by vaginal incision ; and the patient, although in 
the last stage of exhaustion, made an excellent recovery. 
Two Infirmary patients treated in the same way did equally 
well, and one of these would almost certainly not have borne 
abdominal section. 

While I advocate, for these conditions, the application of the 
maxim " Ubi pus, ibi evacua," I would not seek to contest 
the theoretical advantage of operating by a method which will 
enable us to satisfactorily deal with and remove the cause of 
the disease. Many cases, chiefly those in which the abscess is 
small, can be dealt with only by abdominal section ; and others 
are met with in which abdominal section is quite permissible, 
from the fair condition of the patient. In all of these, the direct 
incision through the parietes should be selected. 

A detailed account of the operation would be a mere 
repetition of previous descriptions. The wall of the abscess is 
usual!}' more or less completely covered by adherent intestine : 
a part on the surface is looked for to which intestine is not 
attached, and here the aspirator needle, guarded with one or 
more sponges, is inserted. As the sac collapses it is drawn 
towards the surface by means of catch-forceps, and if possible 
attached to the parietal wound by a continuous suture. In 
those cases where the sac is an adventitious one composed of the 
walls of adherent viscera, this is impossible, and the cavity must 
be drained by a glass tube carried to its bottom. Here the 
cavity should be thoroughly cleansed b)' irrigation and mop- 
ping with sponges charged with antiseptic material. Diseased 



TUBERCULAR PERITONITIS. 761 

appendages, if discovered, are of course removed. Adhesions 
between intestines need not be broken down unless it is neces- 
sary to do so on account of secondary collections of pus. The 
breaking down of adhesions seems to add greatly to the condition 
of shock, and it is doubtful whether such separation of adherent 
surfaces is more than temporary. It is possible to do too much 
in these cases ; a complete and perfect surgical technique may 
be carried out at the expense of the patient's life. The first 
essential is evacuation of pus and provision for drainage ; then 
we may seek to isolate the cavit}' of the abscess by suturing its 
walls to the parietal opening ; perfect irrigation and cleansing, 
with separation of adhesions and removal of causes, is the final 
proceeding, to be carried out only if the condition of the patient 
will warrant it. 



Tubercular Peritonitis. 

The operative treatment of tubercular peritonitis has been 
stumbled on by accident, rather than carried out by design. 
A good many cases of operation for encysted cases of this 
disease have been performed by mistake for ovarian dropsy 
or other allied condition. Many of these were found to recover, 
and hence abdominal section for tubercular peritonitis of a cer- 
tain class has come to be carried out with deliberate purpose as 
a mode of treatment promising success. Possibly one hundred 
such operations have been performed in the last twenty j^ears. 

Dr. Kuemmell of Hamburg* collected 30 cases of this kind, 
beginning with one of Spencer Wells, in 1862 Of these cases, only 
2 died directly from the operation ; 3 died from tuberculosis, in 
periods varying from 5 to 12 months. Altogether there were 25 
cures, of from 9 months to 25 years' duration. No doubt many 
cases died which were not reported, and it is probable that this 
mortality is too favourable ; still, there can be no doubt that a 
considerable number of cases of undoubted tubercular peritonitis 
have been cured or have had their lives prolonged b}' abdominal 

section. 

* Centralbl. {. Chir., 1887, xxv. 



762 TUBERCULAR PERITONITIS. 

It must be admitted that this is an exceedingly surprising 
fact. Some years ago I operated on a case of encysted 
ascites, caused by tuberculosis of the peritoneimi. The cavity 
was washed out and drained, and, speaking from the information 
which was then before the medical profession, I had no hesitation 
in prognosing that the patient would die. Death took place at 
the end of six months, and diffuse tubercular disease was found 
affecting the peritoneum. Alongside of this case I may quote 
one recently reported by Ely van de Warker of New York,'' 
which is similar to it in many respects. He says: " I made an 
incision about five inches long, fully expecting to come upon a 
cyst ; but on reaching the peritoneum, no separation could be 
made between it and what ought to correspond with a cyst-wall, 
and yet what we regard as the peritoneum was enormously 
thick. I carefully worked my way through it, and was rewarded 
by a jet of fluid from what appeared to be a cyst-cavity. The 
incision was enlarged to the full extent of the external wound, 
the patient turned upon her side and the cavity emptied. Some 
further attempts were made to separate a cyst-wall from the 
peritoneum, but it only resulted in tearing the peritoneum from 
the abdominal wall. The idea of a cyst was abandoned, and 
we confined our efforts to find out the nature of the case. By 
inserting the hand a mass was brought into view which was 
so thickened and matted together that it was with difficulty 
recognised as intestine. The peritoneum was rolled out and 
found to be studded with a great number of tubercles, from the 
size of a millet-seed to that of a buck-shot — some of them white, 
others yellow. The intestines were everywhere beset with 
them. The transverse colon, thickened and covered with 
tubercles, was adherent to the peritoneum from side to side, 
thus enclosing the cavity and giving to the fluid the appearance 
of being confined within the walls of a cyst." The patient made 
an excellent recovery ; and at the end of three months, from 
being in a condition of somewhat marked invalidism, she became 
a strong, robust woman. In a case on which I operated in the 
Bristol Infirmary in April of this year which had a solid mass of 
* Jouvn. Amer. Med. Assoc, Nov. 5th, 1887. 



TUBERCULAR PERITONITIS. 763 

caseated material in one broad ligament, and the whole perito- 
neum covered with tubercles, but no ascitic fluid and no adhesions, 
I did nothing, being convinced that meddlesome interference 
would only accelerate the end. 

Similar and even more striking cases of recovery have been 
recorded ; and altogether there can be no doubt that the operative 
treatment of tubercular peritonitis has, in many cases, been 
attended with extraordinary success. 

It may be, and has been said in criticism of these results, 
that the disease in these cases was probably not tubercular at 
all ; but more than one case has shown that not only the true 
structure of miliary tubercle, but the tubercle bacillus itself 
was present. In four cases on which I have operated, two are 
as yet too recent (six months and four months) to draw con- 
clusions from ; of the other two, one died after six months wdth 
extensive tubercular disease in the abdomen, and the other is 
steadily losing ground. In several of the cases, however, in 
which recover}^ has foUow^ed operation, true tubercular tissue 
has not been found. It is just possible that in some of these 
cases the so-called miliary tubercles were simply nodules of 
inflammatory lymph, such as are sometimes found on inflamed 
pericardial or pleural surfaces. 

Admitting that cases of undoubted tubercular disease recover, 
several surgeons and pathologists have attempted to give 
explanations which need not here be recapitulated. No expla- 
nation is, in my opinion, satisfactory unless we review the whole 
of our knowledge of this disease. 

It is more than probable that a good many of these cases 
reported as cured are simply quiescent, like caseated lymphatic 
glands, and, as time passes, may develop into an acute con- 
dition and kill the patient. With some reservation, the evidence 
at present before us would seem to suggest that those cases that 
get well are examples of local tuberculosis isolated by peritoneal 
adhesions and bathed in ascitic fluid ; those that die are ex- 
amples of general diffusion of tubercle without adhesions and 
not encysted. 

As to the diagnosis, very little need be said in addition to 



764 SUPPURATIVE PERITONITIS. 

what has already been said in the opening sections. The 
diagnosis is essentially that of encysted ascites. In a few cases 
there may be pyrexia, but in many the temperature will pursue 
a normal course. Cases of diffuse tuberculosis invading the 
whole of the peritoneum have not as yet come within the domain 
of operation, and nothing need be said of their diagnosis. 

The operation requires no special description, being usually 
performed on an uncertain diagnosis or for exploratory purposes. 

The first steps after the opening of the peritoneum should be 
taken with extreme caution. The adherent bowels or omentum 
which enclose the ascitic fluid in front are carefully separated 
and the cavity exposed. The fluid is removed either by the use 
of a siphon tube or by sponging. It is apparently not necessary 
on even expedient to use a strong antiseptic for the cavit)'. 
Irrigation with simple hot water has been found to be quite 
efficient. The drainage tube is inserted, the wound is closed 
around it, and the dressing and after-treatment managed in the 
ordinary manner. 

Before dismissing the subject of suppurative peritonitis, I 
desire to throw out a suggestion which I am inclined to believe 
will develop into a useful mode of practice. It is that cases of 
suppurative inflammation of the peritoneum should be treated 
with a wet and not a dry peritoneum ; that the intestines should 
be kept floating for a few days in hot aseptic or antiseptic 
lotion. Perfect drainage of the abdominal cavity becomes 
impossible as soon as a few coils of intestine become adherent. 
Intestinal paralysis, distension and vomiting are caused by 
the formation of peritoneal adhesions ; and the future risk to 
life is greatly increased where peritoneal bands are formed. 
I believe that these grave conditions are best met by keeping 
the intestines bathed in an innocuous or mildly antiseptic fluid ; 
and in the past few years I have been cautiously acting on this 
belief. The results so far have been very encouraging ; and I 
think the plan merits a trial. 

The fluid which I use is hot boro-glyceride solution, of the 
strength of about an ounce of the material to a pint of hot 



SUPPURATIVE PERITONITIS. 765 

water. Boro-glyceride seems, in addition to its antiseptic pro- 
perties, to retain some of the hygroscopic properties of glycerine; 
and is beneficial to the engorged and inflamed peritoneal 
membrane in a similar manner to glycerine when applied, in 
vaginal tampons, to the uterus. Through the drainage tube a 
quantity of the solution is slowly forced into the cavity by 
syringe or irrigating resorvoir, and permitted to remain in the 
cavity, or even compelled to do so by temporarily plugging the 
orifice of the tube. The fluid should be hot — at least 102° Fah. ; 
I have always noted that the patient derives comfort from the 
injection of the hot fluid. This injection may be repeated 
several times a day. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 



DIAGNOSIS OF ABDOMINAL TUMOURS. 

Ballard. — Phys. Diag. of Dis. of Abdomen. Lond. 1852. 

Bernutz.- — Art. Abdomen. Semeiologie. N. Did. de Med. et Chir. Prat. 

Paris. 1864. 
Bright. — Clin. Mem. on Abd. Tumours. New Syd. Soc. i860. 
BuDiN. — Du palper abdominal. Bull. gen. de therap. Paris, xcvi. 1879. 
Corrigan. — "Leather-creak." Dub. Med. Journ. 1836. 
CouiLLAULT. — De III symptomatologie . . . de Vabdomen. Paris. 1855. 
Delaigne, — Percussion an diagnostic des Maladies de l' Abdomen. Paris. 1844. 
DuPUY. — Du palper abdominal, &c. Gaz. Obstet. Paris, vii. 1878. 
Edis.- — Diag. of Abd. Turn. Cases. Lond. Obstet. Journ. vi. 1878. 
Forbes. — Exploration of Abdomen. Cycl. Pract. Med. Phila. 1845. 
GuTTMAN. — Physical Diagnosis. New Syd. Soc. 
Habershon. — Dis. of Abdomen. London. 1878. 
Hart. — Atlas of Female Pelvic Anatomy. Edinburgh. 
Hegar. — Zur gynak. Diagnostik. Samml. Klin. Vortr. 1876. No. 105. 
Hooker.- — Intestinal Auscultation. Boston Med. and Surg. Journ. xl. 1849. 
Jenner. — Diagnosis of Extra-pelvic Tumours. Brit. Med. Journ. 1869, i., 

and 1870, i. 
Leale. — Intra-abdominal Exploration. N. Y. Acad. Med. Trans. 1874. 
LooMis. — Lectures on Physical Exploration of Abdomen. A^. Y. Med. Rcc. 

1867. ii. 
Pepper. — Fat in omentum, &c., causing error in Diagnosis. Ayn. Journ. 

Obstet. ii. 1870. 
Piorry. — Diag. difl:'. des tumeurs de I'abdomen. Gaz. d. hop. Paris. 1851. 
Reeve. — Diag. of Abd. and Pelvic Tumours. Amer. Pract. Louisville, ix. 

1874. 
Sabatier. — Des applications de la percussion, &c. Pans. 1843. 
Schramm. — Diaphanoscope. Jahresb. d. Gesellsch, &c. Dresden. 1876. 
SiEBERT. — Diag. der Kranhheiten des Unterliebes. Erlangen. 1855. 
Simon. — Rectal Palpation, &c. Deutsche Klinik. xxiv. 1872. 
Sommerbrodt. — Zur Auscultation des Abdomen. Bcrl. Klin. Woch. x. 1873. 
Williams. — Physical Exam, of Abd. London Journ. Med. 1851-2. 
WiLLKAMP. — Rectal Exploration. Case. Cincin. Med. News. iii. 1874. 
WiNCKEL. — Ueber Auscultation des Unterliebes. Jahresb. d. Gesellsch, &c. 

Dresden. 1874. 

PHANTOM TUMOURS. 

Broca. — Monit. d. hop. Par., i., 1853, P- 601. 

Da Costa. — Philadelphia Med. Times, i., 1871, p. 449. 

Greenhow. — Lancet, i., 1857, P- S^- 

Habershon. — Med. T. and Gazette, ii., 1858, p. 441. 

Paget. — Lancet, ii., 1873, p. 833. 

Ramskill. — Med. T. and Gazette, xix., 1859, pp. 298, 579. 

Thomas. — Phila. Med. and Surg. Reporter, xxx., 1874, p. 477. 

Wells. — Med. Times and Gaz. ii., 1859, p. 580, and i., 1878, p. 671. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 767 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS IN GENERAL. 

Bantock,— 100 Consec. Cases of Abdom. Sect. Lancet. March 12th and 

19th, 1887. 
BiGELOW. — A Morning with August Martin. Amer. J. Obstet. 1886. xix., 

p. 468. 
Discussion on Indications for Drainage. Am. Journ. Obstet. 1886. xix., p. 611. 
DoRAN. — Handbook of Gynaecological Operations. Lond. 1887. 
Emmet. — Germ, and Eng. Gynaecology. N .Y.Med. Joiivn. 1886. And Reprint. 
Fowler. — Explorative Laparotomy. New York. 1886. 
GooDELL. — A Year's Work in Laparotomy. Phila. 1886. 
Hunter. — 50 Cases of Abd. Sect. N . Y . Med. Journ. 1886. And Reprint. 
Persistent pain after Abd. Sect. Trans. Amer. Gynac. Assoc. 1886. 

P- 378. 
Mural Abscess following Laparotomy. Tr. Amer. Gyn. Sac. 1886. 

X., 317- 
Kelly. — Gynaec. Operns. in Germany. Phila. Med. Neivs. 1886. xlix., p 301. 
McKiNNON. — Some details in Ovariotomy. Canada Pract. xi., p. 229. 
Mears. — Surgery of the Abdomen. Phila. 188S. 
Malcolm. — Intestine after Operation. Tr. Mcd.-Chir. Soc. Lond. 18S8. 

P. 43- 
Muller. — Zur Nachbehandlung schwerer Laparatomien. Cent. f. Gynlik. 

1886. x., 409. 
Munde. — Laparotomy in Europe. Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1886. xix., p. 897. 
Perkins. — 338 Operations by Dr W. Burnham. Ann. of Gynac. Boston. 

1887-8. i., p. 339. 
Reed. — After-treatment. Cincin. Lane, and Clinic. 1886. xvii., p. 329. 
Senn. — Present Status of Abd. Surgery. Journ. Am. Med. Ass. 1886. vi., 

p. 617. 
Tait. — 1000 Cases of Abd. Sect. Brit. Med. Journ. 1885. -A-^d Reprint. 
Wylie (W. G.) — Obs. on Abd. Surg., &c. Trans. Amer. Gyncsc. Soc. 1886. 

P. 503. 
Wyman. — Abdominal Surgery, and how to learn it. Med. Age. Detroit. 

August 3rd and loth, 1887. And Physicians' Leisure Library. 

parotitis following abdominal operations 

Berth. — Greifswald. 1886. 

Bougarel. — France med. 1886. ii., 1232. 

Bumm. — Centralbl.f. Gyndk. 1887. xl. 

GooDELL. — Trans. Am. Gyn. Soc. 1886. x., 211. 

Jalland. — Lancet. 1886. ii., p. 916. 

Keith. — Ed. Med. Journ. 1886. xxxii., p. 306. 

Stephen Paget. — Lancet. Jan. 9th, 1886. 

VoN Preuschen. — Deutsche Med. Woch. 1886. No. 51. 



OVARIOTOMY. 

special works. 

Atlee. — Diagnosis of Ovarian Tumours. Phila. 1873. 

Baker-Brown. — On Ovarian Dropsy. Lond. 1862. 

Clay. — Cases of Perit. Sect, for Extirp. of Diseased Ovaries. London. 1842. 

DoRAN. — Tumours of the Ovary, &c. London. 1884. 

Gallard. — Pathologic des ovaries. Paris. 1886. 

GooDELL. — Dis. of Ovaries and Oviducts. Pepper's. Syst. Pract. Med. 1886. iv. 

KoEBERLii. — Sur le traitement des Kystes le I'ovaire, Sec. Paris. 1865. 

LiZARS. — Observations on the Extraction of ■ Diseased Ovaria. Lond 1825. 

Peaslee. — Ovarian Tumours. New York. 1872. 



768 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

Tait. — Dis. of Ovaries. Birmingham. 1883. 

Wells. — Ovarian and Uterine Tumours, &c. Lond. 1882. 

Battey. — Antisepsis: 30 successful cases. Trans. Med. Ass. Georgia. 18S4. 

P. 151. 
DORAN. — Papilloma of Fall. Tube, &c. Brit. Med. Journ. 1886. ii., p. 722. 
Elliot. — Suppurating Tumours : Drainage. 3 Cases. Boston Med. and Surg. 

Journ. 1886. cxv., p. 441. 
GooDELL. — Intraligamentary Ovarian Cysts. Amer. Journ. Obstet. Jan., 1888. 
GuiCHARD. — Dermoid Cysts. Bull. Soc. Obstet., &c. Par., 1886. i., p. 171. 
Helmuth. — 33 Laparotomies. Am. Journ. Obst. 1886. xix., p. 1136. 
Herman. — Suppuration, &c., of Dermoid Cysts. Trans. Obstet. Soc. 1886. 

xxvii., p. 254. 
Hooks — -Ovariotomy, dermoid : Child of 30 months. Am. Journ. Obst. 1886. 

xix., p. 1022. 
Keith (Skene). — Cases. Edin, Med. Journ. 1886. xxxi., p. 837. 
KoEBERLE. — Treatment of Pedicle, &c. Mem. Soc. de Med. Strasbourg. 

1884-5. xxii., p. 80. 
Le Bec. — Ovariotomy. Death from Volvulus. Gaz.deslwp. 1886. lix., p. 687. 
Lee. — Internal. Ency. Surg. 1886. vi. 

Macan. — 14 Cases. Trans. Acad. Med., Ireland. 1885. iii., p. 210. 
MuNDE. — Ovariotomy during Peritonitis. Med. and Surg. Rep. Phila. 1886. 

Iv., 300, 328. 
MuNK. — Ein Beitrag zu den Dcrmoidcysten des Ovarium. Tiibingen. 1885. 
Olshausen. — Statistik der Ovariotomie. Deutsche Chirurgie. Lf. 58. 
Parizot. — De la torsion du pedicule, &c. Paris. 1886. 
Perruzzl — 500 Ovariotomies in Italy. Abst. in Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. 

April, 1885. 
Polaillon. — Sarcoma. Operation. Bull. Soc. Obst. 1886. i., p. 52. 
Skene. — Dis. of Ovaries and Oviducts. Pepper's Syst. Pract. Med. 1886. iv. 
Tait. — 139 Consec. Succ. Ovariotomies. Brit. Med. Journ. 1886. i., p. 921. 
Terrillon. — Faux Kystes de I'ovaire. Ann. de gynec. 1886. xxvi., p. 245. 

Kystes parovairiques, &c. Paris. 1886. 
Thiria. — 25 Successful Ovariotomies. Journ. de Med., Sec. Brux. 1886. 

Ixxxiii., p. 485. 
Thornton. — 300 Ovariotomies. Lancet. 1886. ii., p. 818. 



REMOVAL OF THE UTERINE APPENDAGES. 

inflammation and abscess of the ovaries. 

Alexander. — On Removal of the Ut. App. for Infl. Disease. Med. Press and 

Circ. 1884. xxxviii., p. 175. 
BiGELow. — A Case of Oophoritis. Cincin. Lancet and Clinic. 1884. xxii., 

P- 377- 
Bournand. — De I'ovarite blenorrhagique. Par., 1847. 
BouvERET. — Ann. de Gynec. iv., p. 427. 

CouRTv. — Diseases of the Uterus. (Trans, by A. McLaren.) 1882. P. 510. 
Duncan. — Ed. Med. Journ. Sept., 1871. 

Gallard. — De I'ovarite aigue at de la congestion pelvienne. France Med. 1884. 
i., p. 614. 
Gaz. des hop. July-October, 1869. 
Hawkins. — Removal of Ovaries and Fallopian Tubes for Ovaritis. Denver 

Med. Times. 1883-4. iii., p. 289. 
Imlach. — Specimens of Infl. Disease of Ovaries, &c., from 21 women. 
Liverpool Med.-Chir. Journ. 1885. v., p. 221. 
Ovarian Abscess and Pyosalpinx. Liverpool Med.-Chir. Journ. 
Jan., 1886. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 769 

Lettule. — Ovarite suppuree . . . pelvi-peritonite . . . mort. Ann. 

de Gynec. Par., 1884. xxii., p. 442. 
LusK. — Ovaritis with Abscess. Amer. Jotirn. Obstet. Jan., 1880. 
Macdonald. ^Gonorrhoea! Ovaritis. Edin. Med. jfourn. Dec, 1885. 
Nagel. — Centralbl. f. Gynclh. 1887. No. 26. And Lond. Med. Rec. July 15th, 

1887. 
PuECH. — Gaz. des hop. i860. P. 517. (Abscess bursting into peritoneum.) 
Raciborsky. — Gaz. des hop. Nov., 1856. 
ScHROEDER. — Diseascs of the Female Sexual Organs. (Ziemssen's Cyc.) 1875. 

P- 351- 
ScnvLTZY-.—Jenaische Zeit. f. Med. n. Nat. i. 1864. P. 279. 
Slavjansky. — Arch.f. Gynaek. Vol. iii., p. 183. 
Tait. — Diseases of the Ovaries. 4th Ed. 1883. P. 87. 
Tilt. — Diseases of Menstruation and Ovarian Inflammation. 1850. 

Diagnosis of Subacute Ovaritis. Anier. Med. jfourn. Vol. Ixvii. 
Verjus. — Theses de Paris. 1884. (Abscess bursting into peritoneum, causing 

death.) 

DISPLACEMENTS OF THE OVARY. 

Atthill. — Prolapse of Ovaries. Bled. Press and Circ. Dec. loth, 1880. 
Barnes. — On Hernia of the Ovary. Amer. Journ. Obstet. Jan., 1883. 
Chambers. — Congenital double Inguino-Ovarian Hernia. Lond. Obstet. Journ. 

Dec, 1879. 
Cleveland. — Adhasion und Prolapsus des Ovarien. Schmidt's Jahrbuch. 

v., 156. 
Deneux. — Sur la hernie de I'ovaire. Par., 1813. 
Englisch. — Medicinische Jahrbi'tcher. 1871. P. 335. 
GooDELL. — Prolapse of Ovaries. Lessons in Gynecology . Phila., 1880. 
Guersant. — Bull, de Therap. 28. 1865. Two cases. Operation. 
Holmes. — Lancet. Jan., 1884. Operation. 

Hunter. — Prolapsus of the Ovary. Phila. Med. Times. 1883-4. xiv., p. 559. 
luTZE. — Displacement of Left Ovary. Battey's Operation. Death. Amer. 

Pract. 1883. xxviii., p. 257. 
Jones (W. M.) — Congenital Hernia of both Ovaries. Brit. Med. Jotirn. 

Sept., 1877. 
Lassus. — Path. Chir. Par., 1806. ii., p. 98. Operation. 
LoEPER. — Monatschr. f. Geb. B. 28, p. 453. Operation. 
Lol'maigne. — De la hernie de I'ovarie. Par., 1869. 
McBuRNEY. — Hernia, removal. Ann. of Surg. July, 1887. 
McCluer. — Amer. Journ. Obstet. vi., p. 613. Operation. 
Meadows. — Trans. Lond. Obstet. Soc. iii., p. 438. Operation. 
MuLERT. — Journ. f. Chirurg. 1S50. ix., p. 3. 

Munde. — Prolapsus of the Ovaries. Med. Times and Gaz. Jan., 1880. 
Neboux. — Bull, de Therap. Avril, 1845. Operation. 
Pott. — Hernia of Ovaries successfully operated upon. Works. Vol. ii. 

(Occurred in 1756.) 
PuECH. — Des hernies de I'ovarie. Gaz. Obstet. de Par. 1875. 
Skene. — Prolapse of Ovaries. Amer. Journ. Obstet. April, 1879. 
Heywood Smith. — Hernia of the Ovary. Brit. Gynac. Journ. Nov., 1885. 
Stocks. — Ovarien Prolaps. Centralbl. f. Chir. v., i. 
Weinlechner and Balleray. — Ovarial-hernie. Centralbl. f. Chir. v., p. 5. 

1877. 
Werth. — Doppelseitige Hernia Ovarialis inguin. Arch.f. Gynaek. v., p. 11. 

cystic and cirrhotic ovaries. 

Beraud. — (Variolous ovaritis.) Archiv. Gen. de Med. 1859. xiii., p. 588. 
Brown. — Cystic Ovaries removed by Laparotomy. Hydrosalpinx. New York 

Med. Rec. 1884. xxv., p. 195. 
Jacobi. — Cystic Ovaries. Battey's Operation. New York Med. Rec. 18S4 

XXX., p. 705. 

50 



770 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

Tait. — Diseases af Ovaries. 4th Ed. 

Wallace. — Bilateral Ovarian Cystic Degeneration. Oper. Rec. Lancet. 

1884. i., p. 1027. 
Will. — Cystic Degeneration of the Ovary. Battey's Operation. Death. 

Peoria Med. Monthly. 1883-4. iv., p. 419. 



DISEASES OF THE FALLOPIAN TUBES. 

AVELING. — A Case of Double Pyosalpinx. Brit. Gyncsc. Journ. July, 1885. 
BoLDT. — Interstitial Salpingitis. Amer. Journ. Obstet. xxi. Feb. 1888. 
Brossard. — Tubo-ovarite suppuree avec peritonite pelvienne circonscrite. 

Ann de Gynec. Par., 1885. xxiv., p. 117. 
Chambers. — Hydro-salpinx. New York Med. Rec. 1885. xxvii., p. 273. 
Chapman. — Extreme Cystic Dilatation of the Fallopian Tubes. Abdominal 
Section. Recovery. Tr. Edin. Obst. Soc, 1883-4. ^''•> P- ^99- Ldin. 
Med. Journ., 1884-5. xxx., p. 204. 
VON Dessaner. — Ibid, xxvii., p. 60. 

Ferguson. — The Diagnostic Value of Ciliated Columnar Epithelium in cases 
of Hydrosalpinx and Pyosalpinx. New York. Med, Journ. 1885. 
xli., p. 211. 
Forster. — Wiener. Med. Woch. 1852. Nos. 44 and 45. 
GooDELL. — Pyosalpinx and Hydrosalpinx. Journ. Amcr. Med. Ass. 1S84. 

iii., p. 24. 
Gusseraw. — Pyosalpinx, 31 cases. Areh.f. Gyn. xxxii., 2. 
Hennig. — Der Katarrh der inneren Weiblechen Geschlechtstheile. 2nd Ed. 
Horne. — Case of Salpingo-oophorectomy for Pyosalpinx. Dublin J. Med. Sc. 

1884. Ixxvii., p. 347. 
Klob. — Path. Anat. d. Weibl. Sexualorganc. p. 288. 
Lediard. — Pyosalpinx. Abdominal Section. Recovery. Lancet. 1884. 

ii., p. 493. 
Macdonald. — Two cases of Salpingo-oophorectomy. Ed. Med. Journ. 

1884-5. xxx., p. 97. 
Martin. — Successful Operation for Pyosalpinx. Boston Med. and Surg. Journ. 
1884. cxi., p. 132. 
Salpingitis. Zeit. f. Geb. u. Gyndk. xii., 2. 
Porter. — Report on a case of Pyosalpinx. Phila. Med. News. 1885. xlvi., 

p. 362. 
Price. — Six Operations for Pyosalpinx. A''. Y. Med. Journ. 1886. xliv., 

P- 458. 
Sanger. — Gonorrhoeal Disease of the Uterine Appendages, and the Operative 
Treatment. Abst. in Amer. Journ. of Med. Sc. Jan., 1885. p. 295. 
And letter in Obstet. Gaz. Cincinnatti. Feb., 1887. 
Simpson. — Hsemato-salpinx. Tait's Operation. Trans. Edin. Obstet. Soc. 
1883-4. ix., p. 1S2. 

Hsemato-salpinx. Case. Tait's Operation. Edin. Med. Journ. 
1884. xxx., p. 447. 
Tait. — Diseases of Ovaries. 4th Ed. 

Tr. Med.-Chir. Soc. Edin. 1883-4. ii'- P- 36- 
Trans. Obstet. Soc. Lond. 1884. Pp. iix, 138, 234. 
New Yorli Med. Journ. 1884. xl., p. 421. 
Med. Times and Gaz. 1884. ii., p. 318. 
Edin. Med. Journ. Sept., 1885. 
Brit. Gynac. Journ. July, 1885, and Nov., 1885. 
Terrillon. — Hasmato-salpingitis. Four Operations. Le Bull. Mdd. June 

ist, 1887. 
Wagner. — Monatsschr. fiir Geb. xiv., p. 436. 

WiEDOW. — Zur Operativen behandlung der pyosalpinx. Centralbl. f. Gyndk. 
Leipz., 1885. ix. p. 145. 

% 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 771 

Wylie. — Cases of Salpingitis. Results of Operations. New York Med. Rec. 

1S85. xxvii., pp. 85, 161. 

Diseases of the Fallopian Tubes. Boston Med. and Surg. Journ. 

1886. cxii., p. 109. Amer. Jotirn. Ohstet. vi., p. 43. 
Zeiss. — Pyo- und Hamato-salpinx. Centralbl. f. Gyndk. Leipz. 1885. vii. , 

P- 745- 

OPERATIONS FOR CAUSES RESIDING IN UTERUS. 

Battey, — Trans. Internat. Med. Congress. 1881. iv. , p. 280. 

Discussion on the Treatment of Uterine Myoma. Brit. Gyncec. 

Journ. July and November, 1885. 
DuPLAY. — De I'ablation des ovaires dans le traitement des fibro-myomes, &c. 

Archiv. Gen. de Med. July, 1885. 
Menzel. — Castrationen bei Ovarialprolaps. Uterus-fibrom. Retroflexio 

uteri mit Descensio Ovariorum. Archiv. f. Gynclk. Bd. xxvi. Hft. i. 
Tait. — Post-mortem Examination on case where Appendages were removed 

for Myoma three years before death. Med. Times and Gaz. 1884. 

ii., p. 147. 

The Modern Treatment of Uterine Myoma. Brit. Med. Journ. 

Aug., I^85. 
Werner. — Battey's Operation performed in a case of Malformation of the 

Genital Organs. Am. Journ. Obstet. 1^84. xvii., p. 144. 
WiEDOW. — (For Fibroids.) Archiv. f. Gynctk. 1S85. Bd. i., p. 299. 

ovarian neuroses. 

BiRCHER. — Die Castration bei Ovarial-neuralgie und Hysterie. Cor.-Bl. f. 

Schweiz. Aerzte. 1S84. xiv., pp. 447, 470. 
Brooks. — Castration for Hystero-Epilepsy. Phila. Med. and Surg. Rep. 1885. 

iii., p. 230. 
Carstens. — Three Cases of Battey's Operation. Itiid., p. 266. 
Geissler. — Hyperaesthesie des Ovarium. Schmidt's Jahrbuch. v., p. 76. 
GooDELL. — Removal of Ovaries for Confirmed Masturbation. Phila. Med. 

Times. 1883-4. ^^'v., p. 230. 
Hegar. — Der Zusammenhang der Geschlechtskrankheiten mit Nervosen 

Letden und die Castration bei Neurosen. Stuttgart, 1885, and 

Centralbl. f. Gyncih. 1884. xxxviii., p. 593. 
Homans — Hysteria as affected by Removal of the Ovaries. Boston Med. and 

Surg. Journ. 1884. ex., p. 542. 
Landau and Remak. — Ein Fall von Ovariotomie bei hysterischer Hernia- 

nasthesie ; Klinischer Beitrag zur Ovarie- und Castrations-Frage. 

Ztschr. f. Klin. Med. 18S3. vi., p. 437. 
Leppmann. — Castration bei Epilepsie und Hystero-Epilepsie. Ibid. 
Montgomery. — Removal of Appendages for Menstrual Epilepsy. Phila. Med. 

News. 1884. xi^'i 584 ; ^i^d Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1S85. xviii., 152. 
MUNDE. — Removal of Appendages followed by disappearance of symptoms of 

Spinal Atrophy. Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1S84. xvii., p. 1162. 
Ohr. — Genito-Reflex Neuroses in the Female. Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1883. 

xvi., p. 50 et seq. 
Fallen. — True import of Oophorectomy in Epilepsy. A^. Y. Med. Rec. 

June 5th, 1880. 
ScHMALFUss. — Zur Castration bei Neurosen. Archiv. f. Gynak. xxvi. i., p. 1. 
ScHROEDER. — Dcutsclie Mcd. Zeit. 1886. vii., p. 943. 

Zeit. f. Geb. u. Gynak. xiii., 2. 
Sims. — Battey's Operation in Epileptoid Affections. N. Y. Med. Rec. June 

5th, 1880. 
Terries. — Sur I'influence que peut avoir I'ovariotomie sur les manifestations 

hysterique. Bull, et Mem. Soc. de Chir. de Paris. 1884. x., p. 243. 
Walton. — Hysteria as affected by Removal of the Ovaries. Ibid., p. 529. 

50 * 



772 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

GENERAL CASES. 

Baker (W. H.) — The Use and Abuse of Battey's and Tait's Operations. 

Boston Med. and Surg. Journ. 1885. 
Battey. — Summary of 15 Cases of Battey's Operation. Brit. Med. Journ, 

April 3rd, 1880. 
Chereau.^ — Memoire pour servir a I'etude des maladies des ovaries. Par. 18S4. 
Chunn. — Removal of Uterine Appendages. Maryland Med. Journ. 1883-4. 

X., p. 526. 
Croom (J. H.) — Remote Results. Amer. Journ. Med. Soc. Dec, 1888. 
Dawson. — Two Cases of Oophorectomy. Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1884. xvii., 

p. 964. 
Engelmann. — Case of Battey's Operation. Boston Med. and Surg. Journ. 

May 13th, 1880. 
Van Ernag. — Four Cases of Oophorectomy. Kansas City Med. Rec. 1884. 

i., p. 95. 
Ewens. — Two Cases of Oophorectomy. Brit. Med. Journ. Jan. 31st, iSSo. 
Fehling. — Zehn Castrationen, &c. Archiv. f. Gynaek. Berl. 1883-4. xxii., 

p. 291. 
Gallard. — Physiologic de la Menstruation. Compt. rend. 18S3-4. ''"■t 

P- 713- 
Gardner. — Ovaries and Fallopian Tubes removed, &c. Canada Med. Rec. 

1882-3. xi., p. 242. 
Goodell. — Two Cases of Oophorectomy. Phila. Med. News. 1884. xiv., 

p. 468 ; and Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1S84. xvii., p. 1186. 
Gray. — A Case of Battey's Operation. Atlanta Med. and Surg. Journ. 1884. 

i., p. 321. 
Hegar. — Die Castration der Frauen. Samml. Klin. Vortr. Leipz. 1878. 

Nos. 136-8. 
Hempel. — Indications. Gottingen. 1886. 
Hermance. — Ovarian Dysmenorrhoea ; Oophorectomy. N. Y. Med. Record. 

18S4. XXV., p. 430. 
Hooper. — The Morbid Anatomy of the Human Uterus and its Appendages. 

Lond. 1832. (Specially for diseases of the Fallopian tubes.) 
Imlach. — Six Cases of successful Removal of the Uterine Appendages. 

Liverpool Med.-Chir. Journ. 1884. iv., p. 392 ; also ibid., Jan., 1886. 
Jackson. — Double Oophorectomy for Dysmenorrhoea, &c. Weekly Med. 

Review. Chicago. 18S4. ix., p. 290. 

A Contribution to the Relations of Ovulation and Menstruation. 

Journ. Amer. Med. Ass. 1884. And Reprint. 
Jacobi. — Salpingo-Oophorectomy. A^. Y . Med. Journ. 18S4. xxxix., p. 673. 
Johnson (J. T.) — Four Cases of Oophorectomy, with remarks. N. Y. Med, 

Journ. Sept. 26th, 1885. 
Keen. — Three Cases of Tait's Operation. Phila. Med. Times, xvi., p. 343. 
Keith (Skene). — Twenty-three Cases. Edin. Med. Journ. March and 

April, 1887. 
Kyle. — Oophorectomy. Louisville Med. News. 1S85. xix., p. 129. 
Loewenthal. — Une nouvelle Theorie de la Menstruation. Med. Pract, 

Par. 1884. v., p. 577; and Semaine Med. Par. 1884. iv., p. 461. 
LuTAUD. — Ovariotomie Normale. Arch. Gen. Med. 1879. i. 
Meadows. — Ovarian Menorrhagia. Brit. Med. Journ. July 12th, 1879. 
MuNDii. — Three successful Cases of Oophorectomy. New Eng. Med. Monthly. 

1883-4- iii- P- 549- 
Parish. — Removal of the Uterine Appendages. Phila. Med. Times. Jan. 

23rd, 1886. 
Prochownick. — Beitrage zur Castrations-frage. Arhiv. f. Gynah. XXIX., ii. 
Rabagliati. — Two Cases of Double Oophorectomy. Lancet. 18S4. ii., 

p. 1091. 
Reed. — Principles of Practice. Journ. Amer. Med. Assn. I88S. xi.,p. 253. 
Savage.— On Oophorectomy. Lond. Obstet. Journ. May, 1880; and Traws. 

Internat. Med. Cong. 1881. iv. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 773 

Simpson. — Ligature of Broad Ligaments instead of Battey's Operation. 

Ediii. Med. Journ. 18S4-5. xxx., p. 444. 
ScHLESiNGER. — These de St. Petersbourg. 1887. 
De SiNETY. — Ovulation et Menstruation. Ann. de Gynec. vii. 
Smith (Greig). — Removal of the Uterine Appendages. Bristol Mcd.-Chiy. 

Journ. 1886. 
Taylor (J. W.) — Report on Abdominal Surgery. Birm. Med. Rev. Sept., 18S5. 
Thallon.— The Battey-Tait Operation. N. Y. Arch. Med. 1884. xi., 

p. iSo. 
Thomas. — Normal Ovariotomy. Amer. Med. Journ. Ixvii. 
Thomas (T. G.) — Two Cases of Extirpation of the Ovaries. Med. Chron. 

Baltimore. 1883-4. "■■ P- ^^i. 
Verneuil and Ferrier. — Menstruation after Double Ovariotomy. Land. 

Obstet. Journ. v. 
Wells, Hegar, and B.'^ttey. — Symposium. Am. Journ. Med. Sc. xcii., 

P- 483- 
Wylie. — Fourteen Operations. Trans. N. Y. Acad. Med. 1SS6. v., p. 99. 



HYSTERECTOMY FOR CANCER. 

Anderson. — Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1882. xv., p. 322. 

Baker. — Comparison of Total and Partial Amputation. New York Med. 

Journ. 1886. 
Barnes and Garson. — Am. Journ. Obstet. 1882. xv. 
Boeckel. — Fistula of Ureter. Nephrectomy. Gaz. Med. de Strasbourg. 

Sept., 18S4. 
Braithwaite. — Two Cases. Lancet. July 23rd, 18S7. 
Brennecke. — Zeitschr. f. Geb. u. Gyn. 1886. xii., p. 56; and Centralbl. f. 

Gyndk. 1883. vii., p. 763. 
Brown and Simpson. — Edin. Med. Journ. 18812. xxvii., p. 745. 
Brit. Med. Journ., Leader in. 1883. ii., p. S37. 
Buffet. — Forcipressure to Vessels. Gaz. des hop. 1886. lix., p. 647. 
CoE. — Annals of Surgery. 18S5. ii., p. 486. 
Comet. — De I'hysterect. vag. en France. Paris. 1886. 
Cotterell. — Brit. Med. Journ. July gth, 1S87. 
Demons. — Rev. de Chir. August loth, 1884. 

Duncan. — Extirpation of Uterus. i885. Reprint from Obstet. Soc. Trans. 
Edis. — Vaginal extirpation. Trans. Ohstet. Soc. Lond. 1886. xxvii. 
Emmett. — New York Med. Joiirn. 1882. xxxv., p. 627. and xxxvi., p. 61. 
Etheridge. — Three Cases. Obstet. Gaz. Cincin. Dec, 1887. 
Fenger. — Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. 1882. Ixxxiii., p. 17. 
Foreman. — Austral. Med. Gaz. 1883-4. iii. p- i43- And July, 18S5. 
Freund. — Trans. Internal. Congress. 1881. iv., p. 323. 

GooDELL. — Vaginal Hysterectomy. N . Y. Med. Journ. i8S5. xliii., p. 616. 
Gordon. — Three cases. Journ. Am. Med. Ass. 1888. xi., p, 296. 
VoN Herff. — Archiv. /. Gynrik. 1885. xxvi., p. i. 
Helmuth (Freund). — Am. Journ. Obstet. 1882. xv., p. 599. 
Hofmeier. — Zeit.f. Geb. u. Gyn. x., p. 269. 
Homberger. — Centralbl. f. Gyndk. 1882. xxxi. 

Hyernaux (New inst.) — Bull. Acad. Med. Belg. 1881. xv., p. 827. 
Jackson. — West. Med. Rep. Chicago. 1882. iv., p. 129. 
Journ. Amer. Med. Ass. August 15th, 1885. 
Trans. Am. Gyn. Soc. 1883. viii., p. 172. 
Jennings. — Lancet. 1886. i., pp. 682, 825. 

Landau. — Seven cases — forcipressure. Berl. klin. Woch. Mar. 5, 1888. 
VON G. Leopold. — Archiv. f. Gyniik. Bd. xxx. Hft. 3. 
MacCormac. — Brit. Med. Journ. 1882. ii., p. 91. 
Marchand. — Bull, et Mem. de la Soc. de Chir. de Par. 1886. xii., p. 152. 



774 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

MoLiNES. — Coiitn'b. a I'etude de la colpohysterectomie, &c. Montpelier. i8S6. 
MuLEUR. — Clamp-forceps. Noiiv. Aych. d'Obstet. et Gynec. Aug., 18S7. 
MuLLER. — Wien. Med. Woch. 1884. xxxiv., p. 213. 
MuNDE. — Med. Times and Gaz. May 7th, 1886. 
Polk.— iV. Y. Med. Journ. Aug. 25th, 1883. 
' Post. — Internat. Journ. Med. Sc. Jan., 1886. 
PuRCELL. — Vaginal Hysterectomy. Tr. Obst. Soc. Lond. 1886. xxvii. 

Brit. Gynac. Journ. May, 1887. 
" " La;!t-rf. Jan. 31st, 1885, andAug. 27th, 1887. 

RiCHELOT. — Union Med. 1886. xlii., pp. 85, 97, 217. 

And others. Discussion. Bull, et Mem. Soc. Cliir. 1886. 
2nd Sess., p. 375. 
RoHMER. — B71II. et Mem. de la Soc. de Chir. 18S6. xii., p. 947. 
VON RoKiTANSKY. — WicH. Med. Presse. 1S82. xxiii., p. 657. 
Sanger. — Archiv.f. Gyndk. Bd. xxi. Hft. i. 
Sauve. — Contribution a Vetitde de Vhysterectomie, &c. Paris. 1884. 
ScHATZ. — Archill, f. Gyndk. Bd. xxi. Hft. 3. 
Schroeder. — Brit. Med. Journ. 1883. ii., p. 520. 
Schultze. — Deutsche Med. Zeitung. 1886. i., pp. 13, 25, 37. 
Simpson. — Edin. Med. Journ. Nov., 1882. 
Sinclair (W. J.)— Six cases. Med. Chronicle. Feb., 1888. 
Stavde.— Deutsche Med. Woch. Berl. 1886. xii., pp. 601, 624. 
Stirling. — Brit. Med. Journ. May 21st, 1887. 
Terrier. — Bull. Soc. de Chir. de Par. 1886. xii., pp. 11 and 467. 

Rev. Gen. de Clin, etde Therap. Nov. 8th, 1888. 
Terrillon. — Bull. Soc. de Chir. de Par. 1886. xii., p. 200. 
Trelat.— Ga^-. des h6p. 1886. lix., p. 887. 
Wallace. — Brit. Med. Journ. 1883. ii., p. 579. 
Wells.— BnY. Med. Journ. 1881. ii., p. 856. 
Williams.— Cflsse/^s Year-book of Treatment. 1885. 
Wylie.— (Modn. of Freund.) Am. Journ. Obst. 1883. xvi., p. 527. 



HYSTERECTOMY FOR MYOMA. 

Amiot. — Traitement du pedicle, &.C. Paris. 1884. 
Antal. — Congress at Buda-Pesth. 1880. 
Bantock. — Lancet. 1883. i., p. 647. 

Trans. Obstet. Soc. Lond. 1882-3-4-5. 
Barton. — Phila. Med. and Surg. Rep. Jan. 31st, 18S5. 
Bayle. — Hysterectomie. Diet, des Sc. Med. 1883. 
BiGELOw. — Amer. Journ. Obstet. Nov., 1883, et seq. 
Billroth. — Wien. Med. Woch. 1S76, i and 2, and 1877, 40. 
BoMET. — Acad, de Mid. 1870. 
Braithwaite. — Lancet. 1885. i., p. 255. 
Clado. — De Vhysterectomie abdomitiale, &c. Paris. 1886. 
CouRTY. — Dis. of Uterus. Trans. Lond. 1882. 
Cutter. — Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. July, 1878. 
CzERNY. — Wien. Med. Woch. 1881. Nos. 18 and 19. 

Dudley. — Intra-peritoneal elastic lig. Trans. Amer. Gymrc Ass. 1886. p. 458. 
Duncan. — Lancet. Nov. 28th, 1S85. 
Duplay. — Ann. de Gynec. Nov., 1879. 
Frankel. — Enucleation. Arch /. Gyndk. xxxiii., 3. 
Fraipont. — Bull. Soc. Chir. April 3rd, 1884. 
Fritsch, — Centralbl. f. Gyndk. 1879. 
Golding-Bird. — Lancet. 1882. ii., p. 849. 
Goodell. — Phila. Med. Times. 1883. p. 435. 
GussEROW. — Die Neubildungen des Uterus. Stuttgart. 1886. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 775 



Hegar. — Berl. Klin. Woch. March 20th, 1876. 
Ccntralbl. f. Gyndk. 1880. No. 12. 
Wien. Med. Presse. 1877. No. 17. 
Hegar und Kaltenbach. — Operat. Gyndk. 18S6. 
Herrgott. — (History.) Rev. Med. dc I'Est. 1885. 
HoMANS. — Lancet. 1883. ii., p. 767. 

Boston Med. and Surg, journ. 1885. 
Hunter. — Air.er. Journ. Obstet. 1885. p. 120. 
Jackson. — Brit. Med. Journ. July gth, 18S7. 
Johnson. — Am. Journ. Obstet. 1885. 
Jones (S.) — Lancet. 1882. i., p. 119. 
Kaltenbach. — Zeitschr. f. Gehurt. u. Gyn. Bd. x. Hft. i. 
Keith. — Tumours of the Abdomen. Pt. i. 1SS5. 
Kleeberg. — Zeitschr. f. Gcb. u. Gyn. 1876. No. 27. 
Koeberle. — Gaz. Hebd. Nov. 23rd, 1866. 

Gaz. Med. Strasbourg. 18S5. 

Allg. Wien. Med. Zeit. 1885. 
KvsTETL.—Centralbl. f. Gynak. 1884. 

Lange. — Clinical Aphorisms, &c. N. Y. Med. Journ. xliv., p. 19. 
Leopold. — ArcJiiv.f. Gyn. Bd. xx. Hft. i. 
Lomer. — Zeitschr. f. Geburt. u. Gyndk. Bd. ix. Hft. 2. 
Martin. — Berl. Klin. Woch. 1885. No. 3. 

Path, und Therap. der Fraiien Krankheiten. Wien. 1885. 
Moeller. — Berl. Klin. Woch. 1882. No. 30. 
More-Madden. — Dub. Journ. Med. Sc. May, 1885. , 

Brit. Gyn. Journ. 1885. 
Muller. — Gaz. Med. de Strasbourg. 1886. xv., p. 102. 
Pean. — Gaz. des hop. 1886. lix., p. 950. 
Pean and Urdy. — Hysterectomy. Paris. 1873. 
Petit and Boinet. — Diet. Encyc. des Sc. Med. Art. Gastrotomie. 
Pozzi. — Ligature elastique. Cong, f rang, de Chir. 1886. i, p. 537. 
Savage. — Lond. Obstet. Joxmi. 1880. 
ScHROEDER. — Ziemsscu's Cyclop, x. 

Berl. Klin. Woch. 1885. 
Zeitschr. f. Geb. u. Gyn. Bd. v. and Bd. viii. 
Schwartz. — Diet, de Med. et de Chir. Arts. : Uterus, Hysterectomie. 
Stimson. — Neu York Med. Journ. 1884. P. 642. 
Tait. — Brit. Gynaec. Journ. 1886. ii., p. 211. 

Brit. Med. Jorn. Oct. 3rd, 1885. 
Terrillon. — Bull. Soc. Chir. 1883. 
Thiersch. — Centralbl. f. Gyndk. 1882. No. 40. 
Thiriar. —Prwse Med. Beige. 18S4. 
Tillaux. — Acad, de Med. Oct. 14th, 1S79. 

Bull. Acad. Med. 1SS5. P- G28. 
Walter. — Brit. Med. Journ. 1883. ii., p. 718. 
Wiedow. — Arch. gen. de MM. July, 1885. 
Wolfler. — Wien. Med. Woch. 1885. xxv., p. 1493. 

hysterectomy for inversion of uterus. 

Choppin. — Ainer. Jorn. Med. Sc. 1867. 

Denuce. — Acad, de Med. Paris. Nov. 9th, 1875. 

Traite Clinique de V Inversion uterine. Paris. 1883. 
Donne. — Archiv. de Gyndc. Jan. 7th, 1876. 
Valette. — Lyon Med. April, 1871. 



776 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

CESAREAN SECTION. 

OLD. 

Bandon. — L'ovotomie Abdominale ou Operation Cesarienne. Paris. 1S73. 

BuRCKHARDT. — Sectio Casaveu. Halle. 1879. 

CoLLiNGS. — Lancet. 1886. ii., p. 120. 

DoLAN. — Brit. Med. Jorn. May 23rd, 1885, 

Favre. — Rupture of Uterus. Rev. Med. de la Suisse Rom. 1886. vi., p. 626. 

Gaudin. — Archiv. de Tocologie. Sept., 1878. 

GoDEFROY. — De la gastro-hysterotomie. Rev. de Therap. Med. Chir. 1869. 

Grunewald. — Ueber den Kaiserschniit. Miinchen. 1875. 

Harper. — Lancet. 1886. ii., p. 119. 

Harris. — Amer. Journ. Obstet. Jan., 1879. 

Med. Times and Gaz. 1882. i., p. 620. 

Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. Oct., 1885. 
Heister. — Gen. Syst. of Surgery, ii., p. 27. 
Huendorf. — Ueber Kaiserschnitt. Halle. 1867. 
Jenks. — Tr. Amer. Gyn. Soc. 1886. x., p. 172. 
Kinkead. — Dublin Journ. Med. Sc. 1880. 

Lahs. — (With Ovariotomy.) Deutsch. Med. Woch. Feb. 2nd, 187S. 
LusK. — Prognoses of C cesarean Operations. Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1880. xiii. 
Maschke. — Ueber den Kaiserschnitt. Berlin. 1874. 
Parish. — Phila. Med. News. 1886. xlix., p. 413. 

Polk.— Surg. Anat. Gravid Uterus. N. Y. Med. Journ. May 3rd, 1884. 
Radford. — Several Papers, between 1851 and 1S68, in Land. Med. Gaz., 

Prov. Med. and Surg. Journ., and Brit. Med. Journ. 
Rodenstein. — The Origin of Csesarean Section. N. Y. Med. Journ. 1872. 
XV., p. 358. 
Uterine Sutures. Am. Journ. Obstet. 1871. iii., p. 577. 
Roussetus. — De partu Casareo, &c. Trans, of Caspar Bauhin's work. 
Simon. — Mem. Acad. Roy. de Med., Sec. ii., p. 623. 
Smiles. — An Essay on the C(xsarean Operation, Edinburgh. 1853. 
Tarnier. — Bull. Soc. de Chir. de PMr. 1871. xi. 
Walton. — Cincin. Clinic. Feb., 1878. 

NEW, 

Beumer. — Arch.f. Gyndk. Bd. xx. 3. 

BiRNBAUM. — Arch.f. Gyndk. Bd. xxv. Hft. 3. 

Crede. — Arch.f. Gyndk. 1886. xxviii. 144 

Ehrendorfer. — Arch. f. Gyndk. Bd. xxvi. i. 

Fasola. — Gazz, de din. Turin. 1886. xxiii., p. 369. 

Garrigues. — Am. Journ. Obstet. 1883. xvi., p. 344 

GooDELL. — For Cancer of Cervix. Med. and Surg. Rep., Phila. ix. No. 13. 

Harris. — Sanger-Csesarean. Med. News, Phila. 1886. xlix., p. 317. 

Caes. Sect, and its substitutes. Internal. Encyc. Surg. 1886. vi. 
Krukenberg. — Arch.f. Gyndk. Bd. xxviii. Hft. 3. 
Kehrer. — Arch.f. Gyndk. and Med. Times and Gaz. 1882. i., p. 479. 

Arch.f. Gyndk. 1885-6. xxvii., p. 227. 
Leopold. — Deutsche. Med. Woch. 1886. xii., p. 545. 

Arch. f. Gyndk. 1886. xxviii., p. 97. 
Mv^STER.—Centralbl.f. Gyndk. 1886. x., p. 82. 
PoTOCKi. — Ann. de gynec. Par. 1886. xxv., pp. 280, 345, 416. 
Sanger, — Arch.f. Gyndk. 1885. xxvi., p. 2. 
Schauta. — Wien. Med. Woch. 1886. xxxvi., pp. 73, loi, 136. 
Skutsch. — Archiv. f. Gyndk. 1886. xxviii , p. 131. 

PORRO'S OPERATION. 

Arnott. — Trans. Med. and Phys. Soc. Bombay. 1885. vii., p. 48. 
Bartlett. — A modification. Journ. Amer. Med. Ass. 1886. vii., p. 385. 
Bazzotti — (2nd Porro). Gaz. med. ital. lomb. Milano. 1886. viii. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 777 



BouDON. — Thei-ap. Contemp. Paris. 1886. vi., p. 277. 
Braun. — Wieii. Med. Woch. 1S83. Nos. 45, 46. 
Chiara. — Ann. nniv. di med. e chir. Milano. 1878. 

Ann. d. Obstet. Milano. 1879. &c. 
Chalot. — Modification. Gaz. hcbd. 1883. v., pp. 265, 291, 315. 
Demaison. — Gaz. hebd. de med. Paris. 1880. xvii., p. 534, 
Etheridge. — With Myoma Uteri. Chicago Med. Journ. 1886. liii., p. 494. 
Fehling. — Centralbl.f. Gyniih. 1884. No. 2. And Nov. 23rd, 1878. 
Fochier. — Lyon Med. 1879. xxxi., pp. 393, 473, 505, 675. 
Godson. — Brit. Med. Journ. Jan. 26th, 1884. 

Lancet. 1884. i., p. 142. 
Grossmann. — Modification. Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. 1883. P. 477. 
Harris. — Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. April, 1885. 

Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1880, et alibi. 
Herman. — Med. Time-^ and Gaz. 1884. ii., p. 219. 

HoFMEiER. — Zur Indicationstellung, &c. Deutsche med, Woch. 1886. xii.,p. 513. 
Imbert de la Touche. — Paris. 1878. 
Jones. — Trans. Obstet. Soc. Lond. 1886. xxvii., p. 4. 
King. — Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1884. P. 348. 
Lucas-Championn;ere. — Bull. Soc. de Chir. 18S6. xii., p. 93. 
Lumpe. — Arch. f. Gyndk. 1884. Bd. xxiii. Hft. 2. 
Mangiagalli. — Abst. in Am. journ. Med. Sc. July, 1884. 
Ann. de Obstet. Milano. 1879 and 1880. 
'M.KV.rin.—Zeitschr.f.Geb.u.Gyn. 1884. Bd. x. Hft. i. 
Maygrier. — Paris. 1880. 

MuLLER. — Centralbl. f. Gynak. March 2nd, 1878. 
Partridge. — (Rupture.) N . Y . Med. Journ. July 19th, 1884. 
Patterson. — With Myoma. Glasg. Med. Journ. April, 1885. 
Pavvlik. — Papers in Wien. Med. Woch. 1S79, 1880. 

Petit. — Med. Times and Gaz, 1882. i., p. 359. (From Archiv. Gen. de Med.) 
Pinard. — Ann. de Gyn4c. Paris. 1879 and 1880. 
PoRRO. — Ann. Univ. de Medicina. Oct., 1876. 
Riedinger. — Wien. Med. Woch. 1879. xxix., p. 537 et seq. 
Savage. — Birm. Med. Rev. Nov., 1883. 
Slavjansky. — Rupture. Paris. i856. 
Simpson. — Edin. Med. Journ. July, 1884. 

Spath. — Impl. Roy. Soc. of Vienna, and Wien. Med. Woch. 1878. 
Tait. — Two Cases. Brit. GyuiFC. Journ. 1886. ii., p. 57. 
Taylor. — Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. 1880. Ixxx. , p. 115. 
Veit. — Zeit.f. Geb. n. Gyndk. 1880. v., p. 256. 
ViNC.'Ni. — Lancet. Feb. 28th, 1885. 

Wassiege. — Bull. acad. roy. de med. de Belg. Brussels, 1878. 
Wells. — Brit. Med. Journ. June nth, 1887. 



LAPARO-ELYTROTOMY. 

Baudelocque. — op. Cesariennc, Elytrotomie, &c. Paris. 1844. 
Edis. — Brit. Med. Journ. Nov. 30th, 1878. 
Ganzinette. — Le Bull. Med. June ist, 1887. 
Garrigues. — Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1S83. p. 33. 

Neii) York Med. Journ. Nov., 1878. And Reprint. 
Gillette. — Am. Journ. Obstet. 1880. xiii., p. 98. 
Hine. — Lancet. Nov. 9th, 1878. 

Jewett. — Two Cases. Trans. Amer. Gyn. Soc. 1886. x., p. 344. 
Fallen. — New York Med. Rec. 1878. xiii., p. 286. 
Skene. — Annals of Surgery. 1885. i. No. i. 

Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1876. viii., p. 626. 

N. Y. Med. Journ. 1874. xx., p. 401. 



778 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 



Thomas. — Amer. Journ. Obstet. 1S70. iii., p. 125. 

Ibid. 1875. ix., p. 326. 

Trans. N. Y. Obstet. Soc. 1879. i., p. 354. 
Vella. — Gastro-elitrotomia. Morgagni. Napoli. 1857. 



OPERATIONS FOR ECTOPIC GESTATION. 

Adam and O'Hara. — Austral. Med. Journ. Aug. 15th, 1887. 
Adams. — Opern. Gaz. Med. de Paris. 1871. xxvii. 
Atlee. — Amer. Journ. Med. Se. Oct., 1878. 

Barbour. — Case. Frozen Section. Edin. Med. Journ. Sept., 1882. 
Bard. — Med. Obscrv. and Enquiries. Lond. 1764. 
BoNiLLY. — Soc. de Cliir. de Par. Dec, 1886. 

Bratton. — Double Uterus. Opern. Trans. S. Carolina Med. Ass. iS'6. P. 61. 
Fifteen years' standing. Case. Tr. S. Car. Med. Ass. 18S8. P. 121. 
Breudel. — Opern. Sth month. Centralbl. f. Gynhtik. Oct. 13th, 1S83. 
Bruch. — Laparotomy. Cure. Le Prog. Med. Dec. iSth, 18S6. And Bull, et 

Mem. de la Soc. de Chir. 1S86. xii., p. 887. 
Chambers. — Austral. Med. Gaz. Sept., 1885. 
Champneys. — Brit. Med. Journ. Dec. 3rd, 1887. 
Cooke. — Lond. Obstet. Trans, v. 

CzEMPiN. — Zwei Falle, &c. Deutsche, vied. Woch. 1886. xii., p. 466. 
DiONis. — Course of Chirurgical Operations. Eng. Trans. Lond. 1733. 
Doran. — Lancet. 1SS2. ii., p. 944. 

Trans. Obstet. Soc. 1885. xxiv. 
Dun-can.— Cases. St. Bart.'s Hosp. Rep. 18S3. 
Duncan (M.atthews) and Mason.— Four Cases. Abst. in Med. CJiron. Feb., 

1885. 
East.man. — Operation. Child and mother alive. Ain. Journ. Obstet. 1888. 

xxi., 929. 
Godson. — Removal by vaginal incision. Brit. Med. Journ. Dec. 3rd, 1S87. 
Harris. — Phila. Med. News. May 21st, 1887. 
Hun. — Case. Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. July, 1884. 
Ferguson. — North Carolina Med. Journ. i885. xvii., p. 210. 
Freund. — Edin. Med. Journ. Sept., Nov., Dec, 1883. 
Galabin. — Obstet. Trans. 1S82. xxiv., p. 141. 
Gervis. — Brit. Med. Journ. 1886. ii., p. 818. 
Grandin. — Am. Journ. Obst. 1886. xix., p. 244. 
Gregory. — Opern. St. Louis Cour. Med. 18S6. xvi., p. 235. 
Hamon. — Paris med. 18S6. xi., p. 421. 
Harris. — Cystectomy or Cystotomy, with Living and Viable Foetus. Am. 

Journ. Med. Sc. 1SS8. xcvi., p. 262. 
Jakins. — Austral. Med. Gaz. 1S85-6. v., p. 271. 

Janvrin. Case of Tubal Pregnancy. Trans. Amer. Gyn^^c. Soc. 1886. P. 471. 
Johnson. — Case of Operation. New York Med. Pec. Feb. 26th, 18S7. 
Kelly. — Removal of Sac and contents. N. Y. Med. Journ. 1SS6. xliii., 

p. 617. 
Langer. — Ein Fall, &c. Griefswald. 1886. 

Leopold. — Med. T. and Gaz. 18S2. i., p. 41. And Arch iv. f. Gyniih. 
LiTTLEwooD. — Lancet. 1886. i. , p. 36. 
LusK.— Bn7. Med. Journ. Dec. 4th, 1886. 

Boston Med. and Surg. Journ. 1S86. cxv. , p. 34. 
Macdonald. — Opern. Resec of Gut. Edin. Med. Journ. Feb., 1S84. 
McNaught. — Brit. Med. Journ. Jan. 21st, 18S8. 
MKYGRi^R.—Terminaisons et traitement, &c. Paris. 18S6. 
Meadows. ^Discussion. Obstet. Trans, xiii., xiv. 
Moullin.— 7ra;;s. Obst. Soc. 1S84. xxv. 
Notta. — Opern. 7 years. Prog. Med. May, 1884. 



BIBLIOGRAPH 779 

Oettinger. — Prog. vied. 18S4. xii., p. 196. 

O'Hara. — Opern. for Rupture. Pliila. Med. News. 1886. xlviii., p. 692. 
Parry. — Extra-Uterine Pregnancy. 
Pennefather. — Lancet. June 20th, 1863. 

Penrose. — Two Cases. Phila. Med. News. 18S8. liii., p. 276. 
PiNARD; — Diet. Encyc. des. Sc. vied. 1886. xi., p. 194. 
Price (Joseph). — Two Cases. Reprint from Practice. Phila. Jan., 1SS9. 
Rennert. — Archil', f. Gyndk. 1884. No. 52. 
Robertson. — Opern. Brit. Med. Joiirn. Feb. 13th, 18S6. 
Rousseau. — Opern. Union med. Sept. 30th, 187S. 
Sale. — Med. Journ. New Orleans. Oct., i860. 
Sinclair (W. ].)—Brit. Med. Journ. Jan. 21st, 1888. 
Spanton. — Opern. Brit. Med. Journ. Jan. 12th, 1884. 
Spofforth. — Opern. Brit. Med. Journ. 1886. i., p. 154. 

'Tait. — Pathology and Treatment. Brit. Med. Journ. August i6th, 1SS4, and 
April iSth, 18S5. And Lancet. 1S88. ii., p. 409. 
Lectures on Ectopic Pregnancy. 1S8S. 
Taylor. — Cincinnati Lancet. 18S6. xvi., p. 451. 
Thatcher. — Edin. Med. Journ. Oct., 1S82. 

Thomas.— Electric Current. N. Y. Med. Journ. Oct. nth, 18S4. 
Thornton. — Obstct. Trans. 1SS2. xxiv., p. 81. 
Valentine. — N . Y. Med. Journ. Jan. 23rd, 18S6. 
YEiT.^Die Eileiterschwangerscha/t. Stuttgart. 1S84. 
Ward.— New York Med. Rec. Sept. 27th, 1S84. 
Werth. — Archiv.f. Gynlik. xxiv., p. 2. 

Deutsche vied. Woch. Oct. 20th, 1887. 
Wiener. — Arch. f. Gynah. 18S5. xxvi., p. 2. 
Williams. — Living child. Brit. Med. Journ. Dec. 3rd, 1887. 



OPERATIONS ON THE STOMACH. 

Barker. — Gastro-enterostomy. Case. Brit. Med. Journ. Feb. 13th, 1886. 
Barwell. — Gastrostomy. Case. Brit. Med. Journ. Dec. 5th, 1885. 
Bertoye. — Gastrostomie et dil. dig. du pylore. . . . Lyon Med. 1S86. 

Hi., p. 76. 
Billroth. — Clin. Surgery. New Syd. Soc. 1881. 

Coats and M.aylard. — Pylorect. Case. Brit. Med. Journ. July 24th, 1886. 
Cohen. — Recherches sur le manuel op. de la gastrostomie. Tlicrap. Contemp. 

Par. 1886. vi., p. 323, et seq. 
Chavasse. — Gastrostomy. Lancet. 1886. i., p. 388. 

Golding-Bird. — Jejunostomy. Case. Brit. Med. Journ. Dec. 5th, 1885. 
Gross. — Gastrostomy, &c. Anicr. Journ. Med. Sc. July, 1884. 
Von Hacker. — Die viagenoperationen an Billroth' s Klinik. Wien. 1885. 
Idelson. — Cases of Gastrostomy in Russian Journals. Lond. Med. Rec. 

July, 1886. 
KvH.—Uebcr die Resection des Pylorus. Berlin. 1882. 
Lauenstein. — Zur technik der Pylorus resection. Verhand. d. deutsch. Gesell. 

f. Chir. 1885. xiv., p. loi. 
Leuf. — Stomach, Anatomy, &c. Phila. Med. News. April i6th, 1887. 
LuTZ. — Technique of Gastrectomy. St. Louis M. and S. Journ. 1882. P. 380. 
Maydl. — Ueber Gastrostomie. Wien. vied. Bl. 1882. v., p. 449, et seq. 
McBurney. — Pyloric Stenosis. Two Operns. New York Med. Journ. Jan. 

i6th. 1886. 
McGill. — Gastrostomy. Two Cases. Lancet. 18S1. ii., p. 942. 
Mikulicz. — Pylorect. Case. New York Med. Rec. Oct. 27th, 18S3. 
Morgan. — Gastrostomy in boy aged 4. Brit. Med. Journ. Dec. 5th, 1S85. 
Morse. — Gastro-enterostomy. Case. Brit. Med. Journ. March 13th, 1886. 
MuRiE. — De la resection du pylore, 6<,c. Paris. 1883. 



780 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Petit. — Sur quelques points de I'histoire de la Gastrostomie. Union Med. 

1884. xxxvii. 
PoLAiLLON.— Gastrotomy for fork. Bull. Acad, de Med. 1886. xvi., p. 240. 
RocKWiTZ. — Gastro-enterostomie. Deutsche zeit. f. Chir. Bd. xxv. Hft. 6. 
Ryan. — Gastrostomy with tracheotomy. Austral. Med. Gaz. 1885. v., p. 271. 
Schramm. — Pylorectomy. Success. Centralbl. f. Chiv. 1887. xii. 
Stonham. — Gastrostomy with tracheotomy. Lancet. 1886. ii., p. 625. 
Street (for Kocher). — Pylorectomy. Three Cases. Zeit f. Chir. xxvii., 

5 u. 6. 
Tansini. — Pylorectomy. Abst. in Lond. Med. Rec. Nov. 15th, 1887. 
Thornton. — Gastrostomy for mass of hair. Lancet. Jan. 19th, 1886. 
WiNSLOw. — Operations for Pyloric Stenosis. Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. April, 

1885. 
WoLFER. — Zur Resektion des Carcinomatosen Pylorus. Wien. vied. Woch. 

1882. xxxii. 
Zesas. — Gastrostomie und ihre Resultate. Arch. f. Klin. Chir. 1885. Bd. 

xxxii. Hft. I. 



OPERATIONS ON THE INTESTINES. 

Ashhurst. — Intestinal Obstruction. Internat. Encyc. Surg. 1886. vi. And 

Phila. Polyclinic. 1885-6. iii., p. 157. 
Ball. — Dub. Journ. Med. Sc. 1886. Ixxxii., p. 265. 
Ballance. — Colectomy. Lancet. 1883. ii., p. 5^5. 
Banks. — Resect, of Gangrenous Intest. Med. Times and Gaz. May 2nd, 1885. 

Treatment of Intest. Obst. Lancet. 1885. i., p. 39. 
Barker. — Intest. Obst. Opern. Brit. 3Ied. Journ. 1886. i., p. 445. 

Opern. for Intussusception. Lancet. 1S88. ii., p. 200. 
Barlow and Godlee. — Supp. Appendicitis. Opern. Lancet. Dec. 19th, 

1885. 
Bartleet. — Surg. Treat, of Intest. Obst. Birm. Med. Rev. 18S3. xiv., 

p. 221. 
Barton — Portion of Colon removed with Tumour. Lancet. May 24th, 1884. 
Bayliss. --Intussusception in Children. Ant. Journ. Obstet. 1886. xix., 

p. 1156. 
Bell. — Intest. Obst. Case. Edin. Med. Journ. April, 1886. 
Benham. — Intest. Obst. Diag. and Treat. Brit. Med. Journ. 1S82. ii., 

p. 165. 
Besnier.— Dfs etranglements internes de Vintestin. Paris, i860. 
Blum. — De la resection de I'estomac. Arch. gen. de vied. 18S2. cl., p. 332. 
Braun. — Operat. Treat, of Intussusception. Archiv.f. klin. Chir. Bd. xxxiii. 
Hft. 2. 
Operation for Intussusception. Archiv.f. klin. Chir. xxxiii., p. 2. 
Brinton. — Intestinal Obstruction. London. 1867. 

Bristowe. — Malig. Dis. of Caecum. Cases. Med. Times and Gaz. July 4th, 
1885, et seq. 
Obstruction of the Bowels. Reynolds Syst. Med. iii. 
Bryant. — Papers on Intest. Obstruction in Med. Times and Gaz., 1872, and 
Brit. Med. Journ. 1884. 
Colectomy. Brit. Med. Journ. 18S2. 
BuRCHARD. — Treatment, Med. and Surg., of Acute Peritonitis. N. Y. Med. 

Journ. August 15th, 1885. 
Byrd. — Artificial Anus. Rad. cure. Phila. Med. News. 18S4. xliv. 

Enterectomy. N. Y. Med. Rec. 18S2. xxii., p. 163. 
Chanternesse. — Obst. intest. guerison par le lavage de I'estomac. France 

vied. 1885. i., p. 339. 
Chew. — Oblique Resection. New Orleans Med. and Surg. Journ. 18S6. xiv., 
p. 218. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 781 

CouPLAND. — Stricture of Intestine, &c. Brit. Med. Journ. 1878. i., p. 122. 
Davies-Collev. — Colotomy, delayed opening. Clin. Soc. Trans. 1885. p. 204. 
Doyen. — Internal Strangulation. Union. Med. Reims. 1686. x., p. 89. 
DuPLAY. — Du traitement chir. de I'occlusion intestinale. ArcJiiv. gen. de med. 

1879. cxliv., p. 709. 
Eastman. — Colectomy. Journ. Amer. Med. Assn. Dec. 31st, 18S7. 
Edmunds. — Gastro-colic fistula. St. Thos. Hasp. Rep. xiii., p. 91. 
Fagge. — Intest. Obstruct. Kneading. Cure. Lancet. 1872. ii., p. in. 
Fenwick. — 125 Cases of Perforation of Appendix. Cincin. Lancet. March 

2Sth, 1885. 
Fleming. — Resect, of Gangren. Intest. Lancet. Sept. loth, 1887. 

Obstruct, of Intest. cured by Stomach-pump. Med. T. and Gaz. 
1866. i., p. 413. 
Foley. — Cascotomy for Dysentery. Cong, franc, de chir. 1885. 
Forest. — Intussusception in Children. Am. Journ. Obst. 1886. xix. 
Fuller. — Resect, of Intest. Three Cases. New York Med. Rec. 1882. 

ii., p. 430. 
Gaston. — Surgery of Ileo-caecal Connections. Pamphlet. 18S7. 
GoLDiNG-BiRD. — Jejunostomy. Brit. Med. Journ. 1SS5. ii-. P- 1063. 
Gould. — Unusual cause. Obstruction. N. Y. Med. Rec. 1886. xxx., p. 443. 
Gross. — Scirrhus of Colon. Laparotomy. Phila. 3Ied. Times. Nov. 28th,. 

1S85. 
Habershon. — Diseases of the Abdomen. Lond. 1885. 
VoN Hacker. — Pylorectomy and Gastro-enterostomy. Arch. f. klin. Chir. 

18S5. xxxii. 
Hahn. — Colectomy and Enterectomy. (Abst.) Med. Chron. Nov., 1887. 
Hall. —Peritonitis from Appendicitis. Opern. N. Y. Med. Journ. June 

i2th, 1SS6. 
Hardie. — Enterectomy for Intest. Fistula. Case. Med. Chron. Jan., 1885. 
Harris. — Suture of Appolito. Med. News, Phila. xlix., p. 445. 
Haslam. — Resection and Suture of Intestine. Birm. Med. Rev. Feb., 1887. 
Henrot. — De la valcur . . . du taxis abdominal, &c. Reims. 1883. 
Henrotin. — Resection for Fistula. Journ. Amer. Med. Ass. Dec. 5th, 1887. 
Hutchinson. — Notes on Intest. Obstruction. Brit. Med. Journ. 1878. ii., 

P- 305- 
Obstruction. Taxis. Recovery. Med. T. and Oaz. 1872. 
ii., p. 652. 
III. — Resect, of Intest. Two Cases. New York Med. Rec. Oct. 27th, 1883. 
Jennings. — Expts. on Intest. Resect. Lancet. Nov. 22nd, 1884. 
Jessett. — Cancer of Alimentary Canal. London. 1886. 
Jones, S. — Resect, of Gangrenous Intest. Lancet Oct. 3rd, 1885. 
Kelsey. — Colotomy. Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. Oct., 18S5. 
Kocher. — Resection of 5 ft. of Intestine. Corrcsp. Blatt. March ist, 18S6. 
Kronlein. — Enterostomy. Case. Berl. klin. Woch. 1879. Nos. 35, 36. 
Kussmaul. — Heilung von Ileus durch magenausspulung. Bcrl, klin. Woclt. 

1S84. xxi., pp. 609, 6S5. 
Lammiman. — Colectomy. Lancet. Aug. 4th, 1883. 
Le Moyne. — Contrib. a I't'tude de I'occlusion intestinale Paris. 1S7S. 
Leveque. — De I'occlusion intest. prod, par les rotations, &c. Paris. 1S85. 
Lloyd. — Sigmoid Colotomy. Lancet. June 21st, 1884. 
McArdle. — Enterectomy. Case. Trans. Roy. Acad, of Med. 18SS. 
Macleod. — Intest. Obstruction, &c. Brit. Med. JoJirn. 1876. ii., pp. 643, 705. 
Madelung.— Modn. of Colotomy. Lond. Med. Rec. 1884. P. 345. 
Makins.— Artificial Anus. Resection. St. Thos. Hasp. Rep. 1884. P. 181. 
Malins. — Laparo-enterotomy. Two cases. Brit. Med. Journ. 1883. ii., 

p. 581. 
Marcy. — Operns. for Intest. Obst. Boston Med. and Surg. Journ. 1886. cxv., 

p. 79. 
Marshall. — Colectomy. Lancet. May 6th, 1SS2. 
McGuiRE. — Intest. Obstruction. Pepper's Syst. Tract. Med. Phila. 18S5. ii. 



782 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

Morris. — Various papers. Brit. Med. Joimi. 1884. ii. , p. 1075. And 1885 

i., p. 311. 
NicoLAYSEN.— Colectomy. Case. Med. Times and Gaz. 1882. ii., p. 360. 
Obalinski. — Laparotomie bei int. Darmokklusion. Wien. Med. Press. 1886, 

xxvii., p. 140. 
Parker. — Resect. 9 in. for Gangrene. Trans. S. Carolina Med. Ass. 1886. 

P. 73- 
Parker, R. — Intestinal Obstruction. Brit. Med. Journ. 1883. ii., p. 669. 

Resect, for Gangrene. Brit. Med. Journ. Jan. 22nd, 1877. 
Peyrot. — De I' intervention chir. dans V obstruct de l' infest in. Paris. 1880. 
Pilcher. — Indications for Opern. in Intest. Obst. Ann. Surg. 1886. iii., 

p. 214. 
Porter. — Artificial Anus. Closure. Boston Med. and Surg. Journ. 1886. 

cxv., p. 80. 
PoRTEUS. — Invagination, Sloughing. Rec. Gaillard's Journ. New York, 

1886. xlii. , p. 135. 
PosTEMPSKi. — Resez. d'intestino. Bull. d. Reale Accad. Med. Guigno. 1886. 
PouLET. — Treatise on Foreign Bodies. Wood's Series. New York. 
Prati. — Resection of Gangrenous Intest. Case. Lond. Med. Rec. 1884. P- 8. 
Rand. — Diagnosis of Course of Bowel. Brit. Med. Jonrn. 18S3. ii., p. 581. 
Reichel. — Zur Diagnostik und Therapie des Ileus. Deutsche Med.-Zeit. 1884. 

ii., pp. 471, 483, 495. 
Richter. — Resect, of Strictured Bowel. Centralbl. f. Chir. 18S2. 
Roser. — Zur Laparotomie bei Ileus. Deutsche ined. Woch. 18S6. xii. , p. 86. 
Schramm. — Laparotomy for Intest. Occlusion. Three Cases. Archiv.f. Klin. 
Chir. Bd. XXX. Hft. 4. 
Two Laparotomies for Invagination. Centralbl. f. Chir. 1887. xii. 
Smith (Thos.) — Removal of Gall-stone. Lancet. Dec. 3rd, 18S7. 
Thomas. — Intestinal Disease and Obstruction. Lond. 18S3. 
Treves. — Anat. of Intest. and Peritoneum in Man. Lond. 1885. 
Intestinal Obstruction. Lond. 1883. 
Resection of Intestine's. Med. -Chir. Trans. 18S6. 
Truc. — Traitement Chir. de la Peritonite. Paris. 18S6. 

Verneuil. — New Method of Colotomy. Phila. Med. Times. May i6th, 1885. 
Walker (E. D.) — Removal of Spoon from Small Intestine. Cinein. Lancet and 

Clinic. Dec. loth, 1887. 
Walker (H. O.)— Two Resections for Gangrene. Med. Age. Detroit, Sept. 

26th, 1S87. 
Warren. — Process of Repair after Resection, &c. Trans. Amer. Surg. Assn. 

1887. 
Weir. — Colectomy. Case. Table of Cases. A''. Y. Med. Journ. Feb. 13th, 
18S6. 
Intestinal Obstruction. Ann. Anat. and Surg. Brooklyn. 1883. 
Wetekump. — Beitrage zur Lehre vom Ileus. Berlin. 1883. 
Whitehead. — Ccecectomy for Epithelioma. Brit. Med. Journ. Jan. 24th, 

1585. 
WiNSLOW. — Intest. Obst. Opern. Am. Journ. Med. Sc. 1S86. xci. 
Wood. — Fibroma of Caecum ; Enchondroma of Peritoneum. Opern. Lancet. 

1881. i., p. 249. 
Wyeth. — Laparotomy and Intestinal Suture. N. Y. Med. Journ. March 

19th, 18S7. 
Wylie. — Suppurative Peritonitis, &c. N. Y. Med. Rec. 1886. xxx., p. 553. 



OPERATIONS ON THE KIDNEY. 

Special Works. — Morris, Bruce Clarke, Dickinson, Roberts, Ralfe, Landau, 

Bartels, Rosenstein, Newman. 
Adams. — Nephrectomy. Case. Brit. Med. Journ. 1882. ii., p. 1153. 
Agnew. — Nephrorraphy and Nephrectomy. Phila. Med. Times. July 13th, 

1885. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 783 

Baker (Morraxt). Nephrotomy. Trans. Loud. Ivternat. Congress, ii., p. 262. 

Also in same volume, Barker, Lucas, Barwell, and others. 
Barker. — Cases of Opern. Lancet. 1885. i., pp. 95, 141. 

Lumbar Nephrectomy. Med.-Chir. Trans. 1S81. p. 257. 
Baum. — Statistics of Nephrectomy. Phila. Med. Times. Feb. 21st, 1885. And 

Med. and Surg. Rep. Phia. 1888. vol. lix., p. 387. 
Von Bergmann. — Nephrectomy. Four Cases. Centralbl. f. Chir. 1884. No. 45. 
Berkeley-Hill. — Nephro-lithotomy. Lancet. June 13th, 1S85. 
Billroth. — Nephrectomy. Med. Times and Gaz. 1884. ii-' P- 27. 
Boeckel. — Nephrectomy for Ureteric Fistula. Brit. Med. Jov.vn. 1884. '•. 

p. 1262. 
Brosin. — Congenital Sarcoma. VircJiow's Archiv. Bd. cxvi. Hft. 3. 
Carter. — Renal Calculus. Liverpool Med.-Chir. Journ. 18S6. vi., p. 480. 
Chiene. — Nephro-lithotomy. Brit. Med. Journ. 1S85. i., p. 2S0. 
Clarke (Bruce). — Nephro-lithotomy, &c. Lancet. Nov. 7th, 1885. 
Coupek. — Nephrectomy. Med. T. ami Gaz. 1880. ii., p. 5S8. 
Croft. — Nephrectomy for Sarcoma. Lancet. May 23rd, 1885. 
Cullingworth. — Nephrectomy. Sarcoma. Med. Chron. 1886. v., p. no. 
Dandois. — Tnmeiir maligne . . . Operation. Brux. i!586. 
Davy. — Nephrectomy. Case. Brit. Med. Journ. 1884. "•■ P- 757- 
Dickinson and Rouse. — Nephro-lithotomy. Clin. Soc. Trans. 1SS5. 
Discussion on Nephrectomy, Med.-Chir. Soc. Lancet. 18S0. i., p. 402. 
Discussion on Nephro-lithotomy. Lancet. Feb. 19th, 1887. 
Duncan (J.) — Nephrotomy. Edin. Med. Journ. July, 1S81. 
Dunning. — Nephrectomy. Journ. Amer. Med. Assoc. Nov. 19th, 1887. 
Edis. — Sacculated Kidney removed. Brit. Gynac. Journ. iSS6.- i., p. 408. 
Elder. — Nephrectomy. Case. Brit. Med. Journ. 18S2. ii., p. S35. And 

two Cases. Lancet. Aug. ist, 1885. 
Gluck. — Diag. of unilateral dis. Centralbl. f. Chir. 1SS4. ^O- 45- 
GoDLEE. — Nephrectomy in Lifants. Paper before Clin. Soc. Lond. 
Grant. — Movable Kidney. Austral. Med. Journ. Aug. 15th, 1887,^^5^^. 
Gross. — Nephrectomy. Phila. Med. Times. May2nd, 1SS5. And Amer. Journ 

Med. Sc. July, 1885. 
Heilburn. — Beitrage zur Nephrektomie. Centralbl. f. Gyncik. 1886. xi., p. 1. 
Heineke. — Nephrotomy and Nephrectomy. Von Pitha and Billroth's Surgery. 
HoLL. — Anomalies of 12th rib, &c. Langenbeck's Archiv. Bd. xxv. Hft. i. 
Howard. — Suspected Calculus. Opern. Lancet. 1886. i., p. 1112. 
Imlach. — Cases of Nephrectomy. Liverpool Med.-Chir. Journ. 1886. vi., 

p. 478. 
Israel. — Nephrectomy. Case. Lancet. 1883. i. 
KocHER. — Nephrectomy. Deutsche Zeit. f. Chir. Bd. ix. Hft. 304. 
KuMMELL. — Nephrectomy. Sarcoma. Deutsche med.Woch. 1886. xii., p. 489. 
Lange. — Surg. Anat. of Kidneys. Ann. of Surg. Oct., 1885. 

Nephrotomy, double, and Nephrectomy. Cases. Neiv York Med. 
Journ. 1886. xliii., p. 108. 
Langenbuch. — Nephrectomy. Case. Berl. klin. Woch. 1877. ^^o. 24. 
Le Dentu. — Nephrectomy. Archiv. Gen de Med. June, 1S84. 

Technique de la Nephrectomie. Rev. de chir. 1886. vi., p. 104, 
And others. Discussion. Mem. ct Bull, de la Soc. de Chir. 1886. 
2e. Sess. p. 12S. 
Leopold. — Nephrectomy. Archiv. f. Gyniik. And Med. T. and Gaz. 18S2. 

ii., p. 558. 
Lloyd (Jordan). — Observ. in Kidney Surg. Birm. Med. Rev. Dec, 1886. 
Lossen. — Nephrectomy. Lond. Med. Rec. 1881. p. i. 
Lucas. — Nephrotomy and Nephrectomy. Brit. Med. Journ. 18S3. ii, p. 611. 

And Ibid. 18S4. i., p. 537. 
Maas. — Injuries of Kidney. Lond. Med. Rev. 1878. p. 421. 
Marshall. — Haematoma. Puncture and Drainage. Med.-Chir. Trans. 1883. 
May (Bennett). — Nephro-lithotomy. Case. Lancet. 1H83. i., p. 278. 
Morris. — Methods of Operating. Lancet. 1884. 1., p. 464. 



784 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

MiNGES. — Primary Malignant Dis. of Kidneys. Joiirn. Amer. Med. Ass. 

June 6th, 1S85. 
Newman — Catheterization of Ureter. Glasg. Med. Journ. July, 1885. 
Ollier. — De la nephrectomie. Bull. acad. de vied. 1S83. xii., p. 1077. 
Park. — Nephrectomy on Child. Trans. Am. Surg. Ass. 1886. iv., p. 259. 
Paul. — Classification of Growths. Brit. Med. Journ. Jan. 12th, 1S84. 
PoLAiLLON.— Nephrectomy for Floating Kidney. France med. 18S6. ii., 

p. 966. 
Polk. — Movable Solitary Kidney removed. N. Y. Med. Journ. Feb. 17th, 

1883. 
Price. — Removal for Traumatism. Tr. Med. Soc. Pcnnsylv. 1888. xx. , p. 200, 
Rawdon. — Nephrectomy for Rupture. Liverpool Med.-Chir. Journ. Jan., 1884. 
Roberts. — Localising Perinephric Lesions. Trans. Am. Surg. Ass. 1885. 

ii., p. 518. 
Schmidt. — -Hysterectomy and Nephrectomy. Milnchen Med. Woch. 1886. 

xxxiii., p. 701. 
Smith (Th.) — Renal Calculus. Med.-Chir. Trans, liv., p. 211. 
Solomon. — Nephrectomy. Calculous pyelitis. La Gaz. degli Osp. Aug. 31st, 

1884. 
Symonds.— Nephro-lithotomy. Clin. Soc. Trans. 1885. p. 180. 
Tait. — Surgery of Kidney. Birin. Med. Rev. July, 1884. 
Taylor (J. W.) — Rupture of Hydronephrosis. Opern. Lancet. Oct. 4th, 

1884. 
Thomas. — Nephrectomy for Myxo-fibroma. Am. Journ. Obstet. 18S2. xv. 

Supp. 42. 
Thornton. — Nephrectomy. Cases. Lancet. 1883. i., p. 899. 
Tiffany. — Nephro-lithotomy. Case, /liila. Med. Journ. May 2nd, 1885. 
Torres. — Nephro-lithotomy. Thermo-cautery. Land. Med. Rec. 1879. P. 229, 
Walter. — Nephrectomy for Cystic Floating Kidney. Brit. Med. Journ. 1883. 

ii., p. 615. 
Weir. — Nephrectomy. 'New York Med. Journ. Dec. 27th, 1S84. 
Whitehead. — Nephrectomy for Sarcoma. Lancet. Aug. 15th, 1885. 
Wright. — Nephro-lithotomy. Case. Med. Chron. 1886. iv., p. 34. 



OPERATIONS ON THE LIVER AND GALL-BLADDER. 

Alexander. — Cholecystotomy. Case. Liverpool Med.-Chir. Journ. i885, 

vi., p. 221. 

Cholecyst. 8 pints of bile. Ibid. 1888. viii., p. 508. 
BoECKEL. — Cholecystotomie, &c. Mem. Soc. de vied, de Strasburg. 1884-5. 

xxii., p. 126. 
BouiLLY. — Hepatic hydatid ; rem. by laparotomy. Bull. Soc. de Chir. iSS5. 

xii., p. 147. 
Briddon. — New York Med. Journ. Jan. 31st, 1885. 
Phila. Med. News. 1885. xlvi., p. 115. 
Brun. — Cholecystotomy. Arch. g^n. de med. 1885. i., p. 200. 
Buchanan. — Cholecystotomy. Brit. Med. Journ. 1886. i., p. 872. 
CoLzi. — Surgery of Biliary Passages. Sperimcntale. Florence. 1886. Ivii., 

pp. 225, 337, 457. 
Creyx. — D'lin nouveau procedd op. des Kystes hydat. du joie. Par., 1881. 
Croft. — Hepatotomy. Hyd. Cyst. Med. T. and (jaz. 1883. ii., p. 597. 
Curnow and J. Smith.— Hepatic Abscess. Cases. Lancet. Jan. 2nd, 1886. 
Cyr. — Cholecystotomy. Union med. 1885. xxxix., p. 109. 
Eddowes. — Cyst of Liver, Laparotomy. Brit. Med. Journ. 1884. i., p. 410. 
Elsner.— Cholecyst. for Abscess. Buffalo Med. and Surg. Journ. July, 1887. 
Gardner. — Cholecystotomy. Austral. Med. Journ. 1884. vi., p. 34. 
Gaston. — Brit. Med. Journ. 1885. i., p. 324. 

Duodeno-cholecystotomy. Phila. Med. and Surg. Rep. Sept. 12th, 



BIBLIOGRAPHY, 785 

Gould (Keetley). — Cholecystotomies. Annals of Surgery. Oct., 1888. 
Hacker. — Operative Fixation of Movable Liver, &c. Wien. vied. Woch. 1886. 

xxxvi., pp. 485, 529. 
Hayes. — Hepat. Abscess. Joiirn. Amer. Med. Ass. Nov. 28th, 1885. 
Hutchison. — Cholecyst. Phila. Med. News. 1886. xlviii., p. 509. 
Idelson. — Abstract of Cases of Movable Liver. Loiid. Med. Rec. Aug. 15th, 

1885. 
Jacobi. — Hyd. Cyst. Removal. Tr. N. Y. Path. Soc. 1879. iii., p. 8. 
Jones. — Hydatid Cyst of Liver. Incision. Med. Chron. 1886. iv. , p. 36, 
Keen. — Cholecyst. Case. Phila. Med Times. Nov. 14th, 1885. 
KiRCHNER. — Zur. operat. Behand. der Leber-Echinococcen, Berl. Klin. 

Woch. 1880. xvii., p. 315. 
Kohl, — Cholecyst. Gorresp. El. f. Schweiz. Aertze. 1886. xvi.,p. 193. 
Landau. — Die Wanderleber, &c. Berlin. 1885. 

Landerer. — Cholecyst. Case. Mitnchen med. Woch. 1886. xxxiii, p. 297. 
Lange. — Cholecyst. New York Med. Joitrn. Jan. 23rd, 1886. 
Langenbuch. — Berl. Klin. Woch. 18S6. xxii. , p. 691. 

Berl. 7ued. Gesellsch. Jan. 26th, 1887. 
McGiLL. — Cholecystotomy. Case, Lajicet. 1884. "•■ P- 873, 

Abscess of Liver, Lancet. Jan. 14th, 1888. 
Musser and Keen. — Cholecyst. Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. Oct., 1884. 
Napier. — Cholecystotomy. Glasg. Med. Journ. 1886. xxvi., p. 299, 
Ohage. — Cholecystotomy (one case) and Cholecystectomy (one case). Phila. 

Med. News. Feb. 19th and 26th, 1886. 
OsLER. — Tapping the Gall-bladder, Med. News. Phila, 1882. xli., p. 3S0. 
Parkes. — Cholecyst. Case. Amer. Journ. Med. Sc. July, 1885, 
Petit. — Mem. de I'Acad. Roy. de Chir. Tome i., p, 163. 
PosNER, — Deutsche med. Woch. 1885. xi., p. 45. 
Poulet. — Hydatids of Liver. Rev. de Chir No, 6, 1886. p. 441. 

,, ,, Ball, et mem. de la Soc. de Chir. de Par. i885. 

xii., p. 129. 
Ranke. — Sixth Congress of Germ. Surg. 1877. 

Ransohoff. — Cholecyst. Hepat. Cases. New York Med, Rec. 1882, p. 25S, 
RoBSON (M.AYo). — Cholecyst. Cases, Lancet. Oct, 31st, 1885, 
Sheaffer. — Trans. Med. Soc. Renn. 1884. xvi., p. 474. 
Tait. — Surg. Treatment of Gall-stones. Lancet, Aug. 29th, 1885. 
Dis. of Ovaries, p. 335. 

Hepatotomy. Brit. Med. Journ. 1880. ii.,p. 975, And 1881. ii.,p. Si. 
And Birm. Med. Rev. 1881. iv., p. 343. 
Taylor (J. W.)— Cholecystotomy. Brit. Med. Journ. Jan. 21st, 1888. 
Terrier. — Kyste hydatique du foie, Laparotomie, Bull. Soc. de chir. 1886. 

xii. 
Thornton. — Hepat. for Hydatids. Cases. Med. Times and Gaz. 1SS3. i., 

p. 89. 
Truc. — Etitde hist, et crit. du traitement chir. des Kystes hyd. du foie. Par., 18S1. 
Ughetti. — Supp. Hepatitis. Lond. Med Rec. June, 1885. 
Whittaker. — Abscess of Liver. Cincin. Lancet. Oct. loth, 1885. 
Witzel. — Indications for Cholecyst. Deutsche Zeit. f. Chir. Bd. xxi. Hft. 

I and 2. 



OPERATIONS ON THE SPLEEN. 

Arnison. — Brit. Med. Journ. 1878. ii., p. 723. 
Bean. — Med. Times and Gaz. 1867. ii., p. 628. 

Ibid. 1868. i., p. 278. 
Besancon, — Kyste hydatique de la rate. Prog, vied. 1S86, iv,, p. 85; 
Billroth, — Wien. vied. Woch. 1877, No, 5. 

Lancet. June 7th, 1884, 
Blum, — Archiv. gen. de med, June, 1883. 

51 



786 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

Browne. — Lancet. 1877. ii., p. 310. 

Bryant. — Ibid. 1867. ii., p. 608. 

COATES.— (Abscess.) Brit. lUcd. Journ. 1884. ii., p. 143. 

Collier.— (Table and References.) Lancet. 1S82. i., p. 219. 

FouBERT. — De la splenotomie pour tumenrs de la rate. Paris. 1886. 

Franzolinl — Wien. vied. Woch. 1883. No. 20. 

FuHRER and LuDWiG. — (Experiments.) Vierordt's Archiv. 1855. xiv.,p. 307. 

Gilson. — Rev. de Chir. April, 1885. 

MoLLiERE. — Splenotomie. (References.) Diet. Encyc. des Sc. Med. 

Morse.— (Extirpation.) West. Lancet. San Francisco. 1882. ix., p. 403. 

Mo?,i.^-R.— Deutsche Med. Woch. 1884. No. 22. 

Myers. — Extirpation of Wandering Spleen. Journ. Amer. Med. Ass. April 

2nd, 1887. 
FkAN.—Gaz. Med. de Paris. 1867. P. 779. 
Thornton. — References and Cases. Med. -Chir. Trans. Ixix., p. 407. 

Cases of Splenectomy. Lancet. 1886. i., p. 854. 
WiLKS.— BnY. and For. Med. -Chir. Rev. 1856. ii., p. 231. 

Guy's Hasp. Rep. Series iii. ii., p. 37. 
WiNOGRADOFF. — Rcv. de Chir. 1885. p. 318. 

Wright, — Splenectomy. Case. Tables. 3Ied. Chron. Dec. 1888. 
YouNKiN. — Amer. Med. Journ. July, 1884. 
Zesas. — Langenbeek's Archiv. Bd. xxviii. P. 815. 



SUPRA-PUBIC CYSTOTOMY. 

EARLY AND HISTORICAL. 

Pierre Franco. — Petit Traite sur les Hernies. 1556. (Re-impression of the 

first edition in Rev. de Chirurg. 1884.) 
RoussETUS, — Traite Nouveau de VHysterotomotoliie ou Enfantement Cesarien. 

Paris. 1581 and 1596. 
HiLDANUS. — Treatise on Lithotomy. Frankfort. 1682. 
Douglas (John). — Lithotomia Douglassiana ; or a new method of cutting for 

the stone. First practised by John Douglas, F.R.S., Lithotomist to the 

Infirmary at Westminster. London. 1723. 
Cheselden.— A Treatise on the High Operation for the Stone, with xvii. 

Copper-plates. London. 1723. (This work contains also translations 

from the writings of Roussetus, Hildanus, Tolet, and Dionis, on the 

high operation.) 
Pye, Samuel (Surgeon of Bristol).— Some observations on the general methods 

of Lithotomy. London. 1724. 
Middleton (for Thornhill, Surgeon of Bristol).— An essay on the operation 

of Lithotomy : as it is performed by the new method above the os 

pubes. London, 1727. 
Morand. — Traite de la Taille au Haut Appareil. Paris. 1728. Translated 

by John Douglas. Lond. 1729. 
Heister. — Institutiones Chirurgical. Amsterdam. 1739. 

Couk-Frerk.— Nouvelle me'thode d'extraire la Pierre. . . . Brussels. 1779. 
Carpue. — History of the High Operation. London. 1819. 

operations for stone. 

Albert. — Wien. Med. Presse. 1S76. Nos. 4 and 5. 

Lehrbuch der Chir. 1883. iv., p. 127. 
VoN. Antal. — Eine modificirte sectio alta. Arch. f. klin. Chir. 1SS5. xxxii., 

p. 491. 
Assmuth.— Case. Suture of bladder. St. Pefershurgh Med. Woch. 1SS6. 

iii., p. 411. 
Harwell. — On Sup. -pub. lithotomy. Trans. Roy. Med -Chir. Soc. 188P. 

P- 341- 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 787 

Belfield. — Sup. -pub. cystotomy. Case. N. Y. Med. Rec. i8S6. xxx., p. 197. 
Bond. — Adult ; suture. Primary union. Lancet. 1887. i., p. 267. 
BouLEY. — Etude historique experimentale et critique de la taille hypogastrique. 

These de Paris. 1883. No. 458. 
Chauvel. — Art. Cystotomie. Diet. Encyc. des Sc. Med. xxv., p. 106. 
Croft. — Male, 72. Cure. Lancet. 18S7. i., p. 267. 
CuLLiNGWORTH. — Woman. Brit. Med. Journ. 1886. ii., p. 1213. 
Dulles. — Amev. Journ. Med. Sc. 1875. ii., p. 39. 
Danhier. — De la taille hypogastrique chez les enfants. These de Lille. 1885. 

No. 6. 
Dennis. — Supra-pubic cystotomy. Technique. Phila. Med. News. 1887. i., 

p. 589. 
Discussion. — Lancet. 1886. i., p. 637. 
VoN DiTTEL. — Gegen die Fiillung der blase zum hohen Blasenschnitte. Wien. 

med. Woch. 1886. xxxvi., p. 1505. 
DucKASTELET. — Quelqucs points de la taille hypogastrique en France. Ann. 

des nialad. gen.-urin. 1884. ii., p. 555. 
Emson. — Lancet. 1887. i., p. 1031. 
Flury (Andreas). — Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte und statistik des hohen steinchnittes 

von 1854-7S. Tubingen. 1S79. 
Garcin. — Contrib. din. a I'ctiidc de la cystotomie sus-pubienne avec statistique com- 

prenant les annees, 1879-83. Strasbourg. 1884. 
Garson. — Dislocation der Harnblase und die Peritoneum bei Ausdehnung des 

Rectum. Arch./. Anatomic. 1878. P. 171. 
Geister. — Advantages. With case. N. Y. Med. Journ. 1886. xliii., p. 642. 
Gross (Nancy). — De la cystotomie sus-pubienne. , . . Congris Frangais 

de Chir. Paris. 1887. p. 422. 
Gunther. — Der hohe Steinschnitt, &c. Leipzig. 1857. 
GuYON. — Ann. des Maladies des Org. Urin. Paris. 1883. 
Halle. — La taille hypogastrique, &c. Cinq cas. Paris. 1886. 
Howe. — Calculus weighing 3541 grs. Copenhagen Congress. 
Hume. — Lancet. 1887. i., p. 123. 

Jacobson. — Four cases. Med. -Chir. Trans. 18S6. Ixix., p. 377. 
Krabbel. — Ueber antiseptische Lithotomie. Centralbl. /. Chir. 1881. 
Kuster. — Ueber Harnblasengeschwulste, &c. Samml. Klin. Vort. 1S86. 

pp. 267, 268. 
Langenbuch. — Lithotomie und Antiseptik. Arch, f.klin. Chir. 1881. x.wi., 

p. 42. 
Langer. — Topographie der Mannlichen Harnblase. Zeit. f. Gesellsch. der 

Aertze en Wien. 18S2. p. 162. 
Lutrand. — Contrib. d I'etude de la taille hypogastrique. Montpellier. 18S5. 
MacCormac. — Case. Remarks. Lancet. 1886. ii., p. 582. 
McGiLL. — Three cases. Brit. Med. Journ. 18S7. i., p. 17. 

Lancet. 1887. i., p. 75. 
Mannheim. — Ueber den Hohensteinschnitt bei Kindern. Berlin. 1885. 
Meyer.— Ueber die Nachbehandlung in hohen Steinschnitts. Arch.f.klin. 

Chir. 1884. xxi., p. 502. 
Morgan. — Stone. Hsem. into bladder. Lancet. 1887. i., p. 929. 
O'Hara. — Case. Austral. Med. Journ. 1S87. ix., p. 181. 
Orlowski.— Drei Falle von hohen Steinschnitt. Deutsche Zeit. f. Chir. 18S5. 

xxiii,, p. 153. 
Paquet. — Taille hypogastrique. Bull. med. du nord. 1886. xxv. 
Patterson. — Med. Press and Circ. 1^586. xli., p. 311. 
Perier. — Mem. a V Academic de la med. Aug., 1881. 

Bull, et mem. Soc. de Chir. de Par. 1886. xii., p. 935. 
Petersen. — Edin. Med. Journ. Oct., 1878. 
Pitts. — Med. Press and Circ. 1S86. xlii., p. 475. 
Pitts (Bernard).— .^ycZ/fD./. klin. Chir. 1880. xxv., p. 759. 
PiCARD.— Calcul vesical insaisissable, taille hypogastrique. Gaz. de hvp. 

Paris. 1887. Ix., p. 196. 

51 * 



788 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

Preneux. — Etude sur la taille hypogastrique. These Lyon. 1885. 

PvE. — Two cases. Brit. Med. Jonni. 1886. ii., p. 618. 

RiviNGTON. — Very large calculus. Med.-CJiir. Trans. 1886. Ixix., p. 361. 

Roberts. — Phila. Polyclinic. 18S6-7. iv., p. 246. 

RosER. — Zur Lehre von der Sectio Alta. Arch. f. Klin. Chir. 1SS6-7. xxxiv., 

p. 441. 
RoBSON. — Two cases. Brit. Med. Joiirn. 1886. ii., p. 1162. 
ScHMiTZ (Arnold). — Erfahrungen iiber die steinoperationen au Kindern. 

Archiv. f. klin. Chir. 1886. xxxiii., p. 427. 
See. — Etude sur la taille hypogastrique. Rcv.de Chir. Par. 1887. vii., p. 36. 
Smith (Greig). — Stone, 9^ oz. Bristol Med.-Chir. Journ. Sept., 1887. 
Smith (T.) — Stone, weighing 24^ oz. Lancet. 1886. ii., p. 399. 
Tuffler. — De la taille hypogastrique. Ann. des mal. genito-urin. 1SS4. iii., 

P- 367- 
Twyman. — Analyses of 67 Cases. Atistral. Med. Gaz. Oct., 1888. 
Valette. — De la taille hypogastrique pratiquee au nioyen de la cauterization. 

Lyon. 1858. 
Walker. — Three cases in boys. Lancet. 1887. i., p. 873. 
Whitehead. — Three cases. Lancet. 1887. i., p. 1224. 
Znamensky. — Ueber partielle Resektion der Harnblasenwand. Arch. f. klin. 

Chir. 1884. xxxi., p. 1487. 

operations for tumour. 

Browne. — Fibro-papilloma. Brit. Med. Joiirn. 1S87. i., p. 204. 

Colles. — On tumours of the urinary bladder and their treatment. Ann 

Surg. St. Louis. 1886. iv., p. 208. 
FoLET. — Consideration sur le traitement des tumeurs de la vessie. Bull, med 

du nord. Lille. 1886. xxv., p. 398. 
GuYON. — Various papers on diagnosis, and treatment in. Ann. d. mal. d. org. 
genito-urin. Par. 1886. p. 651. 
Rev. de Chir. Par. 1886. vi., p. 938, 
Prog. med. 1887. v., p. .81. 
Hulke and Morris. — Cases of papilloma. Med. Press and Circ. 1886. xlii., p. 45. 
Jones. — Papilloma. Lancet. 1887. ii., p. 65. 

Keyes. — Three cases. Jotirn. Cut. and Urin. Dis. N. Y. 1887. v., p. 242. 
KusTER. — Sur les tumeurs de la vessie et leur traitement. Samnil. Klin, Vortr. 

Leipz. 1886. Nos. 267, 268. 
Lange. — Operation. Phila. 3Ied. News. 1886. xlix., p. 639. 

Operation. Papilloma. N . Y. Med. Joiirn. Jan. 21st, 1888. 
Maracci. — Operation. Lo Sperimentale. 1880. xlvi., p. 350. 
Packard. — Trans. Amer. Med. Assn. May nth, 1887. 

Paquet. — Operation. Bull, et mem. Soc. de chir. de Par. 1887, xiii., p. 318. 
Pitts. — Operation for recurrence. Trans. Clin. Soc. 1887. p. 69. 
Smith (Greig). — Four cases. Brit. Med. Journ. 1886. i., p. 1161. 
Southam. — Operation. Brit. Med. Journ. 1886. ii., p. 715. 
Thompson (Sir Henry). — Tumours of the Bladder. 1884. And papers in 

Brit. Med. Journ. 1887. i., p. 204. 
1888. Jan. 7th and 14th. 

Lancet. 1886. i., p. 293. 

Clin. Soc. Trans. 1887. P. 63. 
Wenning. — Cincin. Lancet-Clinic. Oct. 29th, 1887. 

OPERATIONS FOR ABDOMINAL INJURIES AND 
INFLAMMATIONS. 

gunshot and penetrating wounds and RUPTURE OF VISCERA. 

Abbe.— iV. Y. Med. Journ. 1886. xliv., p. 564. 

Annals of Surg. Dec, 1886. 
Barker. — Two cases. Brit. Med. Journ. Mar. 17th, 1888. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 



789 



xli., p. 134, 
266. 



Oct. 



1887. 
P. 107 



Briddon. — N. Y. Med. Jouvn. 1887. i.,p. 75. 
Brooks. — Med. Herald. Louisville. 1886. viii.,p. 134. 
Bryant. — Med. News. Phila. Nov. 27th, 1886. 

Gaillai'd's Med. Journ. New York. 1886. 
Bull. — Boston Med. and Surg. Journ. 1886. cxv. , p, 

Annals of Surg. Dec, 1886. 

Phila. Med. News. 1886. xlix. , p. 525. 
Carson. — jfourn. Amer. Med. Assn. Nov. 5th, 1887. 
CoLEY. — Boston Med. and Surg, jfourn. Oct. loth, 1888. 
Curtis. — Rupture of Intestine. Internal. Journ. Med. Sc. 
Dalton. — Stomach and Liver. Tr. Med. Ass. Missouri. 
Dennis. — Phila. Med. News. 1886. xlviii., pp. 225, 253. 
Gaston. — Med. and Surg. Rep. Phila. 1886. liv. ,p. 739. 
Grindon. — Am. Journ. Med. Sc. Jan., 1885. 
Jersey. — N. Y. Med. Rec. 1886. xxx., p. 433. 
Kocher. — Corresp. Bl. f. Schweiz. Aertz. xxiii. and xxiv. 

Lange. — Laparotomy for Bullet-wound. N. Y. Med. Journ. Nov, 26th, 1867. 
Lloyd. — Brit. Med. Journ. March 24th, 1883. 
LuTZ. — Med. Rev. St. Louis. 1886. xiv. , p. 514. 
MacCormac (Sir W.) — Abd. Sect for Intra-perit. 

Lond. 1887. 
McGr.aw. — N . Y. Med. Rec. xxxii., 9. 
Morton. — Journ. Amer. Med. Ass. Feb. 26th, 1887. 
Nancrede. — Ann. of Surg. June, 1S87. 
Park. — Phila. Med. News 1888. liii., p. 116. 
Parkes. — Ann. of Surg. Nov., 1887. 
Richardson. — Neiv Orleans Med. and Surg. Journ. 188 
Rockwell. — N. Y. Med. Journ. 1886. liii., p. 620. 
Sherry. — Successful operation. Annals of Surgery. Oct., 1888. 
Skelly.— .4«;;. of Surg. July, 1887. 
Smith. — Journ. Amer. Med. Ass. Nov. 27th, 1886. 
Travers. — Injuries of the Intestines. Lond. 1812. 
Tremaine. — Phila. Med. News. Nov. 27th, 18S6. 



Injury. (References.) 



xiii., p. 867. 



SUPPURATIVE peritonitis. 

Barchard. — N. Y. Med. Journ. Aug. 15th, 1885. 

Barlow and Godlee. — Lancet. 1885. ii., p. 1143. 

Brien. — Tubercular Peritonitis. Cincin. Lancet-Clinic. Dec. 24th, 1S87. 

Byrd. —TraHs. Am. Med. Ass. Phila., 1881. 

Chaput. — Journ. de vied. 1880. 

Discussion. — Obstet. Gaz. Cincin. 1886. ix., p. 169. 

FiTZ. — Internal. Journ. Med. Sc. Oct., 1S86. 

Grant.— il/^r?. Press and Circ. 1886. xli., p. 449. 

Hall. — N. Y. Med. Journ. 1886. xliii., p. 662. 

Heald. — Boston Med. and Surg. Journ. Sept. 3rd, 1885. 

Hoffmann. — IVien. Med. Presse. 1881. xxii., p. 114. 

Jackson. — Am. Journ. Obstet. 1886. xix., p. 645. 

Krafft. — Perforation of Vermiform App. Rev. Med. de la Suisse Rom 

Kronlein. — Archiv. f. klin. Chir. 18S6. xxxiii., p. 2. 

KuEM.MELL. — Tubercular Peritonitis. Ccntralbl. f. Chir. i 

Mackenzie. — Diagnosis in Perforative Peritonitis. Lancet. 

1888. 
Mk-rsh.— Med. -Chir. Trans. 1S85. p. 1S5. 
Mikulicz. — Samml. klin. Vortr. 1S85. No. 262. 
Oberst. — Centralbl. f. Chir. 1S85. xx. 
Owen. — Lancet. Oct. loth, 1885. 

Reeve. — Boston Med. and Surg. Journ. 18S6. cxv., p. 329. 
Reuss. — Tubercular Peritonitis. Wicn.med. Woch. 1887. No. 3|. 
Schmidt. — Vrach. St. Petersburg. 



18SS 



7. No. 25. 
Dec. 1st and Sth, 



790 BIBLIOGRAPHY, 

ScKWA'RTZ. — Centralbl. f. Chir. 1887. p. S22. 

Secheyron. — Du trait. Chir. de la Peritonite Tuberculeuse. Noiiv. Arclitv. 

d'Obsiet. et de Gynec. Nov. 25th, 18S7. 
Sinclair. — Pelvic Abscess. Two Cases. Med. Chvon. Nov., 1887, and 

Jan., 1888. 
Steinthal. — Eighteen cases collected. Beilage Zum Centralbl. f. Chir. 

Nov. 24th, 188S. 
Stewart. — Perforative Peritonitis. Med.Chron Nov. 1SS7. 
Tait. — Obst. Gaz. Cincin. 1886. ix., p. 393. 
Terrillon. — Semaine mid. Paris. 1886. vi., p. 305. 
Treves. — Med. -Chir. Tratis. 1885. p. 174. 
Truc. — Traitement Chir. de la Peritonite. Paris. 1886. 
Wharton. — N. Y. Med. Journ. 1886. xliii., p. 608. 



RUPTURE FROM INJURY. 

BouiLLY. — Bnll. de la Soc. de Chir. Aout 10, 1884. 
Waggener. — St. Louis Coiir. Med. 1886. xvi., p. 204. 

RUPTURE OF BLADDER — LAPAROTOMY. 

(For other references see Text.) 

Ball. — Annals of Surgery. 1885. i., p. 67. 

Heath. — Trans. Med. -Chir. Soc. 1879. 

Holmes. — Lancet. July 23rd, 1887. 

Lesur. — Paris, 1888. 

MacCormac. — Two cases. Lancet. Dec, nth and i8th, i{ 

Sonnenberg.— B^;-/. klin. Woch. 1885. p. 142. 

Walter. — Med. and Surg. Rep. Phila. 1862. 

WiLLETT.— S^. Bart.'s Hasp. Rep. 1876. 



INDEX. 



Abdomen, Topographical Anatomy, i 
Abdominal Operations, History of, 49 

Nomenclature of, 49 
Abdominal Injuries and Inflammations, 695 
Abdominal Parietes, Growths in, 37, 641 
Abdominal Tumours, Conditions simulating, 

23 
Abscess of Kidney, 542 
Liver, 44, 577 
Ovary, 43 
Peri-nephric, 545 
Spleen, 44 
From Stitches, 87 
Adenoma of Kidney, 33 
Allingham's Modification of Colotomy, 465 
Amnion, Dropsy of, 40 
Amussat's Operation {see Colotomy), 447 
Anaesthetics, 71 
Anastomosis, Intestinal, 400 
Anatomy of Abdomen, Topographical, i 
Surgical, of Broad Ligaments, 159 
Gall-bladder, 574 
Intestines, 406 
Kidneys, 499 
Liver, 572 
Pancreas, 625 
Spleen, 614 
Stomach, 342 
Uterus, Gravid, 270 
Anderson — Structure of Intestines, 411, 413 
Antiseptics, 60 
Anus, Artificial, 490 
Operations for, 492 
Resection, 495 
Appendicitis, Perforative, 738 
Operative Treatment, 743 
Pathological Anatomy, 739 
Symptoms, 741 
Appolito — Intestinal Suture, 481 
Ascites, 38, no 
Assistance at Operation, 59 



Atmosphere, Purification of, 54 
Ball — Modification of Colotomy, 463 
Bantock — Mortality after Ovariotomy, 122 

Early operation, 123 

Hysterectomy, 236, et scq. 
Barker — Gastro-enterostomy, 400 
Barnes — Oophorectomy, 177 

Rupture of Uterus, 307 
Barrow — (Boyce) Gastrostomy, 362 
Battey — Oophorectomy, origin of, 174, 175 

,, Results of, 204 

Battey's Operation, 174 
Bed and Bedding for Patient, 55 
Bell (John) — in History of Ovariotomy, 119 
Bernays — Gastrotomy for Cancer, 378 
Bigelow — Mortality of Hysterectomy, 235 
Billroth — Pylorectomy, 389, 393 
Bishop — Clamp, 477 

Intestinal Suture, 479 
Bladder, Distended, 23 

Resection of. Partial, 693 

Rupture of, 727 
Causes, 728 

Operative Treatment, 731 
Pathological Anatomy, 727 
Symptoms, 729 

Shot-wounds of, 714 
Blundell — Advocate of Oophorectomy, 173 
Braun — Statistics on Operation for Invagina- 
tion, 434 
Breudel— Operation for Ectopic Gestation, 

335 
Broad Ligaments, Anatomy, 159 
Papillomatous Cysts, 1C6 

Diagnosis, 16G 

Removal, 168 
Simple Cysts, 162 

Diagnosis, 163 

Removal, 164 

Tapping, 163 
Brown (Baker)— Influence on Ovariotomy, 121 



792 



INDEX. 



Bryant — Gastrostomy, 365 

Colotomy, 448, d seq. 
Bull (W. T.)— Gastrotomy, 377 

Gunshot Wounds, 696 
Butlin — Ovariotomy for Malignant Disease, 
156 

Resection of Intestine, 473 

Cascectomy, 470 
Caecitis, 738 
Caecum, Cancer of, 35 
Cassarean Section, 273, 275 

FcEtus, Extraction ot, 278 

Hasmorrhage in, 302 

History, 273 

Incision in Parietes, 276 
In Uterus, 277 

Indications for, 297, 304 

Modifications of, 283 

Mortality, 298 

Peritonitis after, 302 

Pregnancy after, 302 

Shock, 301 

Uterine Wound, Treatment of, 279 
Calculous Suppression of Urine, 546 
Calculus, Renal {see Nephro-lithotomy), 515 

Biliary {see Chole-lithiasis), 594 
Cancer of Cacum, 35 

Kidney, 33 

Pancreas, 30, 626 

Pylorus, 30, 390 

Uterus, 213 
Catgut for Ligatures, 65 
Catheterism, 55 
Cellulitis, Pelvic, 757 

Cervix uteri. Amputation of, for Cancer, 217 
Chambon — History of Ovariotomy, iig 
Chavasse— Gastrostomy, 363 
Cheselden— Epicystotomy, 644, 646 
Cholecystectomy, 6n 
Cholecystotomy, 604 

History, 592 

Indications for, 594 

Mode of Operating, 604 
Chole-lithiasis, 594 
Clamp, Author's Scissors, 78 

Author's for Broad Ligaments, 224 

Keith's Cautery-clamp, 138 

Keith's Hysterectomy-clamp, 262 

Koeberle's, 248, 262 

Makins' Intestinal, 476 

Tait's Modification of Koeberle's, 248 
Clamp-forceps, Wells's, 127 
Clarke (Bruce) — Nephro-lithotomy, 528 
Clay (Charles)— Ovariotomy, History of, 120 
Clothing for Patient, 55 
Clover's Crutch, 217 
Cohn — Statistics of Malignant Disease of 

Ovaries, 156 



Cohnstein — Modification of Caesarean Sec- 
tion, 283 
Colectomy, 471 
Colitis, 738 

Colon, Growths of, 450, 473 
Colotomy, 447 

History, 447 

Indications for, 448 

Inguinal, 462 

Lumbar, 454 

Method, choice of, 451 

Mortality, 451 
Compressor, Rope, 249 
Cousins — Tapping Trocar, 116 
Covering of Patient, 57 
Curtis — Rupture of Intestine, 719 
Cystitis after Catheterism, 91 
Cystotomy, Supra-pubic, 642 {see Supra- 
pubic Cystotomy) 
Cystoma of Ovary {see Ovary), 30, 102 
Cysts of Broad Ligaments, 40, 162, 166 

Extra-peritoneal, 638 

Kidney, 42, 533, 534 

Mesentery, 38, 637 

Omentum, 633 

Ovary, 30, 102, 183 

Pancreas, 38, 628 

Parovarian, 39, 162 

Spleen, 619 
Czerny — Intestinal Suture, 482 

Delaporte — Ovariotomy, History of, 119 
Dermoid Cysts of Ovary, no 

Diagnosis, 112 
Diagnostic Methods, 5 

Auscultation, 11 

Inspection, 5 

Palpation, 6 

Percussion, 9 

Puncture, Exploratory, 11 

Scheme of, 28 
Doran — Ovarian Cystoma, 102, 104, 114 

Ovariotomy, r42 

Growths in Broad Ligament, 160, 162 
Douglas — History of Epicystotomy, 645 
Drainage, 80 
Drainage tube — Keith's, 81 

Koeberle's, 82 
Dressings, 86 

Dropsy, Encysted, of Peritoneum, 
Duodenostomy, 403 
Dupuytren — Intestinal Suture, 480 



Ectopic Gestation, 312 
Anatomy, 313 
Diagnosis, 318 
Indications to Operate, 322 



INDEX, 



793 



Ectopic Gestation — Mortality, 322 
Operation, Child alive, 330 
Child dead, 334 
Abdominal Section, 329 

History, 312 
Electricity, 325 
Elytrotomy, 324 

Evacuation of Liquor Amnii, 323 
Injection of Lethal Substances, 324 
Removal of Sac, 329 
Rupture of Sac, 321, 329, 333 
Egebert— Gastrostomy, 345 
Elastic Ligature in Hysterectomy, 263 
Enterectomy, 470 {see Intestines, Resection 

of) 
Entero-cholecystotomy, 609 
Enterorraphy, 479 
Enterotomy, 444 

Epicystotomy 642 {see Supra-pubic Cys- 
totomy) 
Epigastric Region, Contents, 3 
Epilepsy, Operation in, 191 
Examination of Patient, General, 46 
Exploratory Incision, 47 
Extra-peritoneal Cysts, 638 
Extra-uterine Pregnancy, 32, 41, 43, 312 {see 
Ectopic Gestation) 

Faecal Accumulations, 23, 429 

Faecal Fistula, 490 {see Artificial Anus) 

Fallopian Tubes, Disease of, 184 

Fluid Collections in, 43 

Pregnancy in, 187 

Removal of, 193 
Feeding after Operation, 89 

Rectal, 96 
Felizet— Gastrotomy, 370 
Fenger — Gastrostomy, 346 
Fibro-cystic Disease of Uterus, 40 
Fibroma of Ovary, 31 
Fluid Tumours, 37 

Symmetrica], 38 

Non-symmetrical, 42 
Forceps — Nelaton's, 127 

Sponge-holding, 78 

Tail's, 75 

Thornton's, 77 

Wells's, 75, 76, 77 

Galabin — Ectopic Gestation, 335 
Gall-bladder, Anatomy, 574 

Distension of, 44 

Dropsy and Empyema of, 596 

Gunshot wounds, 714 

Operations on, 592 {see ChoJecystotomy, 
&c.) 

Perforation of, 597 

Rupture of, 734 

Solid Tumours of, 34 



Gall-stones, 594 

Sounding for, 601 
Gardner — Operation, Peritonitis, 94 
Garrigues — Laparo-elytrotomy, 292 
Garson — Epicystotomy, 664 
Gaston — Entero-cholecystotomy, 603 

Stab-wounds, 715 
Gastrectomy, Partial, 388, 405 {see Pylorec- 

tomy). 

Total, 404 
Gastro-enterostomy, 397, 398 

History, 397 

Indications, 397 

Mortality, 397 
Gastrorraphy, 380 

History, 380 

Indications, 380 

Operation for Fistula, 381 

For Ulcer, 382 
Gastrostomy, 345 

Aim of Operation, 347 

Conditions for which Operation per- 
formed, 348 

Feeding after, 367 

History, 345 

Mortality, 353 

Parietal Incision, 358 

Stomach, Fixation of, 361 
Opening of, 365 
Gastrotomy, 368 

History, 368 

Indications, 369 

Operation described, 370 

For removal of foreign bodies in oesopha- 
gus, 375 
Godson — Caesarean Section, 274 

Porro's Operation, 285 
Gross — Gastrostomy, 353 

Gastrotomy, 368 
Gullet, Absence of, 350 

Stricture of, 348 

Tumours Outside, 349 

Ulceration of, 350 
Gunshot Wounds of the Abdomen, 696 

Anatomical Conditions, 697 

Indications to Operate, 703 

Mortality after Operation, 703 

Operation for, 705 

Symptoms, 700 

Treatment after Operation, 717 
Gussenbauer — Cancer of Pylorus, 390 

Intestinal Suture, 482 
Gusserow Hysterectomy for Myoma, 236, 245 
Gut, Silk-worm, 66 

Haematocele, Pelvic, Suppurating, 757 
Haemato-kolpos, 41 
Haemato-metra, 41 



794 



INDEX. 



Hffimato-salpinx, 43 
Hagedorn's Needle and Holder, 86 
Hahn — Nephrorraphy, 511 
Halsted — Anatomy of Intestine, 411 

Intestinal Suture, 483 
Hamburger — Auscultation of cesophagus, 352 
Hart — Ectopic Gestation, 317 
Hegar — Oophorectomy, 174 

Hysterectomy for Myoma, 246, 260, 264 
Hepatic Abscess, 44, 577 

Surgical Treatment of, 579 
Hepatotomy, for Abscess, 583 

For Hydatids, 587 
Hevin — Intestinal Obstruction, 415 

Nephrotomy, 516 
History of Abdominal Surgery, 
Houston — History of Ovariotomy, 119 
Hunter — History of Ovariotomy, 119 
Hydatids of Kidney, 42, 534 
Liver, 44, 586 
Spleen, 620 
Hydramnios, 40 
Hydro-metra, 43 
Hydro-nephrosis, 42, 535 
Hydro-salpinx, 41, 186 
Hypochondriac Region, Contents, 3 
Hypogastric Region, Contents, 5 
Hysterectomy for Cancer, 210 
Freand's Method, 210 
History, 210 

Indications and Contra-indications, 213 
Mortality, 211 
Operation described, 219 
For Intractable Inversion, 232 
History, 232 

Varieties of Operation, 233 
Immediate removal, 233 
Gradual removal, 233 
Compression and Excision com- 
bined, 234 
For Myoma, 235, 248 
History, 235 
Indications, 236 
Keith's Operations, 254 
Shroeder's Operation, 252 
Mortality, 235, 266 
Hysterectomy, Puerperal, 285 {see Porro's 

Operation) 
Hysteria, Operation in, 193 
Hystero-epilepsy, Operation in, 192 
Hysterotomy, Puerperal, 273 {see Csesarean 
Section) 

Iliac Regions, Contents, 5 
Incision, Exploratory, 47 
Parietal, Making, 71 
Closing, 84 
Instruments, 67 



Intestinal Obstruction, 414 
Diagnosis of, 423 
History, 414 

Indications for Operation, 429 
Laparotomy for, 414, 432 
Modes of Operating — 

For Foreign Bodies, 443 
In Intussusception, 441 
In Strangulation by Bands, &c., 440 
In Volvulus, 439 
Intestines — Anatomy, Surgical, 406 
Gunshot Wounds of, 6g6 
Obstruction of, 414 {see Intestinal Obstruc- 
tion) 
Physical Examination of, 20 
Auscultation, 21 
Inspection, 20 
Palpation, 20 
Percussion, 20 
Intestines— Resection of, 470 
Clamps for, 476, 477 
History, 470 
Indications, 472 
Mode of Operating, 475 
Mortality, 474 
Rupture of, 719 
Diagnosis, 722 
Operation for, 723 
Pathological Anatomy, 719 
Symptoms, 701 
Intussusception of Intestines, 419 

Operation in, 441 
Invagination of Intestines, 419, 441 
Irrigation of Cavity, 78 

Jejunostomy, 404 

Jessop — Ectopic Gestation, 331 

Jones (Sydney)— Gastrostomy, 347 

Kaltenbach— Hysterectomy for Myoma, 260 
Kehrer— Modification of Cassarean Section, 

283 
Keith — Antiseptics, 60 

Drainage Tube, 81 

Ovariotomy, 121, 138, 143 

Cysts of Broad Ligament, 163 

Hytserectomy for Myoma, 235, 254, 262 
Kidney, Abscess, 42, 542 

Adenoma, 33, 533 

Calculus, 518, 546 

Cancer, 33, 554 

Cysts, 42, 109,533,553 

Displaced, 33 

Excision of, 550 {see Nephrectomy) 

Floating, 33, 507 

Gunshot wounds, 713 

Hydatids, 42, 534 

Incision of, 540 {see Nephrotomy) 



INDEX. 



795 



Kidney, Injury to, 560 

Movable, 33, 505 

Puncture of, 533 

Sarcoma, 33, 553 

Scrofulous, 543 

Tumours, 33, 553 
Kidneys, Anatomy, 499 

Physical Examination of, 14 

Operations on, 505 (see Nephrotomy, &c.) 
Kleeberg — Elastic Ligature, 260 
Knot (Staffordshire), 140 
Koeberle — Forceps, 75 

Drainage Tube, 83 

Serre-noeud, 248, 264 
Kolpo-hysterectomy, 210 

Clamp for, 224 

Complications, 230 

Division of Broad Ligaments in, 223 

Drainage, 229 

History, 210 

Indications and Centra-indications, 213 

Manipulation of Uterus in, 220 

Mortality, 211 

Operation Described, 219 

Suture of wounds in, 228 

Position of Patient in, 220 

Preparation of Patient for, 220 

Lange— Anatomy of Kidneys, 504, 526 
Langer— Anatomy of Bladder, 663 
Langenbuch— Nephrectomy, 567, 570 

Cholecystotomy, 611 
Laparo-colotomy, 462 

Laparo-cystectomy, 329 {see Ectopic Gestation) 
Laparo-elytrotomy, 291 

Assistance, 292 

Child, Delivery of, 295 

Haemorrhage, 302 

History, 291 

Incision through Parietes, 293 

Indications, 297, 303 

Peritonitis after, 302 

Pregnancy after, 302 

Preliminary Steps, 292 

Suturing Wound, 295 

Vaginal Opening, 293 
Lembert— Intestinal Suture, 374, 482 
Leopold — Malignant Ovarian Growths, 155 

Caesarean Section, 281 
Ligature, Materials, 65 

Elastic, 260 

Interlocking, 141 
Light during Operation, 59 
Littre's Operation, 447 {see Colotomy) 
Liver, Abscess, 44, 577 

Anatomy, Surgical, 572 

Cancer, 34 

Gunshot wound of, 712 



Hydatids, 44, 586 

Physical Examination of, i3 

Solid Growths, 34 
Lloyd (Jordan) — Nephro-lithotomy, 520, et seq. 
Loreta's Operation, 384 

Aim, 384 

History, 384 

Pyloric Obstruction, 385 
Lucas — Nephro-lithotomy, 52S 
Lund — Instruments in Colotomy, 458 



McArdle — Pylorectomy, 392 
MacCormac — Rupture of Bladder, 727 
Macdonald (Angus) — Ectopic Gestation, 335, 

337 
McDowell (Ephraim) — History of Ovario- 
tomy, 119 
Madelung — Modification of Colotomy, 461 
Makins — Clamp in Enterectomy, 476 
Mania, Operation in, 191 
Martin — Tubal Disease, 185 
May (Bennett) — Nephro-lithotomy, 5 
Menses, Retained, 41 

Obstruction to flow of, 190 
Mesentery, Cysts of, 38, 637 

Lipoma, 637 

Solid Growths, 636 
Mikulicz, 391 

Minges — Nephrectomy, 553 
Missed Labour, 337 

Anatomy, 337 

Diagnosis, 338 

Operation, 338 
Molar Pregnancy, 32 
Morris (Henry) — Pylorectomy, 391 

Nephrorraphy, 511 

Nephro-lithotomy, 515, et seq. 
Morton — Gunshot wounds, 703 

Stab wounds, 715 

Perforating Typhoid Ulcer, 751 
Myoma of Ovary, 31 
Myoma of Uterus, 31, 188, 199, 238 

Diagnosis, 238 

Hysterectomy for, 235 

Removal of Uterine Appendages for, 188, 
199 
Myomectomy, 240, 243 

Nelaton's cyst-forceps, 127 

Nelaton's Operation {see Enterotomy), 444 

Nephrectomy, 551 

Abdominal, 567 

History, 551 

Indications, 551, 558 

Lumbar, 563 

Method, Choice ot, 569 

Mortality, 5 7 



796 



INDEX. 



Nephric Abscess, 43, 542 
Nephritis, Suppurative, 542 
Nephro-lithotomy, 515 

History, 515 

Indications, 524 

Mode of Operating, 525 
Nephrorraphy, 505 

Indications, 510 

Mode of Operating, 511 
Nephrotomy, 532, 541 

Indications to Operate, 547 

Operation, 548 
Nomenclature of Abdominal Operations, 49 
Notta — Ectopic Gestation, 334 
Nursing of Patient, 55 

Obesity, 25 

(Edema of Abdominal Walls, 26 

CEsophagus {see Gullet), Absence of, 350 

Auscultation of, 352 

Cancer of, 348 
Diagnosis, 350 

Fibrous Stricture, 349 

Foreign Bodies in, Gastrotomy for, 368 

Obstruction in, 348 

Ulceration of, 350 
Omentum, Abscess in, 636 

Cysts of, 633 

Gunshot wounds of, 712 

Physical Examination of, 21 

Sanguineous Tumours in, 636 

Sarcoma of, 636 

Tumours in, 633 
Oophorectomy, 171 

Aim of, 175 

Conditions indicating, 178 

History, 172 

Mode of Operating, 193 

Progress after Operation, 201 
Operating room. Plan of, 69 
Ovariotomy, 100, 124 

Abdominal incision in, 129 

Accidents during, 14G 

Adhesions in, 135 

After-treatment, 149 

Assistance, 124 

Drainage, 144 

Dressings, 145 

Emptying Cyst, 133 

Foreign Bodies left, 148 

History, 118 

Indications and Contra-indications, 122 

Instruments, 125 

Mortality, 122 

Pedicle, 136 

Peritoneal Cleansing, 143 

Suturing Parietal Wound, 145 
Ovaritis, 180 



Ovary — 

Abscess, 43 
Anatomy, 100 
Cancer, 31, 155 
Cystic and Cirrhotic, 183 
Cystoma, 39, 102 

Anatomy, Pathological, 102 

Diagnosis, 105 

Rupture of, 112 

Suppuration in, 114 

Tapping, 116 

Twisting of Pedicle, 113 
Dermoid Cysts, 110 

Diagnosis, 112 
Displacements, 181, 200 

Hernia, 181 

Prolapse, 182 
Encapsuled, 148 
Fibroma, 31, 155 
Myoma, 31, 155 
Sarcoma, 31, 155 
Solid Growths of, 31, 155 

Anatomy, Pathological, 155 

Diagnosis, 157 

Operation, 157 

Pancreas, Cancer, 30, 626 

Cysts, 38, 628 

Operations on, 625, 630 
Mortality, 632 

Physical Examination, of 71 

Surgical Anatomy, 626 
Papillomatous Cysts of Broad Ligament, 40, 

109, 166 
Parietes, Growths in 37 
Parietal Incision, 71 

Closure of, 84 
Parotitis following Abdominal Operations, 

98 
Parovarian Cysts, 39, 162 
Parry — Ectopic Gestation, 312, ct seq. 
Patient, Environment of, 53 

General Examination of, 46 

Preparation for Operation, 56 
Pean — Pylorectomy, 389, 393 
Peaslee — Ovariotomy, 121 
Pedicle in Hysterectomy, 260 

Combined Method, 266 

Extra-peritoneal Treatment, 261 

Intra-peritoneal Treatment, 260 

In Ovariotomy, 136 

In Removal of Uterine Appendages, 196, 
Pedicle-twisting, in Ovarian Cystoma, 113 
Perforation of Viscera, 697 
Peri-nephric Abscess, 42, 545 
Peritoneum, Cysts of, 38 

Cysts Outside, 638 

Encysted Dropsy of, 38, 108 



INDEX. 



797 



Peritoneum, Solid Growths of, 36 

Toilet of, 143 
Peritonitis, after Operation, 93 

Operations for, 431 

Pelvic, 736 

Purges in, 93 

Rupture from Blows, 718 

Stabbing and Incised Wounds, 696 

Suppurative, 737 

Tubercular, 761 

Traumatic, 93 
Petersen— Anatomy of Bladder, 664 
Petit — Cholecystotomy, 592 
Phantom Tumour, 24 
Polk — Anatomy of Gravid Uterus, 270 
Porro's Operation, 284 

Haemorrhage in, 287, 302 

Mortality, 298 

Parietal Incision, 286 

Pedicle in, 287 

Peritonitis after, 290, 302 

Placenta in, 287 

Shock after, 301 

Uterine Opening, 2S6 
Pozzi's Elastic Tourniquet, 249 
Pregnancy, 40 

Extra-uterine, 31, 32, 40, 41, 42, 43, 312 

Molar, 32 
Prostatectomy, 684 
Pseudo-cyesis, 24 
Puerperal Hysterotomy, 273 {see Cassarean 

Section) 
Puerperal Laparotomy, 306 {see Rupture of 

Uterus) 
Puncture, Exploratory, n 
Purgatives after Operation, 93 
Pylorectomy, 389 
Pylorus, Cancer, 30 

Fibroid Thickening, 30, 385, 388 

Intubation, 405 

Obstruction, 384 

Operative Dilatation, 385 {see Loreta's 
Operation) 

Resection of, 389 (Pylorectomy) 
History, 389 
Indications, 389 
Mortality, 391 
Operation described, 392 
Pyo-nephrosis, 42, 541 
Pyo-salpinx, 43, 184 
Pyrexia after Operation, 97 

Reel-holder, 66 

Reichel — Resection of Intestine, 474 

Renal Abscess, 542 

Calculus, 518 

Cysts, 40, 42, log, 533, 553 
Richardson — Gastrotoray, 376 
Rivington— Rupture of the Bladder, 727 



Rockwitz — Gastro-enterostomy, 398 
Rokitansky's Tumour, 115 
Roussetus — Caesarean Section, 273 

Supra-pubic Cystotomy, 644 
Rupture of Abscesses, 739 
Cysts, 112 
Gall-bladder, 734 
Intestine, 719 

Diagnosis, 722 

Operation, 723 

Pathology, 719 

Symptoms, 721 
Urinary Bladder, 727 

Operation, 734 

Pathology, 727 

Symptoms, 729 
Uterus, 306 

Anatomy, 306 

Operation, 309 

Symptoms, 307 
Viscera, Solid, 733 

Salin— Missed Labour, 339 

Salpingectomy, 171 

Salpingitis, 184 

Sanger's Modification of Cassarean Section, 

281 
Sarcoma of Kidney, 33, 553 

Ovary, 31, 155 

Uterus, 32,215 
Schroeder — Myomectomy, 252, et seq. 
Schultze — Missed Labour, 339 
Scissors, 72 
Screw for Myoma, 243 
Sedillot — Gastrostomy, 345 
Senn — Inflation of Hydrogen, 701 

Intestinal Anastomosis, 400 

Operation on Pancreas, 625 
Serre-nceud, Koeberle's, 248 
Shock after Operation, 88, 91 
Silk for Ligatures, 63 
Simulation of Abdominal Tumours, 23 
Solid Tumours, 29 

Non-symmetrical, 32 

Symmetrical, 30 
Spleen, Abscess, 44, 618 

Anatomy, Surgical, 614 

Cysts, 619 

Enlargements, Solid, 35, 619 

Gunshot wounds, 713 

Hydatids, 45, 620 

Lymphosarcoma, 619 

Operations on, 614 

Physical Examination of, 16 

Prolapse, 619 

Wandering, 36, 619 

Wounds, 618 
Splenectomy, 622 

History, 616 



798 



^ INDEX. 



Splenectomy, Indications 6i8 

Mortality, 620 

Operation described, 622 
Sponges, Preparation, 62 
Spray, Antiseptic, 54, 60, 62 
Stab-wounds of the Abdomen, 715 
Staffordshire Knot, 140 
Stomach, Anatomy, 342 

Cancer, Removal of, 378 

Gunshot wounds of, 712 

Morbid Growths, 30 

Operations, 340 (see Gastrostomy, &c.) 

Operative Dilatation of Orifices, 384 

Physical Examination of, 17 

Rupture of 726 

Ulcer perforating, 382, 749 
Anatomy, 747 
Operation for, 382, 749 
Symptoms, 747 
Strong — Anatomy oi Bladder, 666 
Suppuration in Cysts of Ovary, 114 
Supra-pubic Cystotomy, 642 

Anatomical Considerations, 662 

Bladder Distention in, 673 

Foreign Bodies, Extraction of, 683 

History, 643 

Incision through Parietes, 677 

Indications for Operation, 650 

Mode of Operating, 672 

Prostate, Removal of, 684 

Rectal Distension in, 664, 675 

Stone, Extraction of, 681 

Suture of Bladder, 686 

Treatment after, 691 

Tumours, Removal of, 682 
Sutures, 65 

Intestinal, 479 

Vesical, 686 
Suture-instrument, 85 
Syringe, Exhausting, Tait's, 82 



Table, Operating, 57, 70 

Tait (Lawson) — Pseudo-cyesis, 25 

Catch-forceps, 75 

Exhausting Syringe, 82 

Twisting of Ovarian Pedicle, 113 

Ovariotomy Mortality, 122 

Cyst-trocar, 128 

Staffordshire Knot, 140 

Solid Growths of Ovary, 155 

Removal of Appendages, 171, et seg. 

Screw for Myoma, 243 

Hepatotomy, 5S3, 590 

Cholecystotomy, 594, ct seg. 
Thomas's Operation, 291 (see Laparo-e'y- 

trotomy) 
Thorburn — Anatomy of Ureters, 209 



Thornhill — Supra-pubic Cystotomy, 647 
Thornton — Antiseptics, 60 

Catch-forceps, 77 

Ovarian Cells, 104 

Ovariotomy, 121, 142 

Ectopic Gestation, 334 

Gastrotomy, 369, 372 
Tillaus— Regions of Abdomen, 3 

Anatomy of Stomach, 343 
Toilet of Peritoneum, 77, 143 
Tourniquet, Pozzi's Elastic, 249 
Treatment after Operation, 89 
Treves — Anatomy of Intestines, 409 

Intestinal Obstruction, 416 

Intestinal Clamps, 477 
Trocar, Tait's, 128 

Wells's, 128, 129 
Tubercular Peritonitis, 761 
Tumours, Diagnosis of Abdominal, i 
Twisting of Pedicle in Ovarian Tumours, 113 
Tympanites, 26, 94 
Typhoid Ulcer, Perforating, 751 

Operation for, 752 



Umbilical Region, Contents, 5 
Urachus, Cysts of, 42 

Sarcoma of, 641 
Ureter, Fistula of, 556 

Modes of Catheterising and Compress- 
ing, 560 

Relations of, 209 
Uterine Appendages, Physical Examination 

of, 21 

Removal, 171 

Aim of Operation, 175 

History, 172 

Indications, 178 
Modes of Operating, 193 

With Normal Structures, 195 
" Inflamed Structures, 197 

For Myoma, 199 

For Ovarian Hernia, 200 
Nomenclature, 171 
Progress after Operation, 201 
Effects of Operation, 202 ' 
Uterus — Anatomy, Surgical, 205, 270 

Anomalies and Defects in— Operation 

for, 190 
Cancer, 213, 215 (see Kolpo-hysterectomy) 
Cancer, Cervical Amputation, 217 
Hysterectomy for, 210 
Displacements, Incurable, 190 
Fibro-cystic Disease, 40, 109 
Gravid, Anatomy, 270 

Operations on, 268 
Intractable Inversion, 232 

Hysterectomy for, 234 



INDEX. 



799 



Uterus, Myoma, 31, 188, 238 

Hysterectomy for, 235, 243, 248 
Physical Examination of, 21 
Rupture, 306 

Anatomical Conditions, 306 
Diagnosis, 307 
Operation for, 309 
Sarcoma, 32 
Urinary Fistula, 556 
Urine, Calculous Suppression of, 546 

Vautrin — Hysterectomy, for Myoma, 235 
Verneuil — Modification of Colotomy, 462 
Visitors, Presence of, 54 
Vomiting, 92 



Volvulus of Intestines, 419 
Mode of Operating on, 439 

Warmth during Operations, 58 
Wells — Antiseptics, 60 

Pressure Forceps, 75 

Ovariotomy, 121 

Ascites Tube, 117 

Clamp-forceps, 127 

Cyst-trocar, 128, 129 
Whitehead — Gastrostomy, 350 
Winslow — Pylorectomy, 391 
Wolfler— Pylorectomy, 389, ct seq. 

Zesas— Gastrostomy, 347 



J. W. Arrow-smith, Printer, Quay Street, Bristol. 



/r 



Pi 



f^£ 



I 









Xi'n 



Abdominal surq- 



2002313383 












Sto;i:<y-^r:W-».«^''' 



