UB 

U58r 

1835 



fe -O f D£)t)£)t>Q r OCaO-D^'CODOaQ r COC - L -^ 



Surgeon General's Office 



%$ 



EBfl 






o\ 






» ccc?ccc(?jCC3C.CG;(^aooaQ)gc : 



**4 



sU > 






$&a 'MS(&Wk&W®l 



ARMY OF THE UNITED STATES; 



ALSO, 



THE RULES AND ARTICLES OF WAR, 



Extracts from Laws relating to them. 



PUBLISHED I»T AUTHOR1TT OF THE WAR DKPlttTJJEKT. 



CITY OF WASHINGTON: 

l'RIXTKD AT THE GLOBE OFFICE ON A NAPIER PKLSS. 



MDCCCXXXV. 



-A 




WAR DEPARTMENT, 

December 31, 1836. 

Ueneral Order : 

I The General Regulations for the Army, having, by direction 

of the Secretary of War, been revised by Major General Alexander 
Macomb, and the said revised Regulations, as printed by authority 
of the War Department, in 1835, having, with the exceptions 
hereinafter specified, received the sanction of the President op the 
United States, it is the command of the President, that the said 
General Regulations, as amended by this Order, be published for 
the government of all concerned; and that the same, as herein 
altered and amended, be strictly observed. 

II The alterations and amendments, above referred to, are 

as follows : 

1. Page 7 — Article 8 — JVb 1 to 8. 

The whole of this Article to be stricken out; and the subject, 
to which it refers, to remain, as established by the provisions 
of the Army Regulations of 1825, applicable to such subject. 

2. rage 79— Article 29— JVbs. 10 and 11. 

These numbers stricken out, having been revoked. 

3. Page 80— Article 29— JVb. 12. 

Insert after the word year, "if the state of the service will 
permit." 

4. Page 86 — Article 32— JVb. 16. 

Add to this number as follows: "8. Such measures for the 
moral and religions instruction of the troops, as the state of the 
fund may allow, to be determined by the Council of Admin- 
istration." 

5. Page 95— Article 35— JVb. 29. 

Strike out in the 3d line, the words " a general," and insert 
instead, " another" 



6. Page 149— Article 43— JVb. 61. 

Add, after the word " route, " in the 5th line, " and in ihr 
accustomed or other reasonable manner." 

7. Page 185— Article 47— JVb. 16. 

Substitute the word "may" for "shall" in the last line; and 
add to the paragraph, " at the discretion of the commanding officer." 

8. Page 195— Article 48— JVbs. 16, 17, and 18. 

Stricken out. The subject to remain as provided by the acts 
of Congress, and the regulations now in force. 

9. Page 230— Article 52— JVb. 16. 

¥tv-b»-o mitt ed , ~errrh The following to be inserted, next after the 
clause in relation to a Major General : 

"Brigadier General. The same as a Major General, except that 
there shall be but one star in the centre of the strap." 

10. Page 238— Article 55— JVbs. 7 and 8. 

These numbers to be left out, being superseded by law. 
11. Page 239— Article 59. 

Modified in respect to the first distribution of the present revised 
Regulations, one copy of which will be gratuitously transmitted to 
each officer now in service, as hereinafter provided. 

Ill All former regulations, on the subjects embraced in the 

said revised and amended Regulations, are hereby annulled, except 
as to the matters reserved in this order ; and nothing contrary to 
the tenor of such revised and amended Regulations will be enjoined 
on any portion of the troops of the United States by any officer. 

IV The General Order, bearing date September 1, 1835, printed 

with the said Regulations and prefixed thereto, having never been 
promulgated, is hereby declared not to be, and never to have been, 
in force. The page containing said order is cancelled, and in lieu 
thereof, a printed copy of this order shall be inserted. 

v One copy of the said General Regulations, with this 

Order inserted therein, as above directed, will be sent to each officer 
of the Army now in commission. 

B. F. BUTLER, 
Secretary of War, ad interim. 



CONTENTS 



Page. 

ARTICLE I. 

Precedence of regiments and corps. 1 

ARTICLE II. 

Precedence and gradation of officers and non-commissioned officers 2 

ARTICLE III. 

Rank and command 3 

ARTICLE IV. 

Succession in duties or command 4 

ARTICLE V. 

Appointment and promotion of officers 5 

ARTICLE VI. 

Appointments to the staff, and details of officers to assist in staff 

departments 6 

ARTICLE VII. 

Exchange or transfer of regimental officers 7 

ARTICLE VIII. 

Relative rank and precedence of the officers of the army and navy 7 

ARTICLE IX. 

Interior management and economy of a regiment 8 

Instruction of officers 8 

Posting of officers with their companies _ 9 

Appointment of adjutants and non-commissioned officers 10 

System of general responsibility 11 

Officers' mess 12 

Soldiers messing 12 

Cleanliness— dress 13 

Marking 1 

Bands 13 

Preservation of arms and accoutrements 14 

Ammunition 1 1 

Regimental books • 1«* 

Company books 1° 

Soldiers'" book 16 

Officers' waiters 16 



VI CONTENTS. 

ARTICLE X. 

Transfer of soldiers from one regiment to another 17 

ARTICLE XL 
Furloughs to soldiers 17 

ARTICLE XII. 
Discharges 18 

ARTICLE XIII. 
Certificate of disability 19 

ARTICLE XIV. 
Pension certificate 19 

ARTICLE XV. 
Deceased soldiers 20 

ARTICLE XVI. 
Deserters 21 

ARTICLE XVII. 
Troops in barracks 23 

ARTICLE XVIII. 

Duties in garrison and camp 24 

Beats and signals 25 

Roll calls 25 

Daily details and duties 26 

Dress parade 29 

Guard mounting 32 

Relieving guards and sentinels 34 

Method of going and receiving the grand rounds 37 

Guards — their use and duty 39 

Working parties 47 

ARTICLE XIX. 
Duties of commanding officers of posts and stations 48 

ARTICLE XX. 
Troops in campaign 51 

ARTICLE XXI. 

Order of encampment 53 

Of infantry 53 

Of cavalrv 55 

Of artillery .' 57 

ARTICLE XXII. 

Marches * 57 

ARTICLE XXIII. 

Baggage and baggage train... Ql 






CONTENTS. VI 1 

ARTICLE XXIV. 
General police • 62 

ARTICLE XXV. 
Review ••• 63 

ARTICLE XXVI. 
Inspection 67 

ARTICLE XXVII. 

Honors to be paid by the troops 71 

Salutes 73 

Escorts of honor 74 

Funeral honors 75 

ARTICLE XXVIII. 
Safeguards 77 

ARTICLE XXIX. 
Leaves of absence 78 

ARTICLE XXX. 
Absence without leave » 82 

ARTICLE XXXI. 
Deceased officers 82 

ARTICLE XXXII. 
Sutlers — councils of administration — post and company funds 83 

ARTICLE XXXIII. 
Military discussions and publications • 89 

ARTICLE XXXIV. 
Arrests and confinements 89 

ARTICLE XXXV. 
Courts martial s ' 

ARTICLE XXXVI. 

. . • 1 (14. 

Recruiting service J"* 

Duties of superintendents |"*j 

Duties of recruiting officers 1«° 

Returns to be made to the superintendent 1 1 1 

to the quartermaster general Ill 

, to the ordnance department 112 

to the second auditor of the treasury 112 

Regimental recruiting service jj* 

Inspection of recruits jj* 

Recruits sent to regiments • Jj* 

Depots for collecting and instructing recruits II 

Recruits in depot at military posts 11C 

ARTICLE XVII. 
Organization of the military departments and commands 117 



VI" CONTENTS. 

ARTICLE XXXVIII. 

Militia 1 18 

ARTICLE XXXIX. 

The commander of the army 119 

ARTICLE XL. 

The staff of the army 120 

ARTICLE XLI. 

Adjutant general's department • 121 

Orders 121 

Military correspondence 125 

The roster 127 

Muster rolls — returns — reports , 128 

ARTICLE XLII. 

Inspector's department 131 

ARTICLE XLIII. 

Quartermaster's department 137 

Allowances of fuel and quarters, and barrack and office furniture 142 
of transportation and travelling 148 

of forage 151 

of straw 152 

of stationary 153 

Incidental allowances 154 

Appropriations 155 

Accountability 156 

ARTICLE XLIV. 

Engineer department 156 

Military academy 1 56 

ARTICLE XLV. 

Topographical department 1 57 

ARTICLE XL VI. 

Ordnance department 157 

Ordnance and ordnance stores 159 

Artillery " 

Ordnance sergeants 17] 

Issues of arms, ordnance, and ordnance stores to the militia called 
into the service of the United States, and the accountability 

thereof. 1 74 

Table and rates of charges for small arms 1 76 

Rates of charges for accoutrements for small arms 1 80 

Names of ordnance stations 182 

ARTICLE XLVII. 

Subsistence department 182 

Commissary general of subsistence j go 

Assistant commissaries of subsistence Ig3 



CONTENTS. IX 

Component parts of the ration 186 

Issues 186 

Subsistence of recruiting parties i 138 

Sales to officer.* " 

Wastage 189 

Boards of survey 190 

Monthly returns '• 

Abstracts 191 

Accounts current * 

ARTICLE XLVIII. 

Pay department 192 

Allowance of additional rations 193 

Brevet pay 194 

Table of pay, subsistence, forage, &c. allowed to officers, soldiers. Sec. 1 98 

ARTICLE XLIX. 

iYIedical department 200 

Surgeon general « •• " 

Medical director. " 

Medical purveyors * 

Surgeons and assistant surgeons 20 1 

Private physician 205 

Form of a contract with a private physician 207 

ARTICLE L. 

Purchasing department 208 

» ARTICLE LI. 

Clothing bureau 208 

Allowance of clothing for three years for privates < 209 

Statement of the cost of clothing for the army of the United States, 

for the year 1834 211 

Allowance of camp and garrison equipage 212 

ARTICLE LII. 

Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 

Of a major general commanding in chief 212 

Of other major generals 214 

Of a brigadier general 

Of officers of the general staff. 215 

Of pay department 217 

Of medical department 

Of corps of engineers 218 

Of cadets of the military academy 219 

Of the topographical engineers 220 

Of artillery 221 

Of ordnance department 22-1 

Of infantry 224 

Of dragoons ■ •** 

Horse furniture 226 

Non-commissioned officers, buglers, and privates of drngoom '• 



X CONTENTS. 

Badges to distinguish rank 227 

Aiguillettes 228 

Shoulder straps to be worn, on the frock coat to designate rank.. • • 230 

Horse furniture for general and staff officers 231 

Horse furniture for mounted officers of artillery, ordnance, and in- 
fantry 232 

Uniform of the non-commissioned officers, musicians, artificers, and 
privates of the artillery 233 

of the infantry 234 

ARTICLE LIII. 

Flags, colors, guidons, drums 235 

Garrison flag " 

Colors of regiments of artillery " 

of regiments of infantry 236 

Camp colors 

Standards and guidons of the cavalry " 

Drums " 

Knapsacks 237 

ARTICLE LIV. 
Arms of the United States, as established by an act of Congress.. 237 

ARTICLE LV. 
Extra and incidental allowances 238 

ARTICLE LVI. 
Restrictions as to extra allowances 238 

ARTICLE LVII. 
Individuals employed in staff departments 239 

ARTICLE LVIII. 
Disbursing officers " 

ARTICLE LIX. 

Officers of the auny must provide themselves, at their own expense, 
with a copy of this book of general regulations, &c. &c 239 

THE RULES AND ARTICLES OF WAR. 

An act for establishing rules and articles for the government of 
the armies of the United States 241 

Extracts from acts of Congress having reference to the articles of 
war 2G2 



GENEKA1 REGULATIONS 



Bill AIBS&^o 



ARTICLE I. 

PRECEDENCE OF REGIMENTS AND COHPS. 

l....The precedence of regiments and corps shall be as follows: 
1st. The Light Artillery. 
2d. The Light Dragoons. 
3d. Other Regular Cavalry. 
4th. The Artillery. 
5th. The Infantry. 
6th. The Marine Corps. 
7th. The Riflemen. 
8th. Volunteer Corps. 
9th. Militia. 
2.... Regiments of the regular army will take precedence in their 
particular arm, according to numerical order— in the volunteers and 
militia, by lot. 

3.... This order of precedence refers to parades — on all other 
occasions, the several regiments and corps are to be distributed and 
drawn up as the commanding officer may judge best adapted to 
the purposes of the service 
1 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Precedence and Grade of Officers. 



ARTICLE II. 

PRECEDENCE AND GRADATION OF OFFICERS AND NON-COMMISSIONED 
OFFICERS. 

1 The law establishes the following grades of rank in the army: 

1st. Major General. 
2d. Brigadier General. 
3d. Colonel. 
4th. Lieutenant Colonel. 
5th. Major. 
6th. Captain. 
7th. First Lieutenant. 
8th. Second Lieutenant. 
9th. Cadet. 

10th. Sergeant Major of a Regiment. 
11th. Quarter Master Sergeant of a Regiment. 
12th. Chief or Principal Musician of a Regiment. 
13th. First or Orderly Sergeant of a Company. 
14th. Ordnance Sergeant. 
15th. Sergeant. 
16th. Corporal. 
2 . . . . Staff officers without military rank, and professors and teach- 
ers of the Military Academy, are to be classed as follows; but they 
are not entitled to military command, though they may take their 
places on boards and councils, according to this classification and 
the dates of their appointments: 
The Paymaster General, 

The Surgeon General, ^As Colonels. 

The Commissary General of Purchases, 
Professors of the Military Academy, 

Paymasters, 

r>u i • } J)s JMajors. 

Chaplains, ^ •' 

Surgeons, 



} 



FOR THE ARMY. 



As 1st Lieut s. 



Precedence^ • . Rank-* . . Command. 

Assistant Professors, and Teachers of the Military^ 
Academy, 

Assistant Surgeons who have served five years, j ' 

Military Storekeepers, J 

Assistant Surgeons under five years, 

Assistant Teachers of the Military Academy, 

Master of the Sword, Jls 2d Lieut. 

Te this rule an exception is to be made in favor of the com- 
manding officer, who will have precedence of all who have no mi- 
litary rank. 

3.... In cases where commissions of the same grade and date in- 
terfere, a retrospect is to be had to former commissions in actual 
service at the time of appointment. 

4.... If the parties have served in the army or marine corps, and 
have been disbanded, the rank held by them respectively, is to be re- 
garded next to rank in actual service at the time of their appointment. 

5.... If the parties have not served in the army or marine 
corps, then their relative rank is to be settled temporarily, by lot, 
in the presence of the commanding officer, unless it shall have been 
previously determined by the War Department. 



ARTICLE III. 

RANK AXD COMMAND. 

I . . . . Whenever different corps or regiments, or parts of different 
corps or regiments, happen to join and do duty together upon 
marches, guards, or in quarters, the officer highest in rank of the 
line of the army, present on duty, has, the right to cpmmand the 
whole, and give the orders needful to the service. Brevet officers, 
or officers having brevets or commissions of a prior date to those of 
the regiment or corps in which they serve, cannot, by virtue of 
such brevets or commissions of a prior date, assume the command. 

2.... An officer not on duty with, or belonging to any of the 
companies, battalions, regiments, or corps, composing a command, 
cannot assume the command thereof. 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Rank">> Command. . . .Succession in Duties. 

3... .An officer intrusted with the command of a post, detach- 
ment, guard, or separate force, will not surrender it to another offi- 
cer, unless regularly relieved, except in case of sickness, or inability 
to perform his duty; when the officer next in rank, of the line of 
the army, present and on duty with such command, will succeed 
as a matter of course. 

4.... Officers having rank in the line of the army, in the staff, 
or by brevet, though eligible to command, will not assume the com- 
mand unless specially put on duty with that intention. 

5.... Brevet rank gives no command, except on detachments com- 
posed of different corps. 

6.... Detachment means a body of troops sent from the main body 
to perform a particular service, and to be absent for a limited time: 
when such a detachment is composed of different regiments or corps, 
or parts of different regiments or corps, brevet rank will take effect. 

7....A main body is an army, or any body of troops assem- 
bled in the field, or a garrison of any fortress or post. 

8.... Brevet rank takes place on courts martial, when composed 
of officers of different regiments or corps. 

9.... In regularly constituted commands, such as garrisons, posts, 
departments, companies, battalions, regiments, corps, brigades, divi- 
sions, army-corps, or the army itself, brevet rank cannot be exer- 
cised except by special assignment. 

ARTICLE IV. 

SUCCESSION IN DUTIES OH COMMAND. 

l....An officer who relieves or succeeds another in any command 
or duty, will consider himself precisely in the situation of his pre- 
decessor, in regard to his duties; and whether superior or inferior 
in rank, shall be furnished, for his information and guidance, by 
his predecessor, with copies of all orders and instructions in force at 
the time; and, if time permit, with a statement, in writing, of the 
nature and import of all orders which may have been verbally com- 
municated. 

2.... An officer so relieved, shall turn over to his successor all 



FOR THE ARMY, 



Succession in Duties. . . .Appointments. . . .Promotions. 

the public property in his possession, and all other property for which 
he may be responsible, including books, blank returns, and docu- 
ments: and tbe successor shall give him duplicate receipts for the 
same, which receipts shall specify the condition of each article. One 
of these receipts will be transmitted to the proper administrative 
department, to ensure a correct accountability; and the other retained 
in the possession of the relieved officer, for his own security. 

3. . . .When an officer, having charge of public property, is ordered 
on a duty which may separate him from the same, and thereby 
endanger its safe keeping, the commanding officer will designate some 
officer to take charge of the property, and give the necessary re- 
ceipts, until a successor shall be regularly appointed; but, should 
there be no officer assignable, the commanding officer will take 
charge of it himself, and be held responsible. 

ARTICLE V. 

Arl'OINTMEST AND PROMOTION OF OFFICERS. 

1 . . . . Original vacancies will be supplied by selection. 

2 . . . . Accidental vacancies to the rank of Colonel, by promotion 
according to seniority, except in extraordinary cases. 

3. . . .Promotions to the rank of Captain will be made regimentally. 

4.. ..Promotions to field appointments, as Major, Lieutenant Colo- 
nel, and Colonel, by line: the different arms, as artillery, infantry, 
cavalry, to be kept distinct. 

5 Appointments to the rank of Brigadier or Major General, and 

all appointments in the staff, from the line, will be filled by selec- 
tion; and officers who accept appointments in the staff, to whicli 
military rank is annexed, will vacate their places in the line. 

6.... No officer shall be permitted to hold two staff appointments 
at the same time. 

7 Generals will appoint their own aides-de-camp. 

8.... No officer will be considered out of the service by resigna- 
tion, until his resignation shall have been duly accepted by the pro- 
per authority. 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Staff Appointments. . . .Details of Officers. 
ARTICLE VI. 

APPOINTMENTS TO THE STAFF, AND DETAILS OF OFFICERS TO 
ASSIST IN STAFF DEPARTMENTS. 

1 .... As far as practicable, all appointments in the staff', and de- 
tails Yor assistants in the several departments of the staff, will be 
equalized on the several regiments, according to their respective 
strength in officers. 

2.... The artillery furnishes the details for the ordnance. That 
arm will also furnish its proportion for other extra duties. 

3.... Requisitions for officers from the line of the army, to assist 
in staff departments, will be made by the chiefs of those departments, 
to the Adjutant General, stating the number of officers required, 
in order that the details may be made according to the above prira- 
ciples, should such requisitions meet the approbation of the .Secretary 
of War. 

4. ...An officer shall not fill any staff appointment, the duties of 
which will detach him from his regiment, until he has served at 
least two years with his regiment, except those required as assis- 
tant professors and assistant teachers at the Military Academy. 

5.... Officers detailed for duty in any staff department, or on any 
detached service, shall not remain so detached for a longer period 
than two years; but may be relieved earlier, according to circumstan- 
ces, except at. the Military Academy or in the Ordnance Department, 
where they may continue not to exceed four years. 

6.... The above rules will not apply to aides-de-camp. 

7.... The superintendent of the Military Academy may select, 
with the approbation of the General-in-Chief, such number of the 
graduates of each year, as may be deemed necessary, as assistant 
professors and assistant teachers at that institution; but the officers 
for other duties at the Military Academy, will be put on the same 
footing, as to the period of being absent from regimental duty, with 
other officers, except the commandant of the corps of cadets and 
the officers of engineers. 

8.... When officers, detailed for duty in any of the staff depart- 
ments, are no longer required for such duty, the officer under whose 



FOR THE ARMY. 



Exchange. . . . Transfer. . . .Jielative Hank of Army and J\avy. 

immediate orders they may be serving, will report the fact, through 
the chief of his department, to the Adjutant General. 

ARTICLE VII. 

EXCHANGE OB TRANSFER OF REGIMENTAL OFFICERS. 

l....The Transfer of officers from one regiment to another, will 
be made only by the War Department, and on mutual application of 
the parties desiring the exchange. 

2... In no case will an officer of one regiment be put into ano- 
ther, where the transfer would prejudice the rank of any officer of 
either regiment. 

3 The transfer of officers will be confined to regiments within 

their respective arms, as artillery, infantry, cavalry. 

4.... When transfers are acceded to by the War Department, 
they will be announced in orders. 

ARTICLE VIII. 

RELATIVE RANK AND PRECEDENCE OF THE OFFICERS OF THE ARM* 
AM) NAVY. 

l....Thc officer highest in rank in the navy, to rank with the 
officer highest in rank in the army. 

2.... Captains commanding squadrons, or often years' standing, 
with Brigadier Generals. 

3 Captains of five years' standing, with Colonels. 

4 Under five years' standing, with Lieutenant Colonels. 

5.... Masters Commandant, with Majors. 

6 ... Lieutenants of ten years' standing, with Captains. 

7 Other Lieutenants with First Lieutenants. 

8- ...The rank and precedence of the officers, in the classes 
abovementioned, will be determined by the seniority of their respec- 
tive commissions. This arrangement gives no authority to either 
naval or military officers to command out of (heir respective spheres. 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Interior .Management and Economy of a Regiment. 
ARTICLE IX. 

lN'TERIOIl MANAGEMENT AND ECONOMY OF A BEGIMENT. 

1 The first and principal object of an officer entrusted with 

the command of a regiment, is the maintenance of that system of 
discipline, regularity, and economy, which is essential in every mili- 
tary body, whether we regard its efficiency as a part of an army, 
or the welfare and comfort of the individuals of whom it is com- 
posed. It is difficult to define, in detail, the duties of a command- 
ing officer. He is the source from which proceeds the life and 
energy of the corps entrusted to his charge; each individual looks 
up to him for example, instruction, and encouragement; and a 
proper fulfilment of his responsible duties must always result in 
honor to himself and advantage to the service. 

Instruction of Officers. 

2.... Commanding officers of regiments are responsible for the 
instruction and improvement of the officers and men under their 
command. 

3.... It is expected that every officer who has been two years in 
the service, ^hall be capable of commanding and exercising a com- 
pany in every situation, and perfectly acquainted with its interior 
management, economy, and discipline; and that every officer, after 
having been two years Captain of a company, shall have rendered 
himself competent in all respects to the duties of a field officer. 
To promote this object, as far as relates to parade, commanding 
officers of regiments will, at their discretion, but under their own 
eye, direct the field officers and Captains, to take command of the 
parade, without any regard to their respective ranks. 

4.. . .Commanding officers of regiments of infant)-}', are enjoined 
to avail themselves of every opportunity of instructing both officers 
and men in the exercise and management of field artillery; and 
commanding officers of all regiments and corps ought to encou- 
rage, by every means in their power, all sorts of useful occupations 
and manly exercises and diversions amongst their men; and, with 



OF THE ARMY, 



Interior .^Management and Economy of a Regiment. 

with the same care, to repress every species of idleness, dissipa- 
tion, and immorality. 

5. .. .Unanimity and good understanding amongst the officers, as 
connected with the character and discipline of a regiment, are ob- 
jects peculiarly deserving the attention of the commanding officer. 
His timely interference to prevent disputes, his advice to the young 
and inexperienced, his protection of and favor to the deserving, and 
his immediate reprehension of any conduct likely to interrupt the 
harmony of the corps, are the best means of securing these desi- 
rable ends, towards the attainment of which, he has a right to 
demand, and ought to receive, the assistance of every officer. It 
is well known, that perfect civility and the most conciliatory' man- 
ners, are compatible with the exercise of a most strict command, and 
it is to be observed, that the commanding officer is equally respon- 
sible for the maintenance of discipline and due subordination in his 
regiment, whether on parade, at the mess, or in any other situ- 
ation. 

6.... Every officer is at all times, and under all circumstances, 
accountable for the maintenance and preservation of good order, 
and the rules and discipline of war, according to the powers granted 
him by his commission. 

7. . . .It is made the duty of subaltern officers of companies to 
assist the Captains in making out rolls, reports, and returns; keep- 
ing the books of the company; attending to the issues, and, in short, 
to every thing connected with the welfare of the company with 
which they may be serving; and the Captains will see that this 
assistance is rendered. 

Posting of Officers with their Companies. 

8.... On the organization of a regiment or battalion, the com- 
panies will be designated by the letters of the alphabet, which 
designation is to be permanent. The Captains, in the first instance, 
will be assigned to companies according to] seniority, commenc- 
ing with the letter A; after which, they will succeed to the com- 
mand of them, as the vacancies may happen, but the companies 
will take their places in the battalion according to the rank of 



10 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Interior Management and Economy of a jiegiment. 

their respective Captains. The Lieutenants are to be posted in like 
manner, and afterwards to succeed to companies as vacancies occur. 

9 All officers so arranged are to do duty with their respec- 
tive companies, unless detached by orders from general head quar- 
ters, or appointed in the staff; and neither the Colonel of the regi- 
ment, nor any general officer, will interfere with this arrangement., 
without the approbation of the General-in-Chief. 

10. .. .Officers ordered from one company to another, when the 
regiment is distributed into different posts, shall proceed by the 
most direct route — being considered in the performance of an im- 
portant duty, in which the least delay is highly reprehensible; nor 
are they, under any pretence whatever, except that of sudden ill- 
ness, to apply for leave of absence from the time they quit the 
head quarters of the company they leave, till they have arrived at 
the place of their destination. 

11.... In the absence of a Captain, the command of his com- 
pany shall devolve on the officer next in rank serving with it; 
but should the company be without an officer, the Colonel or Com- 
mandant may order an officer of another company of his regiment 
to take command of it, provided he does not remove an officer 
serving at a distant post not under his immediate command 

Appointment of Adjutants and Non-commissioned Officers. 

12.. ..Each Colonel will appoint, from the subaltern officers of hi* 
own regiment, his Adjutant, and report the same to the Adjutant 
General. He will also appoint the non-comrnissioned staff of bfe 
regiment; and on the recommendation and nomination of the Cap- 
tains of companies, he will, should he approve thereof, appoint the 
Sergeants and Corporals of their respective companies. All thesi- 
appointments are to be announced in regimental orders. 

13 The officers and non-commissioned officers thus appointed, 

are not to be removed from their respective places, except by the 
sentence of a court martial, or by order of the Colonel or porma- 
nent commanding sfficer of the regiment. 

14.... A non-commissioned officer having been duly appointed, 
cannot, at his pleasure, resign hi-- plac or relinquish his duties as- 



OF THE ARMY. H 



Interior Management and Economy of a Regiment. 

such, and r2tur 1 to t':e ranks. If he have been degraded, in conse- 
quence of misconduct, he shall not be re-enlisted within a period to 
entitle him to the additional bounty allowed to such privates and 
musicians, as may re-enlist under ihe provisions of the act, sec- 
tion 3, of the 2d March, 1833. 

System of General Responsibility. 

15. .. .Nothing more essentially tends to the maintenance of good 
order, than that chain of responsibility, which should extend from 
the highest to the lowest grade. To effect this, each company 
must be divided into four squads, each to be put under the charge 
of a non-commissioned officer, who will be responsible to the subal- 
terns of the company. Should there be a deficiency in the number 
of non-commissioned officers, required to assist the subaltern officers 
in the discharge of this duty, Corporals may be appointed to act 
as lance-sergeants, and the most approved private soldiers as lance- 
corporals, who, if they conduct themselves with propriety, should 
be promoted to the first vacancies. 

10.... The subaltern officers to whom squads are intrusted, are 
responsible for the same to the Captain, who is responsible for the 
state of his company, in every particular, to the commanding officer 
of the regiment. 

17 The band will form a separate squad under its Chief, who 

will be immediately responsible to the Adjutant; or the musicians 
will fall into the squads of their respective companies, at the dis- 
cretion of the Colonel. 

18.. ..As far as practicable, squads will be kept separate, whether 
in tents or quarters; and the men of each will be numbered accord- 
ing to their qualifications, in order that the highest in number pre- 
sent, may, as lance-corporal, command the squad in the absence of 
non-commissioned officers and lance-corporals. 

19 The Adjutant, and other regimental staff officers, will be 

immediately responsible to the Colonel for the fulfilment of the du- 
ties of their respective departments. 



12 GENERAL REGULATIONS. 

Interior Management and Economy of a Regiment. 

Officers' 3Iess. 

20.... On many accounts it is desirable that the officers of the 
same regiment should form themselves into a mess, and live toge- 
ther as one family. While such an association tends to promote 
the harmony and comfort of its members, it is at the same time, if 
judiciously managed, the most respectable and economical manner 
in which officers can live within their pay. To encourage the mess- 
ing of officers, the Government allows rooms, kitchens, and fuel. 
It is, therefore, recommended to the officers of regiments and gar- 
risons, especially to those who are without families, to institute 
messes, which will bring them into a beneficial association with 
each other, and at the same time afford the most convenient means 
of discharging the rights of hospitality. 

21. ...Deportment at the mess should be marked with all that 
propriety which characterizes the best society under similar circum- 
stances. All undue familiarity should be discountenanced, as tend- 
ing to disturb the harmony of the association, and but too often, 
especially among young officers, the initiatory cause of the most un- 
happy consequences. It is, therefore, very properly considered a 
military offence to infringe the rules of decorum at a military mess; 
and it is no less the duty of the senior officer present, to interpose 
his authority to check any material irregularity on such an occasion, 
than it is to maintain order and discipline elsewhere. 

Soldiers' Messing. 

22.. ..The regularity of the soldiers' messing is an object of pri- 
mary importance. In camp, or barracks, the regimental officer of 
the day must visit and inspect the kettles at the hour appointed for 
cooking. Independently of this regimental arrangement, the officers 
must frequently, during the day, attend to the messing arrange- 
ments and economy of their respective companies. 

23.... Messes will be prepared by privates of squads, including 
private musicians, each taking his tour, and the greatest care will 
be observed in washing and scouring the utensils employed in cook- 
ing. Those made of brass or copper will not be used unless they 
be lined with tin. 



OF THE ARMY. 13 



Interior Management and Economy of a Regiment. 

Cleanliness — Dress. 

24.... The utmost attention will be paid by the Captains or offi- 
cers commanding companies, to the cleanliness of their men, as to 
their persons, clothing, arms, and accoutrements; and also, as to the 
state of their quarters or tents. This essential point of discipline 
will ever tend to the health and comfort of the soldier. 

25.. ..Bathing is recommended, and where conveniences for it are 
to be had, the men should be made to bathe at least once a week. 
The feet to be washed always at least twice a week. 

26.... Soldiers will wear the prescribed uniform in garrison and 
camp, and will not be permitted to keep in their possession any 
other clothing. When on fatigue parties, they will be made to wear 
the proper fatigue dress. 

Marking. 

27.... Every article, excepting arms and accoutrements, belonging 
to the regiment-, is to be marked with the number and name of 
the regiment. 

28... .Such articles as belong to companies are to be marked 
with the letter of the company, and number and name of the regi- 
ment; and such as belong to the men, with their individual numbers 
and the letter of the company. 

29 Officers' portmanteaux and valises will be marked with the 

names and rank of the owners. 

Bands. 

30... .Regiments that desire to have bands of music, will be al- 
lowed ten privates to act as musicians, in addition to the Chief Musi- 
cians authorized by law. 

31.... Artillery regiments, not being provided bylaw with Chief 
Musicians, are each allowed a Sergeant, to act as master of the 
band, and one Corporal in addition to the ten men. 

32. . . .The number here specified and allowed to act as musi- 
cians, is not to be exceeded under any circumstances, excuse, or 
arrangement, whatever. The men who may compose the band are 



14 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Interior Management ami Economy of a Regiment. 

to be mustered in their respective companies, and will be perfectly 
drilled and liable to serve in the ranks on any occasion of emer- 
gency, and are always to be effective to the service as soldiers. 

Preservation of Arms and Accoutrements. 

33.... The Captains of companies, and commanders of squads, 
will, under the direction of the commanding officer of the regiment, 
see that the arms and accoutrements in possession of the men, are 
always kept in good order, and that proper care be taken in clean- 
ing them. 

34.... The arms will not be taken to pieces, without express per- 
mission from the Captain or other commissioned officer. The prac- 
tice of highly polishing the barrels of the muskets will be discon- 
tinued; all that need be required is, that they be kept clean and free 
from rust, except the bayonet and bands, which are to be kept 
bright. Cartridge-boxes will be polished with blacking instead of 
varnish, as the latter cannot be used without injury to the leather. 
White lead is forbidden to be used in cleaning the belts and gloves; 
it being found to possess qualities injurious to health, when near 
the person. 

Ammunition. 

35.... Service ammunition, issued to the troops, will be charged 
to individuals; and to prevent waste or injury, the cartridge-boxes 
will be inspected twice a day, particularly at evening roll-call, 
when the number and condition of the cartridges will be ascertained, 
and, if necessary, others supplied. Each man will be made to pay 
for the rounds expended without orders, or not in the way of duty, 
or which may be damaged by his neglect. 

36.. . .Ammunition will be frequently sunned. 

37.... After guard mounting, the arms will be discharged at a 
target erected for the purpose; or if there be none, the charges will 
be drawn, and the powder and ball delivered over to the Quarter- 
master Sergeant, or Ordnance Sergeant, by the non-commissioned 
officers of the squads or guards. 

38 .... At no time, and under no pretence, are the arms to be 



OF THE ARMY. 15 



Interior Management and Economy of a Regiment. 

left loaded when the men are off duty, or not in expectation of 
an attack. Fatal effects may result from a neglect of this injunction. 

Regimental Books. 

39.... The books for each regiment shall be as follows: 

JVo. 1. General Order Book, of three quires of paper, 16 inches, 
by 1(H inches, to contain all orders and circulars from general, 
department, division, or brigade head quarters, with an index. 

JSi'o. 2. Regimental Order Book, of three quires of paper, 16 
inches by 10^ inches, to contain regimental orders, with an index. 

JVo. 3. Letter Book, of three quires of paper, 16 inches by 10 J 
inches, to contain the correspondence of the commanding officer 
on regimental subjects, with an index. 

JVo. 4. Size or Descriptive Book, of five quires of paper, 16 
inches by 1(H inches, to contain a list of the officers of the regi- 
ment, with their rank and dates of appointment and promotions; 
transfers, leaves of absence, and places and dates of birth. To 
contain, also, the names of all enlisted soldiers, entered according 
to priority of enlistments, giving their description, the dates and 
periods of enlistment; and, under the head of remarks, the cause 
of discharge, character, death, desertion, transfer, in short, every 
thing relating to their military history. This book to be indexed. 

JVo. 5. Monthly Return. One copy of the monthly returns to 
be filed, and at the end of each year to be bound in a book. 

Company Books. 

40 The books for each company shall be as follows: 

JVo. 1. Descriptive Book, of one quire of paper, 16 inches by 
10^ inches, one page to be appropriated for a list of commissioned 
officers; two pages for non-commissioned officers; two pages for 
register of men transferred; four pagas for register of men dis- 
charged; two fages for register of deaths; four pages for register 
of deserters; and the rest for the descriptive roll of the company, 
with a column of remarks in each case. 
JVo. 2. Clothing Book. 



16 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Interior ^Management and Economy of a Begiment. 

No. 3. Order Book, of one quire of paper, 16 inches by 10$ 
inches. 

The Soldier's Book. 

41... The object of this book is to record the military history 
of its possessor; to keep him informed of the state of his accounts 
with the Government; to make him acquainted with the allow- 
ances of pay and clothing authorized to be made to him according 
to his station; to put him in possession of the means of establish- 
ing his claim to any benefit to which he may be entitled under 
the laws and regulations granting pensions for wounds and disa- 
bilities, allowances and gratuities for long and faithful services, or 
in case of being discharged; and finally, to register all distinguish- 
ed acts of bravery, and good conduct in performance of his duty, 
as well as to serve as an honorable memorial of his character and 
standing as a soldier. This book is to be furnished by the suttler, 
and paid for by the soldier. 

Officers'* Waiters. 

42.... As an allowance is made by law to officers for private 
waiters, no non-commissioned officer or soldier is to be employed in 
any menial office, or made to perform any service not strictly mi- 
litary, for the private benefit of any officer or mess of officers. 

43.... When company officers may be allowed to take private 
soldiers as waiters, (which, however, is not to be permitted when 
waiters can be hired,) soldiers so taken shall be perfectly acquainted 
with their military duty, and, at all times, completely clothed, arm- 
ed, and in every respect equipped according to the rules of the 
service, and have their necessaries and every article of equipment 
complete and in good order. They are to compose a part, and to 
perform their share of the duty of any guard or other service on 
which the officer, to whom they are attached, is employed. They 
are to fall in with their respective companies at all reviews and 
inspections, and are, of course, liable to such drills as the command- 
ing officer may judge necessary to ensure their being, on all occa- 
sions, prepared to act in the ranks, and to do their duty as soldiers. 



FOR THE ARMY. 17 



Transfer of Soldiers •••.Furloughs. 



ARTICLE X. 

TRANSFER OF SOLDIERS FROM OXE REGIMENT TO ANOTHER. 

1 . . . . No non-commissioned officer or soldier will be transferred 
from one regiment to another without the previous authority of the 
General-in-Chief, which is to be obtained through the medium of 
the Adjutant General, on a proper representation from the Colonel 
or commanding officer of the regiment, of the circumstances under 
which the transfer is recommended. 

2. ...When soldiers are authorized to be transferred from one 
regiment to another, the transfer will take place on the first of a 
month, with a view to the more convenient settlement of their 
accounts. 

3.... In all cases of transfer a complete descriptive roll will accom- 
pany the soldier transferred; which roll will embrace an account 
of his pay, clothing, and other allowances; also, all stoppages to be , 
made on account of the Government, and debts due the sutler and 
laundress, as well as such other facts as may be necessary to show 
his complete military history. 

ARTICLE XI. 

FURLOUGHS TO SOLDIERS. 

l....By the 12th Article of War, "Every Colonel or other offi- 
" cer commanding a regiment, troop, or company, and actually quar- 
" tered with it, may give furloughs to non-commissioned officers 
" or soldiers, in such numbers, and for so long a time, as he shall 
"judge to he most consistent with the good of the service; and a 
" Captain, or other inferior officer, comminding a troop or company, 
"or in any garrison, fcr;, or barrack, of the Unite 1 Stale., (his field 
" officer being abssnt,) may give furloughs to non-commissioned 
" officers or sol Hers ior a time not exceeding twenty days in six 
" months, lu" not nrre than two persons ti le absent at the same 
" time, excepting some extnerdinar/ occasion should require it." 

2... Soldiers who go on furlough will not be permitted to take 
with them their arms or accoutre rents. 
2 



18 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Furloughs • ' • » Discharges. 

3.... If a soldier fail to rejoin his regiment on the expiration of 
his furlough, and no satisfactory account be received as to the cause 
of his continuing absent, he must be reported as a deserter, and 
proceeded against accordingly. 

4.... No furlough, however, will be given to enlisted men, with- 
out the sanction, by signature, of the commanding officer of the post, 
detachment, or regiment, (as the case may be;) and during a cam- 
paign, or any particular service, furloughs may be prohibited at the 
discretion of the officer in command. 

Form of Furlough. 
TO JILL TO WHOM IT MJIY CONCERN. 

The bearer hereof, , a Sergeant, (corporal or private, as the case 

may be) of Captain company, regiment of , aged — years, — 

feet — inches high, complexion, eyes, hair, and by profession a ; 

born in the of , and enlisted at , in the of , on the day 

of . eighteen hundred and , to serve for the period of .- Is hereby per- 
mitted to go to , in the county of , Stale of , he having received a Fur- 
lough from the day of , to the day of , at which period he mil 

rejoin his company or regiment at , or wherever it then may be; or be considered 

a deserter. 

Subsistence has been issued to said to the day of , and pay to 

the day of , loth inclusive. 

Given mulcr my hand, at this day of , 18 — . 

Signature of the Officer ( 
giving the Furlough. } 

ARTICLE XII. 

DISCHARGKS. 

1. ...After a non-commissioned officer or soldier has been duly 
enlisted, he shall not be discharged except as provided in the 11th 
Article of War; and all discharges shall be signed in the manner 
painted out by said article. 

2.... Duplicate discharges are prohibited, as well as all certifi- 
cates in lieu of discharges. All discharges will be accurately and 
legibly filled up according to the established form. 

3.. . .Whenever a non-commissioned officer or soldier is about to 
be discharged, his Captain shall furnish him with duplicate certifi- 



FOR THE ARMY. 19 



Certificate of Disability.... Pension Certificate. 

cates of his enlistment, service, and the pay and allowances due 
him at the time; which certificates shall be made in conformity with 
the established form. 

4.... No discharge will be granted prior to the expiration of 
enlistment, except by order from general head quarters. 

Form of Discharge. 

TO ALL WHOM. IT MAY CONCERN: 

Know ye, that , a of company, (—) 

regiment of , who was enlisted the day of one thousand eight hun- 
dred and. , to serve , is hereby honorably discharged from the Army of 

the United States. 

Said was born ir. in the Slate of ,is— years of age, — 

feet — inches high, complexion, eyes, hair, and by occupation, when 

enlUted, a 

Given at , this day of , 19 — . 

Signature of the Officer \ 

giving the Discharge. > 



ARTICLE XIII. 

CERTIFICATE OF DISABILITY. 

1.. ..Whenever a non-commissioned officer or soldier shall be 
incapable of performing his duties in consequence of wounds, dis- 
ease, or infirmity, and recommended to be discharged, the senior 
surgeon of the hospital, regiment, or post, shall furnish his Captain 
with a Certificate of Disability, pursuant to Form 18 of the Me- 
dical Regulations, for his approval or remark; which certificate of 
disability, with the descriptive certificate properly filled up and sign- 
ed by the Captain, will be forwarded by the commanding officer of 
the post, who will add such remarks as he may deem requisite, 
to the Adjutant General, for final decision at general head quarters. 

ARTICLE XIV. 

PENSION CERTIFICATE. 

1 . . . . Whenever a non-commissioned officer or soldier shall be re- 
commended to be discharged in consequence of wounds or other 



20 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Pension Certificate. ... Deceased Soldiers. 

injuries received while actually in the service of the United States, 
and in the line of his duty, and which disable him from obtaining 
his subsistence, his commanding officer shall certify the time, place, 
and manner of receiving such wound or disability, and the senior 
Surgeon of the hospital, regiment, or post, upon obtaining sufficient 
evidence of the facts, shall furnish duplicate Pension Certificates, 
agreeably to Form 19, Medical Regulations; which duplicate pen- 
sion certificates, with the descriptive certificate annexed thereto, 
properly filled up and signed by the Captain, shall be transmitted 
by the commanding officer of the regiment or post, with such re- 
marks as he may deem requisite, to the Adjutant General; one of 
which shall be retained for the files of his office, and the other 
sent to the Pension Office. 

ARTICLE XV. 

DECEASED SOLDIERS. 

1 The inventories of the effects of deceased non-commission- 
ed officers and soldiers, required by the 95th Article of War, will 
be forwarded to the Adjutant General, by the Captain of the com- 
pany to which the deceased belonged, and a duplicate of the same 
to the Colonel of the regiment.' When a soldier dies at a post 
or station absent from his company, it will be the duty of his im- 
mediate commander to furnish the required inventory; and, at the 
same time, to forward to the commanding officer of the company 
to which the soldier belonged, a report of his death, specifying 
the date, place, and cause; to what time he was last paid, and the 
money or other effects in his possession at the time of his decease; 
which report will be noted on the next muster roll of the compa- 
ny to which the man belonged. Each inventory will be endorsed — 

" Inventory of the effects of , late of company ( — ) 

regiment of — , who died at , the — day of , 183 -." 

2.... Should the effects of a deceased non-commissioned officer 
or soldier not be administered upon within six months after his 
decease, they shall be disposed of by the council of administration, 
under the authority of the commanding officer of the post, and the 



FOR THE ARMY. 21 



Deceased Soldiers-' • • Deserters. 



proceeds deposited with the Paymaster, to the credit of the United 
States, until they shall be claimed by the legal representatives of 
the deceased. 

3 In all such cases of sales by the council of administration, 

a statement in detail, or account of the proceeds, duly certified by 
the council and commanding officer, accompanied by the Paymas- 
ter's receipt for the proceeds, will be forwarded by the commanding 
officer to the Adjutant General. The statement will be endorsed — 

" Report of the proceeds of the effects of , late of 

company ( — ) regiment of , who died at , the 

day of , 183-." 

ARTICLE XVI. 

DESERTEIIS. 

1.... Every soldier who deserts the service, shall forfeit all the 
pay, clothing, and allowances, which may be due at the time of his 
desertion. 

2.... If a soldier desert from, or a deserter be received at, any 
post other than the station of the company, or detachment to which 
he belonged, he shall be promptly reported by the commanding offi- 
cer of such post, to the commander of his company or detachment. 
The time of desertion, apprehension, and delivery, will be stated. 
If the man be a recruit, unattached, the required report will be 
made to the Adjutant General. 

3.... A reward of thirty dollars will be paid to any person who 
shall apprehend and deliver a deserter to an officer ef the army at 
the most convenient post or recruiting station. Rewards thus paid, 
will be promptly reported by the disbursing officer to the officer 
commanding the company in which the deserter is mustered, who 
will note the amount of stoppage on the muster rolls, opposite to 
his name. The evidence of desertion, apprehension, and delivery 
will b3 the certificate of a commissioned officer, setting forth the 
name, company, and regiment, of the deserter, which, in all cases, 
must be filed with the voucher for the payment of the reward. The 
above reward of thirty dollars, will include the remuneration for all 



22 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Deserters. 

expenses incurred for apprehending, securing, and delivering, a de- 
serter. 

4 . . . . When non-commissioned officers or soldiers are sent in pur- 
suit of deserters, the expenses necessarily incurred will be paid, 
whether the deserter be apprehended or not; provided the amount 
does not exceed the authorized reward. As far as practicable, the 
bills and receipts for such expenses must be obtained. This rule 
will not embrace the case of citizens who pursue deserters at their 
own option. 

5.... An inventory of all clothing left by a deserter, shall be im- 
mediately taken by the commanding officer of his company or detach- 
ment, who will transmit to the Quartermaster General quarterly 
accounts of all articles so left, which will be kept separate from 
other clothing, and be held subject to his orders, or, when neces- 
sary, may, by order of the commanding officer, be issued to convicts 
or prisoners confined for desertion and so accounted for. Whenever 
deserters' clothing shall be delivered over to another officer, dupli- 
cate receipts for the same will be given, one to be transmitted, with 
the officer's accounts, to the Quartermaster General. Such articles 
as commanding officers may think fit for re-issue, being new or 
nearly new, will be retained for that purpose, and be credited on 
the next quarterly return of clothing, as so much derived from cloth- 
ing left by deserters: each article to be charged according to its 
actual value, to be determined by the council of administration. 

6.... Clothing left by recruits who may desert from a recruiting 
depot, a recruiting station, or marching detachment, shall be taken 
care of, and accounted for in the same manner as directed in cases 
of desertion from companies, by the superintendent, or the com- 
manding officer of the rendezvous or detachment, as the case may be. 

7. ...Every deserter who may be restored to the army, shall make 
good the time lost by his desertion, or the period of his unauthor- 
ized absence from the service. 

8.... The remission of the sentence of a court martial, by way 
of pardon, in the case of a deserter, will apply only to the residue 
of such sentence at the time, unless otherwise expressed; the re- 
mission to take effect from and after the date of the order restoring 
the soldier to duty. 



FOR THE ARMY. 23 



Deserters Troops in Jiarracks. 



9.... If a deserter be restored to duty without trial, he will be 
entitled to receive pay from the time he joined his company or post, 
from desertion; and to clothing, only from the date of the order of 
pardon, deducting from the former the amount of expenses, if any, 
which may have been incurred by the public for his apprehension 
and delivery. 

10 An apprehended deserter, unless restored to duty without 

trial, shall not receive pay, and shall receive only such clothing as 
may be actually necessary for him while waiting trial. 

ARTICLE XVII. 

TROOPS IN BARRACKS. 

1 The quarters of each regiment or battalion must corres- 
pond with its position in the order of battle, and those of compa- 
nies with their arrangement in their respective regiments. 

2 The rooms in the same building or set of buildings, will 

be numbered in the same series, and the numbers inscribed on the 
outside of the outer doors of their respective quarters. 

3 The name of each soldier will be labelled on his bunk, in 

the most conspicuous place; and the number which he bears in his 
squad, will be placed against his arms and accoutrements. The arms 
and accoutrements of non-commissioned officers will, in like man- 
ner, be designated by the name and rank of each. 

4 The arms will be placed in the arm racks, the stoppers in 

the muzzles, the cocks let down, and the bayonets in their scab- 
bards; the accoutrements suspended over the arms, and the swords 
hung by the belts on pegs. 

5.... The knapsack of each man will be placed on the lower 
shelf of his bunk, at its foot, packed with his effects, and ready to 
be slung; the great coat on the same^ shelf, rolled and strapped; the 
coat, folded inside out and placed under the knapsack; the cap on 
the second or upper shelf; and the loots well cleaned and hung on 
pegs over the head of the bed. 

6.... Dirty clothes will be kept in an appropriate part of the 
knapsack; no article of any kind to te put under the bedding; the 
bedding, when not in use, will be neatly rolled up. 



24 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Troops in Barracks ••••Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



7 Cooking utensils and tabic equipage will be cleaned and 
arranged in closets or recesses; blacking, whiting, and brushes, in 
appropriate places, and as much out of view as possible; the fuel 
in boxes convenient to the fire places. 

8.... When circumstances do not admit of a strict observance of 
these arrangements, the spirit of them will be adhered to. 

9.... Unless under special circumstances, Fridays will be particu- 
larly appropriated to police. The chiefs of squads will cause bunks 
and bedding to be overhauled; floors dry rubbed; tables and benches 
scoured; arms cleaned; accoutrements whitened and polished, and 
every thing put in the most exact order. 

ARTICLE XVIII. 

DUTIKS IJf OARBISON AND CAMP. 

l....The duties in garrison and camp are to be conducted, as 
far as practicable, in the same manner, and on the same principles. 

2.... The Reveille is to sound or beat at day break, and is the 
signal for the men to rise, and the sentinels to leave off challenging. 

3.... The Troop is to sound or beat at — o'clock in the morn- 
ing, for the purpose of assembling the men for duty and inspection 
at guard-mounting. 

4.... The Retreat is to sound or beat at sunset, for the purpose 
of warning the officers and men for duty, and reading the orders 
of the day. 

5.... The Tattoo is to be beat at — o'clock, after which no sol- 
dier is to be out of his tent or quarters. 

6'.>.Peas-npo?i-a-tre»cher, the signal for breakfast, is to sound 
or beat at — o'clock in the morning. 

7. . . .Roast-beef, the signal for dinner, is to sound or beat at — 
o'clock; at other times, it is the signal to draw provisions. 

8. ...The Surgeon's Call is to sound or beat at — o'clock, when 
the sick, able to go out, will be conducted to the hospital by the 
First Sergeants of companies, who will hand to the Surgeon a report 
of all the sick in the company other than those in hospital. 

9 .. The General is to feat only when the whole army is to 



FOR THE ARMY. 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



march, and is the signal to strike the tents, and prepare for the 
march. 

10.... The Assembly is the signal to form by company. 

11... To the Color is the signal to form by battalion. 

12.... The March, for the whole to move. 

13. ...The Long-roll is the signal for getting under arms, in case 
of alarm, or the sudden approach of the enemy. 

14-... The Parley is to desire a conference with the enemy. 

15. ...The Stable-call, in cavalry corps, will be sounded imme- 
diately after reveille, forty minutes before noop; and again, immedi- 
ately after retreat, for watering, feeding, and attending to the horses. 

Signals. 

16....To go for fuel — poing- stroke and ten stroke roll. 

17«.«.To go for water — tiuo strokes and a Jlam. 

18... .For fatigue party — pioneers march. 

19.... Adjutant's c&W— first part of the troop. 

20. ...First Sergeant's call — one roll and four taps. 

21.... Sergeant's call — one roll and three taps. 

22. .. .Corporal's call — one roll and two taps. 

23.... For the drummers — the drummer' a call. 

24.... The different daily beats shall be given on the right, and 
be immediately followed by the whole army; to facilitate which, the 
drummer's call shall be beat by the drums of the police a quarter 
of an hour before the time of beating, when the drummers will 
assemble befoie the colors of their respective regiments; and as soon 
as the beat begins on the right, it will be immediately taken up by 
the whole army, the drummers beating along the front of their re- 
spective regiments, from the centie to the right, thence to the left, 
and back again to the centre, where they finish. Where the hours 
for the different beats and signals are not fixed, the commanding 
officer will establish them, having regard to climate and circum- 
stances. 

Roll Calls. 
25..., There shall be daily at least five stated roll calls. 



•26 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Duties in Garrison and Camp. 

The first, immediately after reveille. 

The second, immediately before breakfast. 

The third, immediately before dinner. 

The fourth, immediately before retreat. 

The fifth, immediately after tattoo. 
26.... The first, fourth, and fifth roll calls will be made on the 
company parades by the First Sergeants, superintended by an officer; 
the second and third roll calls will be made by the First Sergeant, or 
by the non-commissioned officers of squads at their respective messes, 
and reported by them to the First Sergeants, who will immediately 
report the result to the Captains, and if at any of the roll calls 
men are absent without leave, or cannot be found, the Captains 
will report the names of the absentees to the Adjutant for the in- 
formation of the Colonel or commanding officer. 

27. . . .Immediately after reveille roll call, the tents or quarters 
and the space around them, will be put in complete order by the 
men of the companies, superintended by the chiefs of squads. The 
same rule will be observed at the guard house or guard tent, by the 
guard or prisoners. 

28.... The morning reports of companies, signed by the Captains 
and First Sergeants, will be handed to the Adjutant before eight 
o'clock in the morning, and will be consolidated by the Adjutant 
within the next hour, for the information of the Colonel; and if the 
consolidation is to be sent to higher authority, it will be signed by 
the Colonel and the Adjutant. 

Daily Details and Duties. 

29.... The daily duty must be announced in orders, and the 
officers to perform it are to be detailed according to the rules of 
the roster. 

30 The number and rank of the officer.} for daily duty, are 

to be regulated by the strength and circumstance? of the camp or 
garrison. 

31....Independe.itly of the officers detafled for guard duty, the 
officers for daily duty will be as follows: 

32.... In large camps ther.; will te a general officer of the day 



FOR THE ARMY. 27 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



for each division; a field officer of the day for each brigade; a 
Captain of the day for each regiment; and such general and re- 
gimental staff officers of the day as may be necessary to attend 
to the various details, and to receive and execute orders accord- 
ing to their respective stations. In every regiment and garrison, 
besides the officer of the day, there will be detailed daily, if the 
strength of the garrison will permit, a subaltern, four non-commis- 
sioned officers, a drummer, and such fatigue parties a? circum- 
stances may require, for the police of the reg'ii e it or garrison. 
In small commands, subalterns may \e de'aibd for duty as officers of 
the day, and they will also discharge the duties of officers of po- 
lice. The officers thus detailed are to remain in camp or garrison 
during their tours of duty. 

33. . . . The General of the day is to superintend the regularity 
and discipline of the camp in every particular; he is to visit the 
guards of the camp and the outposts; he is to call out and inspect 
the inlying pickets as often and at such times as he thinks proper; 
he is to receive all reports in camp, and make immediate com- 
munication of any extraordinary circumstance to the General-in- 
Chief. 

34.... The field officer of the day has the immediate superin- 
tendence of the camp of the brigade; he is to be present at the 
mounting and dismounting of all the brigade guards, particularly of 
the inlying pickets, which are always considered under his com- 
mand; he is to call them out to inspect them, to order such pa- 
troles from them as he may judge necessary to ensure the regu- 
larity and order of the camp, and in the event of the inlying pickets 
being ordered to march, he is to march with them. 

35....7^e Captain or subaltern of the day of each regiment, 
superintends the cleanliness and regularity of the camp or quarters 
of the regiment; he attends the parading of all regimental guards, 
and order; the roll to be called frequently and at unexpected periods, 
and reports every thing extraordinary to the commanding officer; he 
is to visit the hospital at various hour.?, and make a report of its 
state to the commanding officer of the rejiment or garrison. 

36....7\.e Adjutant of the day of the 1 r 'gat'e, is to assist the 



28 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Ditties in Garrison and Camp. 

general staff officer of the day in the various details of it, and, in his 
absence, to perform his duty as such, and attend for orders at head 
quarters. 

37....77*e officer of police, under the direction of the officer of 
the day, is to make a general inspection into the cleanliness of the 
camp or garrison; to suffer no fires to be made in camp, except in 
the kitchens; to cause all dirt or filth to be immediately removed, 
and either burnt or buried; to be present at all distributions of the 
regiment, and to form and send off all detachments for necessaries. 
In case the Adjutant is obliged to be absent, the officer of police 
is to do his duty until his return; for which purpose he must attend 
at the Adjutant's tent or office, to be ready to receive and distribute 
any orders that may come for the regiment. The drummer of the 
police must attend constantly at the Adjutant's tent or office, to be 
ready at all times to communicate the necessary signals; nor must he 
absent himself on any account, during the twenty-four hours, with- 
out leaving another drummer to supply his place until his return; 
nor then without leave from the Adjutant. In camp, when water is 
required by the men, application must be made to the officer of police, 
who will order the drummer to beat the necessary signal, on 
which all who want water must immediately parade with their 
canteens before the colors, where the officer of police will form and 
send them off under the care of two non-commissioned officers of the 
police, who are to be answerable that the whole party is brought 
back, and that no excesses are committed while it is out. Wood and 
other necessaries must be sent for and brought to camp in the saine 
manner. Except in cases of necessity, not more than one detach- 
ment is to be absent at a time. 

38 ... . Every such party not conducted by a non-commissioned 
officer shall have a written permission from a field officer, or officer 
commanding a regiment, or the officer of police, without which it 
is not to be permitted to pass the chain. 

39.... No non-commissioned officer or soldier is to quit camp or 
garrison without a pass signed by the commanding officer of the 
regiment or garrison, or by the Adjutant, under the authority of the 
commanding officer. 



FOR THE ARMY. 29 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



40 No officer is on any account to sleep out of camp or gar- 
rison without permission. 

Dress Parade. 

41.... There shall be daily at least one dress parade, which may 
be at troop or retreat, as the commanding officer may direct; or at 
both beats, should he think proper so to order. The parade at 
troop will be termed the morning- parade, and that at retreat the 
evening parade. In either case it will be conducted as follows: 

42 A signal will be beat or sounded half an hour before troop 

or retreat, for the music to assemble on the regimental parade. At 
the same time each company will turn out under arms, on its own 
parade, for roll call and inspection by its own officers. 

43 Ten minutes after that signal the Adjutant's call will be 

given, when the companies will be marched (the band playing) to 
the regimental parade, where they will be formed in their relative 
positions in the order of battle, arms ordered and at rest: the officers 
at their post with swords drawn, the Adjutant on the right of the 
line. The music will be formed in two ranks on the right of the 
Adjutant, and from the Adjutant's call to troop or retreat the band 
will play. The senior officer present will take the command of the 
parade, and will take post at a suitable distance in front opposite 
the centre, facing the line. 

44....Te?t minutes after the Adjutant's call, the Adjutant will 
order the music to beat of, when it will commence on the right, 
beat in front of the line to the left, and back to its place on the 

right. 

45.... When the music has ceased, the Adjutant will step two 
paces to the front, face the line and command. 

1. Attention.' 2. Shoulder— Arms! 3. Prepare to open ranks! 

4. To the rear, open order.' 5. March. 6. Bight— Dress! 
At the third command the r.mks will be openel according to the 
.ystem laid down in the Infantry Tactics, the commisioned officers 
marching to the front, the company officers four pace^, fielJ officers 
six paces, opposite to their positions in the order of lattle, where 



30 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Duties in Garrison and Camp. 

they will halt and dress. The Adjutant seeing the ranks aligned, 
will command, 

Front! 

And march along the front to the centre, face to the right and pass 
the line of company officers eight or ten paces, where he will come 
to the right about and give the word, 

Presen t — A h m s ! 

When arms will be presented; officers saluting, 

46.... Seeing this executed, he will face about to the command- 
ing officers, salute, and report " the parade is formed." The Ad- 
jutant will then, on intimation to that effect, take his station on 
the left of the commanding officer, one pace retired, passing round 
his rear. 

47.... The commanding officer having acknowledged the salute 
of the line, by totchirg his hat, will, after the Adjutant has taken 
his post, draw his sword and command, 

Shoulder — Arms! 

And add such exercises as he may think proper, concluding with 

Order — Arms! 

48.... The Adjutant will now pass round the right of the com- 
manding officer, advance upon the line, halt midway between him 
and the line of company officers, and command, 

1. First Sergeants, to the front and centre. 2. March! 

At the first word, they will shoulder arms as Sergeant, march two 
paces to the front and face inwards. At the second word, they 
will march to the centre and halt. The Adjutant will then or- 
der, 

1. Front — Face! 2. Report. 

At the last word, each in succession, beginning on the right, will 
report the result of the roll call previously made on the com- 
pany parade. 



FOR THE ARMY. 3L 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



49... The Adjutant again commands, 

1. First Sergeants, outward — Face! 2. To your posts — Mahch! 

When they will resume their places and order arms. The Adju- 
tant will now face to the commanding officer, salute, and give the 
result of the First Sergeants' reports. The commanding officer will 
next direct the orders to be read, when the Adjutant will face about 
and announce, 

Attention to Orders. 

He will then read the orders. 

50.... The orders having been read, the Adjutant will face to the 
commanding officer, salute, and report, when, on an intimation from 
the commander, he will face again to the line, and announce, 

The Parade is Dismissed. 

All the officers will now return their swords, face inwards, and 
close on the Adjutant, the field officers on the flanks. The Adju- 
tan gives the word, 

1. Front — Face! 2. Forward — March! 

When they will march forward, the music playing, and when 
within six paces of the commander, the Adjutant will give the word, 

Halt. 

The officers will then salute the commanding officer by raising 
the hand to the cap, and there remain until he shall have commu- 
nicated to them such instructions as he may have to give, or inti- 
mates that the ceremony is finished. As the officers disperse, the 
First Sergeants wilt close the ranks of their respective companies and 
march them to the company parades, where they will be dismissed, 
the band continuing to play until the companies clear the regimen- 
tal parade. 

51.... All company officers and men will be present at dress 
parades, unless especially excused, or on some duty incompatible 
with such attendance. 

52. •••The dress parades being essential to ensure the complete 



32 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Ditties in Garrison and Camp. 

equipment and neatness ot the troops, as well as to exhibit them 
under arms, at least once a day, commanding officers will be held 
responsible that they are not dispensed with, except on extraordi- 
nary and urgent occasions.' 

Guard Mounting. 

53.... Thirty minutes before guard mounting, a call will be sound- 
ed for the men warned for duty, to turn out on their company pa- 
rades for inspection by the First Sergeants, superintended by an offi- 
cer of each company. Ten minutes after, a second call will be 
sounded for the duty men to repair to the regimental or garrison 
parade, conducted by the First Sergeants. Each detachment as it ar- 
rives, will take post on the left of the one that preceded it, under 
the direction of the Adjutant, in open order,, arms shouldered, and 
bayonets fixesJ; the supernumeraries, five paces in the rear of the 
men of their respective companies. If the guards are intended for 
the grand parade, they will be marched thither by the senior officer 
of the details, where they will take post in the order prescribed 
above, under the direction of the general staff officer, or his assistant, 
the Adjutant of the day. 

54.... The following regulations respecting mounting guards, are 
drawn up with reference to the grand parade; with a few obvious 
variations they will equally apply to regimental or garrison parade. 

55. ...The ranks being opened the officers of guards will take 
post twelve paces in front of the centre, in one line, according to 
rank, and with swords drawn: the Sergeants in one rank, four paces 
in the rear of the officers; and the Corporals in one rank, four paces 
in the rear of the Sergeants; the whole facing to the front. 

56.... The Adjutant of the day will dress the lines, count the 
files, verify the details by reference to the written orders, and tell 
off the guards, whilst the genera! staff offic r appoints the officers 
and non-commissioned officers to the several guards, and designates 
the posts which they are to occupy. 

57.... The staff officer will the:i conn. aid, 

1. Officers and non-commissioned officers. 2. About— face. 
3. Inspect your guards — Maiich! 



FOR THE ARMY. 33 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



The commander of each guard then commands, 

1. Order arms. 2. Inspection of arms. 

The two highest in rank of each guard will divide the ranks be- 
tween them, accompanied by the other officers, and inspect accord- 
ingly. During the inspection the band will play. 

58.... The inspection ended, the officers and non-commissioned 
officers will take post in their respective guards, as though each 
guard were a company of a battalion, in open order, under review; 
at which time, also, the officers of the day will take post in front of 
the centre of the guards: the old officer of the day on the right of 
the new officer of the day, one pace retired. 
59.... The staff officer will now command, 

I. Rest! 2. Troop— Beat off! 

When the music, beginning on the right, will beat down the line 
in front of the officers of the guards to the left, and back to its 
place on the right, where it will cease to play. 
60. ...The staff officer continues, 

1. Attention! 2. Shouldei — Arms! 3. Close order— March! 
4. Present — Arms! 

At which he will face to the new officer of the day, salute, and re- 
port » the guards are formed:' The new officer of the day, after 
acknowledging the salute, will give the necessary instructions to the 
staff officer, who will cause the same to be executed, the staff 
officer giving the word of command. 

61.... The guard having shouldered arms and performed such 
exercises as may be required by the officer of the day, the staff 
officer will again command, 

I. By guards {or platoons.) 2. Right -wheel- March! 3. Pass in 
review. 4. Forward — Guides right — March! 

When the whole will march past ths officer of the day, according 
to the order of review, conducted by the staff officer, marching on 
3 



,,34 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

JDuties in Garrison and Camp. 

the left of the first division; the Adjutant of the day on the left of 
the last division. 

62.... When the column has passed the officer of the day, the 
guards wijl break off under their respective commanders, and take 
the route to the several posts assigned them, the stall" officers break- 
ing off at the same time; the music will cease, and the old officer 
, of the day salute, and give the old or standing orders to the new 
officer of the day. The supernumeraries at the same time, will be 
marched by the First Sergeants to their respective csmpany parades 
and dismissed. 

63... .Guards .which are assigned to new posts will be conducted 
to and established in .them by the officer of the day and the staff 
officer detached from head quarters for the purpose. 

64 In bad weather the ceremony of turning off guards on the 

usual parades may be, dispensed with by the officer of the day, 
and the inspection j be made under shelter. Also, in case of guards 
which may have to mount in the night, or at the close of the day, 
after fatiguing marches, the ceremony of turning off may be dis- 
pensed with; but never that of inspection. 

65. ...The officer of the day will always be present at guard 

mountingr- No other. officer, except a general officer, will interfere 

with, or give any order- on the parade to the staff officer on duty 

.... the; ; e - The commander of the troops or garrison, though under the 

rank of General, is of course an exception to this rule. 

66... .The regiment that furnishes the Adjutant of the day will 
also furnish the music for the grand parade. 

67... .Officers on all duties under arms are to have their swords 
drawn, without waiting for f any words of command for that purpose. 

Relieving Guards and Sentinels. 
68. ...The guards in camp and gairison will be relieved every 
twenty-four hours. - The guards at the outposts will ordinarily be 
relieved in the 'same manner; but this must depend on their dis- 
tances from camp, or other circumstance? which may sometimes re- 
quire their continuing on daty several diys. In such cases thev must 
be previously notified to provide themselves accordingly. 



FOR THE ARMY. 35 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



69.... The guards are to move in the greatest order to their 
respective pests, marching by platoons when the roads will permit. 

70 The officer of the old guard, having his guard paraded, on 

the approach of the new guard, commands, 

Present .Irms. 

71 The new guard will march past the old guard, at shoul- 
dered arms, officers saluting, and take post three or four paces on 
its right, and in a line with it, where its officer will command, 

Present Arms. 

The two officers will then approach each other, and the relieving 
officer take his orders from the relieved. Both officers will then 
return to their respective guards, and command, 

Shoulder Arms. 

72.... The officer of the new guard will now direct his Sergeant 
to make a list of the guard, dividing them into three reliefs, and 
proceed himself to take possession of the guard-house, or guard-tent, 
and the articles and prisoners in charge of the guard; he will note 
every new injury which may have been committed, and, on his report, 
the relieved officer will be held responsible. 

73.... The officer of the old guard will have prepared for the 
signature of the officer who relieves him, an inventory of the pro- 
perty or articles in charge of the guard, and also a roll of the 
prisoners with their offences annexed. 

74.... The first relief having been designated, the officer ot the 
new guard will order it two paces to the front, when the Corporal 
of the new guard will take charge of it and go to relieve the senti- 
nels, accompanied by the Corporal of the old guard, who will take 
command of the old sentinels when the whole arc relieved. 

75.... If the sentinels are numerous, the Sergeants are to be em- 
ployed as well as the Corporals, in relieving them. 

76.... During the time of relieving the sentinels, and of calling in 
the small posts, the commanders of the two guards, will, when near 
the enemy, visit the avenues leading to the post; the old comman- 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



der giving to the new, all the information which he may possess re- 
lative to the p isition of the enemy. 

77. ...A relief, with arms supported and formed in two ranks, 
will march by a flank, conducted by the Corporal on the side of the 
leading front rank man. 

i 78.... Tie sentinel j at the guard-house or guard-tent will be the 
first relieved and le c t behind; the cne most distant will be next reliev- 
ed, and the others in succession, as the relief returns to the guard. 

79.... When a sentinel sees the relief approach he will face to it 
and htl:. At six paces the Corpoial wilt command, 

Relief— Halt! 

When the relief will 1 aH and carry arms. The Corporal will then 
add "No. 1," or " No. 2," or "No. 3," according to the designation 
of the sentinel, 

Jlrms — Port. 
At this word the two sentinels will arms port, and approach each 
other, when the old sentinel, under the direction of the Corporal, 
and in his hearing, will whisper the instructions to the new sen- 
tinel. 

80.... This done, the two sentinels will shoulder arms, and the 
old sentinel will pass in quick time to his place in rear of the 
relief, the new sentinel facing the relief. The Corporal will then 
command, 

1. Relief, support arms. 2. Forward March! 

And the relief proceeds in the same manner until the whole are 
relieved. 

81.... A relief is always to be marched in the greatest order, 
at support arms; and if an officer approaches, the Corporal is to 
order his men to carry arms, supporting them again when the 
officer has passed. The Corporals arc to be answerable that the 
sentinels, when relieving, perform their motions in the greatest spi- 
rit and exactness. 

82.... The detachments and sentinels from the old guard having 
rejoined it, it will take up its march, the music of both guards beat- 
ing a march, except at the out posts, where music is prohibited. 



FOR THE ARMY. 37 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



The old guard will march along the front of the new guard with 
shouldered arms: the new guard at presented arms; officers of both 
guards saluting. 

83.... On arriving at the camp or post, the commander of the 
old guard will, if it consist of detachments of different regiments, 
send each detachment to its own regiment, under an officer or non- 
commissioned officer; unless the officer of the day should be present 
to inspect the old guard, when he will order the men to their 
several regiments, under their respective officers. In either case, 
the pieces of the men will be drawn or discharged at a target, be- 
fore the men are dismissed. 

84... When the old guard has marched off fifty paces, the officer 
of the new guard will order his guard to face to the right, and 
cause them to stack their arms, or to place them in the arm racks. 

85. .. .The commanding officer of the guard will then make him- 
self acquainted with the written, general, and particular instructions 
for his post; next visit his sentinels, to ascertain if the instructions 
they have received be correct; and question the officers and non- 
commissioned officers under him relative to the instructions they 
may respectively have received from the corresponding persons of 
the old guard. 

Method of going and receiving the Grand Bounds. 

8G....Thc General and other officers of the day will visit the se- 
veral guards during the day, as often and at such hours as they 
judge proper. 

87.... When the sentry before the guard perceives the officer of 
the day approach, he will call to the guard to turn out, when it will 
parade, and at the proper time salute him with presented arms. 

88. . . .The officer of the day wiil examine the guard; see that none 
are absent; that their arms and accoutrements are in order; that the 
officers and non-commissioned officers are acquainted with their duty; 
and that the sentinels are properly posted and have received pro- 
per orders. 

89 The officer of the guard shall give the parole to the officer 

of the day, if demanded. 



38 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Duties in Garrisoi> and Camp. 

90 The officers of the day will go the grand rounds after 12 

o'clock at night. 

91 ... . When the officer of the day arrives at the guard whence 
he intends to begin his rounds, he will make himself known as 
such, by giving the officer of the guard the parole. He will then 
order the guard under arms, and having examined it, demand an 
escort of a Sergeant and two men to proceed to the next post. 

92.... When the rounds are challenged by a sentinel, the Ser- 
geant will answer, grand rounds.' and the sentinel will reply, 
stand, grand rounds! advance, Sergeant, with the countersign! 
Upon which the Sergeant advances and gives the countersign. The 
sentinel will then cry, advance, rounds! and present arms till they 
have passed. 

93.... When the sentinel before the guard challenges and is 
answered, grand rounds! he will reply, stand, grand rounds! turn 
out the guard! grand rounds! Upon which the guard will be turned 
out and drawn up in good order, with shouldered arms, the officers 
taking their posts. The officer commanding the guard, will then or- 
der a Sergeant and two men to advance towards the rounds and 
challenge. When the Sergeant of the guard comes within ten pa- 
ces of the rounds, he will halt and challenge briskly. The Ser- 
geant of the rounds is to answer, grand rounds! The Sergeant 
of the guard replies, stand, grand rounds! advance, Sergeant, with 
the countersig?i! and orders his men to present arms! The Ser- 
geant of the rounds advances alone and giving the countersign re- 
turns to his rounds; and the Sergeant of the guard calls to his 
officer, the countersign is right! on which the officer of the guard 
calls, advance, rounds! The officer of the rounds then advan- 
ces alone, and on his approach, the guard presents arms. The 
officer of the rounds passes along the front of the guard immedi- 
ately to the officer, who keeps his post on the right, and gives 
him the parole. He then examines the guard, orders back his es- 
cort, and demanding a new one, proceeds in the same manner to 
other guards. 

94.... All general officers, as well as the commander of the 
post or garrison, may visit the guards and go the grand rounds, 



FOR THE ARM 



^ ' 3<^ 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



and be received in the same manner as prescribed for the officer 
of the day. 



Guards — their Use and Duty. 
96... The principal guards are, 

1. Outposts and picket guards. 

2. Camp and garrison guards. 

- 

3. General officers' guards. 

96.... The outposts and picket guards are formed from the line, 
and composed of cavalry or infantry, or both, according to circum- 
stances. They are posted on the avenues leading to the camp, 
and in such positions as are most eligible for its security. Their 
strength is regulated by a variety of considerations, such as proxi- 
mity to the enemy, and the nature of the position to be guarded. 

97 The duties of the outposts are so various that they will 

usually require detailed instructions according to circumstances; the 
following directions will, however, apply generally, and are most 
strictly to be observed. ,.....-. 

98.... All out guards march off without trumpets sounding or 
drums beating. They pay no compliment of any kind, neither do 
their sentries take any complimentary notice of officers passing near 
their posts. 

99.... The men on advanced pickets are to carry their provisions 
with them, ready cooked, when circumstances permit. The cavalry 
to carry sufficient forage for the time they are to be out. 

100. .. .Officers commanding out-guards are to send guides or 
orderly men to the field officer of the day, or to the staff officer 
of their own brigades, as circumstaaces may require, in order to 
conduct the new guards and to carry such communications as may 
be necessary. When the army is on a march they must- apprise 
the staff officer of the brigade of the situation of their posts, as 
soon as they arrive at them. 

101 ....Whenever detachments are composed of 200 men or np- 
wards, a Surgeon or Assistant Surgeon is to be senjt .wi,th them. 
On particular duties the attendance of a Surgeon, or Assistant Sur- 
geon may be requisite with smaller detachments,, JDetachments of . 
cavalry of fifty or upwards must be attended^ by a Farrier, , : : ,,-, , 

102. . . .As soon as an officer commanding an outpost or advanced 



40 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Duties in Garrison and Camp. 

picket arrives on his ground, he must, by a careful reconnoisance, 
make himself acquainted with not only the space he actually occu- 
pies, but the heights within musket shot; the roads and paths lead- 
ing to or near the post, ascertaining their breadth and practi- 
cability for cavalry and cannon, and ensure a ready and con- 
stant communication with the adjoining posts and videttes, by sig- 
nals during the day — by patrols during the night. He should ex- 
amine all ravines that might cover the approach of an enemy, and 
all the points from which he is most likely to be attacked. This 
will prevent all surprises, and should he be assailed during the night, 
enable him to act with promptness and decision. 

103.... An intelligent officer upon an outpost, even without in- 
trenching tools, may materially strengthen his post. A tree felled 
with judgment, brushwood cut to a certain distance, pointed stakes, 
about breast high, placed on the point most assailable, may be at- 
tended with the greatest advantages, and can be effected with the com- 
mon hatchet, or axe, with which the soldiers arc provided for the 
purpose of cutting fire wood. 

104. ...Unexpected obstacles, within point-blank musket shot of 
the place attacked, embarrass and discourage an enemy; and an 
officer who is on the defensive, should multiply them within that 
distance as much as possible. 

105.... Guards are not to presume to molest any persons coming 
to camp with provisions, and are, on no account, to exact or re- 
ceive any thing for their free passage. 

106.... When a deserter comes in from the enemy, he is imme- 
diately to be sent, under a proper escort, to the officer command- 
ing the outposts, who, after ascertaining from him such facts as relate 
to his own post, will immediately forward him to head quarters. 

107 The videttes or sentinels on outposts are to be placed so 

as to best observe the approach of the enemy, and at the same 
time, communicate by signal with each other and with their respec- 
tive posts. At night, or in thick weather, they will be doubled. 

108.... Officers, soldiers, and followers of the camp, are not, on 
any account to be suffered to pass the outposts, unless they are on 
duty, or present a regular permit from head quarters. 

109.... Persons bearing a fag of truce from the enemy, are to 



FOR THE ARMY. 41 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



be treated with attention and civility; but, as communications of 
that nature are frequently designed to gain intelligence, and for re- 
connoisance, the most strict and efficacious means must be adopted 
to frustrate such consequences. 

110. .. .The camp and quarter guards are for the better security 
of the camp, as well as for preserving good order and discipline. 

111.... Every regiment will furnish a camp and quarter guard. 
The camp guard to consist of one Lieutenant, one Sergeant, one Cor- 
poral, one drummer, and twenty-seven privates; and the quarter- 
guard, of one Corporal and nine privates. 

112.... The camp guard of the front line will be posted four 
hundred and twelve feet in front of it, and that of the second 
line, the same distance in the rear of the second line, each op- 
posite to the centre of the regiment. 

113.... Each camp guard will post nine sentinels, viz. two before 
the guard, two on the right, and two on the left. These six senti- 
nels, with those from the other regiments in the line, form a chain 
in the front and rear of the camp; two sentinels before the colors 
and arms, and one before the marquee of the commanding officer of 
the regiment. 

114.... To complete the chain of sentinels around the camp, the 
Adjutant General or staff officer at head quarters, will order two 
flank guards to be detailed from the line, to consist of a commis- 
sioned officer and as many men as may be necessary for that pur- 
pose. 

11 5.... The intention of the camp guards being to form a chain 
of sentinels around the camp, in order to prevent improper persons 
entering, or soldiers going out of camp, the commanding officers of 
brigades will add to, or diminish them, so as to answer this pur- 
pose. 

116.. . .The quarter guard is to be posted twelve feet in the rear 
of the line of wagons, and will furnish three sentinels, viz. one at 
the guard, and one behind the centre of each wing of the regi- 
ment. 

117 •"> General officers' guards are to be furnished by their re- 
spective commands; that is, for the General commandivg-i?i-chiej, 
by the line, each brigade furnishing it by turns; and will consist 



42 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Duties in Garrison and Camp. 

of such number and description of.ftroops as shall be determined at 
head quarters. 

118.... The guard of a Major Genera!, is one subaltern, one Ser- 
geant, one Corporal, and twenty privates, to be furnished by his 
own division, each brigade furnishing it by turns. 

11 9.... The guard of a Brigadier General, is one Sergeant, 
one Corporal, and twelve privates, to be furnished by his own 
brigade. 

120. .. .Besides these guards, there shall be such others as may 
be found necessary for the protection of supplies in the Commissa- 
riat's and Quarter Master's department, and also for the preserva- 
tion of order at the hospitals. 

121.. ..All guards are to mount at the same hour, which will 
be regulated by the commanding officer. 

122.... The camp and quarter guards, are to parade before the 
centre of the regiment, where they will be formed by the Adju- 
tant; or, in his absence, by the officer of police, and sent off im- 
mediately to their respective posls. 

123.... The guards of a Major General and a Brigadier Ge- 
neral, are to be formed by the staff officer attached to the brigade, 
and sent from the brigade parade. 

124.. ..The other guards, including that of the General-in-Chief, 
being composed of detachments from the line, by brigades, each 
detachment is formed on the brigade parade by the staff officer at- 
tached to the brigade, and sent with an Adjutant or other com- 
missioned officer, to the grand parade. 

125.... All guards, except those which are honorary, should or- 
dinarily be of force proportioned to the number of sentinels re- 
quired, allowing three reliefs to each post. 

12 6.... In garrison, the number of guards depends on the extent 
of the fortress or post to be defended, and the strength of the 
garrison. 

127-... The principal guard will be denominated the main guard; 
and the lesser guards will take the names of the points to be 
guarded, as the arsenal guard, port guard, barrier guard. 

128 Officers commanding guards at the ports, are to cause 

the bridges to be drawn up or the barriers to be shut, on the ap- 



FOR THE ARMY. 43 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



proach of any body of armed men, of which they are to give no- 
tice to the main guard, and are not to suffer any of them to enter 
the garrison without leave from the commandant. 

129.... It is the duty of officers on all guards, to inspect all re- 
liefs of sentinels, both when they go on, and come ©ff, their posts; 
to call the rolls frequently, and, by every means in their power, to 
keep the men under their command in the most perfect state of 
vigilance and preparation. They will be responsible for the security 
of the prisoners and property committed to their charge; and it will 
be their duty to suppress all riots and disorders, and, in case of 
fire, to give the alarm and be instrumental in extinguishing it. 
They are also watchfully to superintend the conduct of the non- 
commissioned officers, taking care that they are correct in the per- 
formance of their duty; that they maintain a proper authority, and 
prevent any species of irregularity among the men. They must parti- 
cularly ascertain that the Corporals themselves are well informed with 
repect to the orders they are to deliver to the several sentinels, whom 
they must frequently visit, to be assured that they know their duty, 
and have received the proper instructions. 

130. ...Officers commanding guards, when going to visit their sen- 
tinels, are to mention their intention, and the probable time of their 
absence, to the next officer in command. 

131.... The officers are to remain constantly at their guards, 
except while visiting their sentinels; nor are they to enter any house 
or place of public amusement. 

132.... Neither officers nor soldiers are, on any account, to take 
off their clothing or accoutrements while they are on guard; but are 
always to be in their uniform, fully equipped for the service. 

133. . . .No non-commissioned officer or soldier is to quit his guard 
without leave, which is to be granted only upon particular occa- 
sions, and to very few at a time. If water or other necessaries 
are wanted for the guard, they must be sent for at a time when the 
sentinels arc not relieving, by a non-commissioned officer and some 
men, with their arms, if at an outpost. 

134. . . .At every relief, the guard must parade for roll call and in- 
spection, and remain fonned until the relief returns. 

135... .A patrol, consisting of ati officer, (if there be more than 



44 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Duties in Garrison and Cam[j. 

one on guard,) a non-commissioned officer, and a file of men, will 
be sent out as often as may be deemed necessary, to see that the 
sentinels understand their orders, to make observations, gain informa- 
tion, and apprehend suspected persons. 

136.... All reliefs and patrols will be conducted with the strictest 
silence, and on their return the non-commissioned officer will report 
to the officer of the guard every thing material that has transpired 
during their absence. 

137. .. .During the day the men may be permitted to rest them- 
selves so much as is consistent with the safety of the guard; but, 
in the night, no man must be suffered to lie down or sleep, on 
any account, but have his arms constantly in his hands, and be 
ready to fall in on the least alarm. 

138. ...The officer who mounts the camp guard, must give orders 
to the sentinels not to suffer any person to pass in or out of camp, 
exept by one of the guards; nor then, till the officer of the guard has 
examined him. 

139.... During the day the sentinels on the outposts must stop 
every party of men, whether armed or not, until they have been 
examined by the officer of the guard. 

140.... No sentinel will be posted so distant as not to be heard 
by the guard, either directly or through other sentinels. 

141.... A sentinel must take the greatest care not to be surprised. 
He must keep himself on the alert, observing every thing that takes 
place within his sight or hearing. He must never quit his arms, 
but move about briskly and without speaking. He must not suffer 
himself to be relieved, except by the Corporal of the guard, or some 
superior of his guard. If a disorder take place, he must call out, 
the guard; and if a fire break out, he must cry, fire. If, in either 
case, the danger be great, he must discharge his firelock before call- 
ing out. 

142.... A sentinel, placed over the colors or arms, must suffer no 
person to touch them, except by order of some officer, or a non- 
commissioned officer of the guard. If placed over prisoners, he 
must suffer no person, except an officer, or a non- commissioned 
officer of his guard, to converse with them; ncr must he permit the 
prisoners to leave their place of confinement. 



FOR THE ARMY. 45 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



143.... The sentinel at the guard house, or guard tent, when 
he sees any hody of troops, or an officer entitled to compliment, 
approach, must call, turn out the guard. 

144.... The officer of the guard must see that the countersign 
is duly communicated to the sentinels a little before twilight; to 
enable him to do which, he must be furnished, by the officer of 
the day, with the parole and countersign, before retreat. 

145. .. .Immediately after receiving the countersign, and until re- 
veille, the sentinels must challenge all who approach them. No 
sentinel must suffer any person to advance nearer than the point 
of his bayonet, until he has received the countersign, placing him- 
self in the position of arms port for that purpose. 

146.... A sentinel, in challenging, will call out — -who comes there? 
If answered — -friend, -with the countersign, he will reply — advance, 
friend, -with the countersign! If answered — relief, patrol, or grand 
rounds! he will reply — halt! advance, Sergeant, for Corporal) and 
give the countersign! and satisfy himself that the party is what 
it represents itself to be. If he have no authority to pass persons 
with the countersign, or if the persons have not the countersign, 
he will call — Corporal of the guard! 

147. .. .In case one of the guard desert, the officer must immedi- 
ately change the countersign, and send notice thereof to the officer 
of the day, who is to communicate the same to the other guards 
and to head quarters. 

148 Though the regulations dispense with guards turning out 

afs a matter of compliment, after sunset, this is by no means to pre- 
vent sentinels, when officers in uniform approach their post, paying 
them a proper attention, by standing steady, with carried arms, 
facing to their proper front; nor is this to be discontinued until the 
evening is so far advanced that the sentinels begin challenging. 

14 9.... When a fire breaks out, or any alarm is raised in a gar- 
rison, all guards are to be immediately under arms; the barriers are 
to be shut, draw bridges drawn up, and so continue until the fire 
is extinguished, or the alarm ceases. 

150.... The officer of the guard will send to the officer of the 
day, at guard mounting, by a non-commissioned officer, a report of 
his tour of sorvice, acccording to the following form: 



46 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



1 














ih, 
















and relieved on the . 




Parole. 


5 

3 


GO 

c 
s 

be 


O 




a 
'o 


DO 

ed 

Hi 


"3 

c 


V 

Is 

be 
o 

be 
be 


Articles in Charge. 


Countersign. 


] 








_ 




— 









Detail - - 




| | 










List of the Guard. 




Reliefs, and when posted. 






6 




Where 
Posted. 


Remarks. 


1st Relief, 
from iu to 12 


2t/ Relief 
I'rom 1 2 to 2 


3rf i2e//e/; 
from 2 to 4 




and 4 to 6. 


an (J C to 8. 


ami S to 10. 
















Tliis column will con- 


1 










tain the remarks of the 
officer of the guard; such 


i 










as,— the time t'ae guard 
was visited bv the offi- 


3 










cer of the dav; and an 


4 










account of every mtilr- 










rial circumstance that 


5 










has transpired during 
the tour. 


List of Prisoners. 








d. 




Confined. 






6 


Names. 




bo 




Charges. 


Sentences.' Remarks. 








O 


m 


When. 


By whom 








1 

a 


















3 


















4 
















A. B. 


Lieut, of 




TJ • # /• 






Commanding the Guard. 



FOR THE ARMY. 47 



Duties in Garrison and Camp. 



151.... The officer of the day, immediately after being relieved, 
will add to the guard report such remarks as circumstances require, 
and present the same at head quarters. 

152.... An officer is not to be placed in charge of a guard, till 
he is sufficiently acquainted with his duty. For the purpose of 
instruction, young officers are to be put on duty as supernumera- 
ries with senior officers, from whose advice and example they may 
be expected to obtain a knowledge of their duty. 

Working Parties. 

153.... Soldiers aie, and at all times have been, liable to be or- 
dered on working parties as a duty. 

154.... When it is necessary to employ them as artificers or 
laborers, in the construction of permanent military works and roads, 
they are to receive, in addition to their pay, the allowances made 
by law or regulation. 

155.... These allowances do not apply to men belonging to the 
Ordnance Department, or to artificers belonging to the artillery 
who arc mustered and paid as such. 

156.... In summer, the hours for actual labor are ten; in winter, 
eight; and the soldiers will be paid in proportion for any greater or 
less number of hours they may be employed in each day. The sum- 
mer period is considered to commence on the 1st April, and the 
winter period on the 1st October, in each year. 

157.... It is, however, to be distinctly understood, that, except 
for the performance of certain duties, in cases that may appear to 
the General, or other officer commanding, to be deserving of par- 
ticular consideration, under the provisions of the law, no such ex- 
tra pay shall be extended to. or claimed by, working parties in 
camp, or on service, when work becomes the most important of 
duties; when the bodily exertion of every individual of every rank 
is required to facilitate the operations, strengthen the positions, and 
ensure the general safety of the army; and when the use of the 
spade, pick-axe, and barrow, are as essential for the defensive, as 
that of the musket and bayonet are for the offensi e, operations of 
the army. 



48 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Duties of Commanding Officers. 

158.... It is likewise to be understood, that officers commanding 
military posts, are not to create any expense under this head, with- 
out authority from General Head Quarters, or from the War De- 
partment. 

159.... The levelling of ground in the vicinity of the camp or 
barracks, and the making of communications between different parts 
©f them, are duties of fatigue, and are to be performed without any 
additional pay. 

160.... When working parties are furnished for opening roads, 
throwing up fortifications, etc., the officers commanding them are 
to execute the work conformably to the directions and plans of 
the Engineer or other officer having charge of the same, without 
reference to their respective ranks. 

161.. ..Troops, when not in the field, are not to be employed 
in any work not strictly military, which can be done by hire, or 
by contract with individuals, not belonging to the army, unless by 
special authority of the War Department. 

ARTICLE XXV. 

DUTIES OF COMMANDING OFFICERS OF POSTS AND STATIONS. 

l....An officer invested with a separate command, is responsi- 
ble for the discipline of the troops under his orders, and for the 
good state of every thing intrusted to his charge. It is, therefore, 
his duty to see that the rules and regulations for the government 
of the troops are strictly enforced; that the proper supply of provi- 
sions, arms, and ammunition, is duly provided; that the quarters and 
defences are in a proper state; that suitable sites or positions are 
selected by the senior medical officer of the command, for the hos- 
pital or hospital tents; and that nothing in time of war is permit- 
ted to remain in or about his post, which may interfere with its 
defence, or which can, at any time, endanger the health or morals 
of the troops, if it be in his power to remove it. He should also 
ascertain the weak points of his position, and study the best means 
of strengthening them. 

2.... Every officer commanding a post should make himself ac- 



FOR THE ARMY. 49 



Duties of Commanding Officers. 

quainted with the country around him; amount of population; thr 
strength of the militia, and the state of their discipline and equip- 
ment. He should also, at convenient moments, reconnoitre the 
country around, and cause maps and topographical sketches to be 
made, by employing such officers of his command as have the re- 
quisite talent and aptitude for the purpose. A duplicate of such 
sketches will be sent to general head quarters, and will be ac- 
companied by a memoir explanatory of all the circumstances of 
the position, showing, in detail, its advantages and disadvantages in 
a military point of view, and every thing connected with its situa- 
tion as to defensive or offensive operations; the distance between 
the post and the adjoining posts; the roads, rivers, hills, mountains, 
soil, productions; in short, every thing relating to the military 
resources and capabilities of the country. 

3 . . . . As it is of the first importance to know every thing rela- 
ting to the Indians on the frontiers, a statement will be made and 
furnished to head quarters, of the number of warriors each tribe 
can bring into the field; their relative distances from each other, 
and from the post; the state of their arms, means of subsistence, 
or whether they possess horses and use them in war, or whether 
they act mostly on foot, or make their excursions by water; their 
habits as to peace or war, and their means of making war; with a 
full acccount of their allies and enemies. 

4.... Whilst it is important to be at all times on the most friend- 
ly footing with the Indians, it is proper that officers commanding 
posts and stations should be ever on their guard against surprise. 
They should never allow a great number of Indians to enter their 
commands at a time, it being expedient, as a general rule, to 
exclude them altogether; and, whenever they evince a disposition. 
to act treacherously, or assume a hostile attitude, it is better to anti- 
cipate their designs, than allow them the advantage of attack. De- 
cision and firmness will always cause an Indian to respect those 
who possess and exercise these qualities. 

5.... From the peculiar situation of Indian agents on our expos- 
ed frontier, it is found that unless they are, in some degree, sus- 
tained in the execution of their dut'e-i ly the military force, their 
4 



50 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Duties of Commanding Officers 



endeavors to conciliate the Indians, and to keep order among them, 
must, in many instances, fail of success. Officers commanding on 
the Indian frontier, or in the Indian country, will, therefore, when 
in their opinion circumstances may require it, lend their aid in fur- 
thering the views and intentions of the Indian agents, residing near 
their respective posts and commands; and when there are no Indian 
agents stationed in the vicinity of a post, the commandant will 
consider himself authorized to act as agent for Indian affairs, and 
attend to the interests of the Indians residing near his post; and 
will, also, receive any deputations from other trihes, which may desire 
to confer with him respecting their own affairs. 

O....N0 additional compensation will be allowed on account of 
this authority to act as agent, nor are any expenses to be incurred 
which may not have been previously authorized by the special order 
of the War Department, except the issuing of rations to the In- 
dians, under the sanction of existing laws. 

7.... Commanding officers of forts and stations on the sea coast, 
are, in pursuance of the act of Congress approved February 25th, 
1/99, respecting quarantine and health laws, authorized and requir- 
ed faithfully to aid in the execution of any quarantines or other 
restraints which may be established by the health laws of any of 
the States, respecting any vessel arriving in, or bound to any port 
or district thereof; whether from a foreign port or place, or from a 
district within the United States. And such commanding officers 
are required to act in conformity with such health laws and regula- 
tions as are, or may be, established by the laws of the States, 
within their respective precincts and commands. 

8.... Whenever a military station or post shall be abandoned, the 
commanding officer will cause to be turned over to the Quarter- 
master's Department, all the public property which he may deem 
necessary to leave behind; certified inventories of which shall be 
forwarded, by the proper officers, to the heads of their respective 
departments. When any of said property shall be deemed unser- 
viceable, the commanding officer shall order a board of survey, and 
shall report the result to the Adjutant General, that the orders for 
its disposal may be given, in accordance with the act of the 3d of 
March, 1825. 



FOR THE ARMY. 51 



Ditties of Commanding Officers. . . . Troops in Campaign. 

9 ••••If a post or station should prove unhealthy at particular 
seasons of the year, the commanding officer, on the recommenda- 
tion of the Surgeon, is authorized to remove the troops to some 
more healthy position in the vicinity, during the prevalence of the 
disease; taking care to report the fact to the commander of the de- 
partment or district, and to the Adjutant General. 

10.... While it is the duty of the Quartermaster's Department to 
provide quarters, commanding officers are responsible that they 
are distributed according to regulation. 

11. ...No officer in the temporary command of any regiment, 
company, post, or station, shall make any interior regulations or 
standing order for the government of the same, which shall contra- 
dict those established by the permanent commander, without autho- 
rity from the General or officer next in command. 

12.... All new Forts will receive their names from the War De- 
partment. 

13.... As the glacis and other slopes of the fortifications are liable 
to be much injured by allowing them to be converted into gardens 
and used for improper purposes, commanding officers are to see that 
this is not permitted, and that they are kept in the most perfect 
order, according to the original plan. 

14.... It is the duty of the commanding officer to cause to be 
repaired, without delay, any injuries the works may receive by de- 
cay, or otherwise; and for that purpose he will apply the means 
at his disposal; but when the injury is so great as to put it out of 
his power, by employing the troops and other means at his com- 
mand, to effect the necessary repairs, he will forthwith report the 
same to the proper Department. 

ARTICLE XX. 

TROOPS IN CAMPAIGN. 

l....As the troops arrive at the appointed rendezvous, the Gene- 
ral-in-Chief will cause them to be organized into brigades and divi- 
sions, and, if necessary, into army-corps. 

2.... The cavalry and infantry will be brigaded separately. 



52 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Troops in Campaign. 

3. .. .Ordinarily, two regiments will constitute a brigade, and two 
brigades a division. But this arrangement may be varied by the 
General-in-Chief, whenever he shall judge it proper. 

4.... As soon as the organization of the brigades, divisions, and 
army-corps, is completed, they will be numbered according to the 
rank of the Generals appointed to command them respectively, which 
will determine the rank of each corps in the order of battle. 

5.. . .A suitable staff, according to the nature of the service, will be 
attached to each brigade, division, and army-corps. 

6....At the commencement of a campaign, the General-in-Chief 
will cause to be made a plan of the order of battle, by which the 
order of march and encampment will be governed; a copy of which 
will be given to each General or commander for his information 
and government. If any important change takes place in the order 
of battle, in consequence of a diminution or augmentation of the 
troops, information of such change will be communicated to the com- 
manders interested. 

7.... Should a regiment be so reduced as not to be able to form 
a battalion, it may be incorporated with some other regiment, or 
employed on detachment; under which circumstances, the men wilt 
continue to be commanded by their own officers. 

8.... The order of the regiments in brigades, of brigades in di\i- 
sions, of divisions in army-corps, and of army-corps in the army,. 
will not be invariable. The Generals, each within lus sphere, may 
change such order, if important reasons should require it; as the 
weakness of some component part. 

9.... A regiment, brigade, or other body of troops, which may 
have been detached, will, on its return, resume its place in the pri- 
mitive order of battle. 

10 ••••In case of the death or temporary absence of the com- 
mander of any army-corps, division, or brigade, the command will 
devolve on the offcer next in rank present for duty; though, if 
there be a supernumerary general officer of the appropriate grade 
present, he mr.y be assigned to the vacancy by the General-in- 
Chief. 

11.... In reports of battles, and other operations in the face of 



FOR THE ARMY. 53 



Troop.': in Campaign. . . . Order of Encampment. 

an enemy, each body of troops will be designated by the names of 
the officers who actually commanded them in person; as for exam- 
ple Greene's army-corps; Lafayette's division; Wayne's brigade. 

ARTICLE XXI. 

UKDEK OF KXCAXPMENT. 

Infantry. — (See Plate 1.) 

l....The troops are on all occasions to lie encamped in the order 
.if battle. 

2.... The front of the camp will occupy the same extent c& 
ground, as the troops when drawn up in line according to thefer 
established formation. The intervals between the battalions will be 
forty-four feet. 

3.. ..The companies will encamp in streets, perpendicularly to 
the line; one-half of the tents on each side of the streets, facing in- 
wards. The width of the streets will depend on the strength of 
the companies. The distance between each tent, will be two feet; 
the distance between the tents of one company and those of another, 
four feet. 

4. ...Thus, a regiment of six hundred men will occupy a frant 
of six hundred feet each, allowing for each Hie two ieet.. This 
front will be divided as follows:— First, deduct forty feet for 
ihe main street leading through the centre of the camp to the 
Colonel's or commanding officer's marquee, there will then re- 
main five hundred and sixty feet to be divided a.nong the compa- 
nies on cither side of the main street; and if there be ten of them, 
each company will be allowed a front of fifty-six feet. 

5.... The following will be the dimensions of a camp for a regi- 
ment ol six hundred men: 

Front, 600 feet. 

Depth, - - - « 10 J * 

Feet. 

From the front of the line of company tents to the chain 
sentinels of the first line, 



54 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Order of Encampment. 

This space to be subdivided as follows: Feet. 
From tbe front line of company tents to the stacks of arms, 

drums, and colors, ... - - 20 

Thence to the regimental parade, - - - - 60 

Thence to the sinks of the men, - - - 320 

Thence to the front of the officer of guard's tent, - 60 

Thence to the chain of sentinels, 40 

From the first line of company tents to the front of the 
company officers' tents, - - - - - 140 

This space to be subdivided as follows: 
From the front of the company officers' tents to the com- 

-pany kitchen:-, ------ 30 

Thence to the front of the company tents, - - HO 

From the front of the company officers' tents to the front of 

the tents of the field and staff, - 4t» 

Thence to the kitchens of the officers and tents of sutlers, 40 

Thence to batman's tents, - - - - - - 6 

Thence to horses and baggage wagons, - - - 2 9 

Thence to the officer's sinks, ... - 30 

Thence to the quarter guard, - - - - 12 

Thence to the chain of sentinels, - - - I "2 

6 -...The tents of all the officers will face towards the front* 
those of the Captains will be placed on a prolongation of the line 
of the right flanks of the companies, and those of the subalterns 
on a prolongation of the* line of the left flanks: the Colonels or 
commanding officer's marquee in the centre of the main street: the 
Lieutenant Colonel's opposite to the centre of the right wing: the 
Major's opposite to the centre of the left wing; the Adjutant half 
way between the Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel: the Surgeon half 
way between the Colonel and Major: the Quarter Master on tin- 
right ot the Lieutenant Colonel, half way between his position and 
the flank: the Assistant Surgeon on the left of the Major, half way 
between his position and the flank. 



FOR THE ARMY 



Order of Encampment. 



'/....The noncommissioned staff to he encamped on the pro- 
longation of the lines of tents, and in a line with the company 
kitehens, on each side of the main street, facing from the street. 

8.... The Sergeants of companies to occupy a tent on the right 
of their companies, in the front line. The Corporals to be distri- 
buted among their respective squads. 

9.... The company kitchens will be placed, those of the right 
wing, on a line with the right of the companies: those of the left 
wincr, on a line witli the left of the companies; to face towards 
the centre, and will be made as follows: commencing at fifteen paces 
from the company officers' tents, in a line with the front of the men's 
tents, dig a trench two feet deep, three feet broad, and ten feet 
long. The earth which is thus excavated will be thrown two .feet 
back, so as to leave room for the construction of the flues or fur- 
naces i:i which lire is to be placed for cooking. These furnaces are 
made by perforating holes horizontally in the bank about six inches 
from the bottom of the trench, to be of a circular form, six or eight 
inches in diameter, and about one foot deep, where they arc commu- 
nicated witli by similar holes perforated from the top. The wood, 
prepared in small pieces, will be placed in the lower holes, and the 
kettles placed over the top holes, raised on three stones. 

10.. ..The sinks will always be hid from public view by encircling 
them with bushes or other blinds; a portion of the earth dug out of 
them oughl every day be thrown in to cover the filth, should the 
troops remain encamped on the same ground any length of time. 

11.... When the army encamps in two lines, the second line 
will be formed eight hundred feet in rear of the first. 

12.... The camp guards of the second line will be the same dis- 
tance in the rear that they are in front, in the first line; and also 
the sinks of the men. 

Cavalry. — (See Plate 2.) 

13.... The cavalry will encamp by squadrons, each squadron occu- 
pying the same front that it does when drawn up in the order of 
battle, with the same intervals being preserved between the squad- 
rons. 



56 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Order of Encampment. 



14 ••••Two companies constitute a squadron. Each company of 
a squadron pitches its tents in one row perpendicularly to the front, 
facing inwards. The horses of each company are picketed in a 
line parallel to the tents, with their heads towards them. Each 
horse, so picketed, will require about five feet; the depth of the row 
will depend on the number of horses in the company. The tents 
will be pitched at equal distances from each other, so as to allow 
space between them respectively for the forage of the horses belong- 
ing to the men of the respective tents. The tents of the Sergeants 
will always be pitched at the head of the row, and on the line of 
encampment. The distance between the Sergeant's tent and the ad- 
jacent tent, will be double the distance between the other tents, so 
as to allow for the forage for the Sergeants' horses, and those of 
the men in the next tent, and thus rendering it unnecessary to place 
the forage of the last tent in the row, on the side of the kitchens, 
where it might be exposed to fire. 

15.... Each company of sixty mounted dragoons, will occupy a 
front of ninety feet, which will be divided as follows: 

Feet. 
For pitching a horseman's tent, - - 9 

From front poll of tents to pickets, - - 12 

From pickets to the edge of the dung, - 18 

Breadth of the dung, 6 

16.... A squadron of two companies will occupy a front of 180 
feet, so that there will be between the dung of each company, a 
street of 90 feet. 

17.... If a company encamp by itself, it will observe the same 
rule, except that it will be formed in two rows of tents instead of 
one. 

18.... If there be an odd company in a squadron, or with the 
regiment, it will encamp in the same manner as is directed for 
the other companies of the squadron, that is, in one row, and 
facing towards the company next to it, whether it be on the right 
or the left, preserving a distance equal to its front when in line. 
19.... The horses of the rear rank are always to be picketed next 
to their file leaders. 



FOR THE ARMY. 57 



Order of Encampment Marches. 

20.. ..The horses of company officers are to be picketed in a. 
line with the company horses, on the flank towards the officers' 
tents. 

21.... The non-commissioned stall" will encamp in a line with the 
Held and staff - . 

22.... The horses of the field and staff' arc to be picketed in the 
rear of their respective tents. 

23.... The remainder of the encampment, including guards, bag- 
gage, sutlers, kitchens, batmen, and sinks, will conform to that of 
I he infantry. 

Artillery. — (See Plates 1 and 2.) 

24.... The artillery will encamp in such positions as may be 
selected by the commander of the troops, to which it may be at- 
tached, who will always take, into consideration the protection pro- 
per to be afforded from the line, as well as the facility with which 
it may get into position, in case of an attack: but batteries which 
form a part of the order of battle, will encamp upon the same line 
with the troops. Mounted artillery will encamp according to the 
order for the cavalry, and foot, artillery according to the order for 
the infantry. 

ARTICLE XXII. 

MARCHES. 

1 Information touching the movements of troops, or disposi- 
tions of march, will not always be put in orders, and when it is 
not, it will be imparted to such persons only as it may concern. 
Nor is any one to expect more to be communicated to him than 
is necessary for the complete execution of the service required of 

him. 

2.... The order of march, the number of columns, as well as 
the kind of troops of which each column ought to be composed, 
depend on the object of the movement, and the nature of the coun- 
try over which the march is to be performed. 

3. . . .The troops will be formed into as great a number of column? 



58 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Jifarches. 

as possible, provided the columns arc not rendered too weak. Their 
respective distances should be such as to enable them to communi- 
cate with, and mutually sustain, each other, and to re-unite with 
facility, when necessary. For that purpose, every commander of a 
column ought, independently of his particular instructions, to be 
made acquainted with the composition, the strength, and the direc- 
tion of the other columns. 

4. ...The advance and rear guards, are ordinarily formed of light 
troops. Their strength and composition, in different arms, are regu- 
lated according to the nature of the country, and the relative posi- 
tion of the enemy. These guards are destined to cover the move- 
Tiieiifs of the troops to which they belong, and to hold the eneim 
in check, until such time as the commanding General may make 
his dispositions. The advance guard does not always march at the 
head of the column. In a march to a flank, it will seize such 
positions as are the most proper to cover the movement. 

5.... The long roll, will never be beaten but when the whole 
of the troops are to form suddenly to meet the enemy. In this 
case, the first company formed will hasten to the colors, and 
the camp guard (excepting a detachment to guard the prison- 
ers) and all guards of honor, will join their respective companies. 
Other guards will not fall in, unless specially ordered. 

6 When the army or a corps is to march under other cir- 
cumstance-;, the assembly will be substituted for repairing to the 
colors. It will be preceded by the general for striking tents, load- 
ing wagons or pack-horses, calling in guards, and extinguishing 
fires. The straw and other combustibles of the old camp will not 
be set on fire, as it will serve to indicate the movement to the 
enemy. 

7.... All dispositions for the march will be executed with the 
greatest promptitude. If any comander of corps be absent, the next 
in rank present will take his place and commence the march. 

8.... The Generals will, when necessary, unite the pioneers at 
the head of the column to overcome difficulties in the wav of the 
march, and send forward a Quartermaster or other staff' officer, to 
superintend these operations. 



FOR THE ARMY. 59 



Marches. 



9.... In bad roads, and particularly in night marches, it will fre- 
quently be necessary to post some trusty non-commissioned officers, 
or privates of the infantry or cavalry, to mark the direction of the 
march and the difficulties to be avoided. They will be posted and 
relieved as often as may be necessary, under the direction of some 
officer of the staff, but without interrupting the march. As night 
marches are always performed with difficulty, they ought never to 
be undertaken, unless on the most urgent occasions. 

10.... The Generals and field officers will cause knapsacks, valises, 
and haversacks, to be frequently searched on the march, in order 
to see that they contain nothing but what may bo proper and ne- 
cessary. 

11 In passing through a city or village, there will be left be- 
hind, by battalion if necessary, in succession, an officer and a cer- 
tain number of v on-commissioned officers, to bring up such men as 
may be found straggling behind. 

12-... When necessary, the commander of the column will, in 
addition to the above arrangements, cause a platoon or company 
towards the rear to be detached from the column as a rear guard. 
to enforce this dutv. The guard will also be particularly instructed 
to prevent marauding, even in an enemy's country. If taken in the 
fact, the marauder will be sent to his corps, with the proper charge, 
in order that he may be severely and publicly punished. 

13... The Generals and Colonels will occasionally halt till their 
columns have passed, in order to see whether the proper distance- 
arc observed. They will frequently send an aid-de-cainp, or other 
staff officer, to the rear, for the same purpose, on whose report the 
march may be regulated; or this may be done on sounding the pro- 
per signal, by a bugle attached to the rear, 

14 The column will halt as often as the object of the march 

and the distance to be made will permit. Frequent and short halts 
serve the purpose of resting and re-forming the troops, and besides, 
of enabling them to adjust their equipments. These halts should 
never exceed five or six minutes. 

15.. ..Officers' led saddle horses, and the horses of the dismounted 
men of the cavalry, will follow the respective regiments of the own- 



60 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



.1 [arches. 



as. Pack horses and others will be with the wagons, under the 
orders of the conductors of the baggage train. They ought not to 
he permitted to accompany the columns; and mounted officers will, 
when the roads are dusty, as far as practicable, keep to the leeward 
of the column. 

16... .When it can be avoided, troops preparatory to taking up 
the line of march, will not be assembled in ways, routes, or 
other places, so as to obstruct the movements of the other troops. 
The Generals of divisions will each send a staff officer in advance, 
to the rendezvous appointed, to receive the corps as they arrive — 
each c:.rps taking its proper position in the order of battle or of 
march. 

17-...The tin:e of commencing the march for each corps, when 
several are to take the same route, will be regulated by the Gene- 
ral-in-Chief, or the senior General present, in case the former has 
not given his orders on the subject. 

18. ...In route, the different battalions will lead alternately, and 
also companies of the same battalion, when it can be done without 
hazard. These changes will take place from halts. 

19.... When the column is about to halt, the step will be re- 
laxed at the head to re-establish distances between battalions and 
divisions, so that when the order is given each may be in its pro- 
per place. 

20. . . During certain halts, if it be thought necessary to prevent 
the men from straggling, sentinels for that purpose will be posted, 
from the camp guard last detached. 

21.... If a man betaken sick, the Captain will direct a Corporal 
1o remain with him, and conduct him gently until the rear guard 
comes up, when the man will be left in the care of the guard. 

22.... For the accommodation of the sick and disabled, a wagon 
will be attached to the rear guard, when necessary and practicable; 
and a Surgeon will attend, to give assistance and to see that no 
improper persons are suflerid to avail themselves of the accommo- 
dation. 

23. ...During a march, care will be taken to give to vehicles 
met on the road a fair proportion of the way,- al;o to keep the 
muzzles of firelocks always well elevated. 



FOR THE ARMY. 61 



Marches.. ..Baggage and Baggage Train. 

24.... Troops destined to the interior will, generally, be fur- 
nished with marching routes, specifying the places where the ne- 
cessary subsistence, forage, and other supplies, may be found; and 
whether these supplies be previously provided or not, the com- 
mander of the corps or detachment will send forward every morn- 
ing, a Quartermaster, or some other agent, to prepare for the wants 
of the troops before their arrival. 

25.... In issuing the order for the march, it will frequently be 
proper to direct the number of rations each man is to carry in 
his haversack. 

ARTICLE XXIII. 

BAGGAGE AND BAGGAGE TRAIN. 

l....The inconvenience arising to an army from having too great 
a number of wagons, must be evident to every officer, and it is 
expected that each officer will curtail his baggage as much as pos- 
sible. 

2 The baggage trains belonging to general head quarters, and 

the head quarters of army-corps, will be confided to the officer of 
the Quartermaster's department, attached to those head quarters 
respectively. 

3.... The train of each regiment will be under the conduct of 
the Quartermaster Sergeant, or some other Sergeant; that of the 
brigade, under the conduct of an officer of the Quarter Master's 
department; and when the several trains of a division are united, 
the senior officer of the Quarter Master's department shall have 
charge of the whole. 

4.... The several conductors of trains shall be responsible to the 
Quartermaster General, or the superior officer of his department, 
for the prescribed order of march; for the parking, and for the 
orderly conduct of all under them. 

5.... The wagons and pack-horses of these trains, together with 
officers' spare or led horses, and horses and carriages belonging to 
the corps, or to the United States, constitute the baggage train of 
an army. None other will be allowed to enter or to march with 
it, without special permission from general head quarters. 



6£ GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Baggage " n <l Baggage Train. . . .General Police. 

6.... The trains of general head quarters, the head quarters of 
army-corps, and of divisions, may, when marching, each have a 
guard of infantry proportioned to the number of sentinels necessary 
to their protection, to be regulated by each particular chief of the 
-staff, under the approbation of his General. In the cavalry, this 
service will be assigned to the dismounted men; and in every case 
where it is practicable, Generals who have guards of honor, will 
detach sentinels from those guards to protect their baggage during 
the night, rather than cause a distinct detail to be made for this 
purpose. 

7.... The train of brigadiers will be served and protected in march 
by the men attached to the trains of the first regiments in their 
respective brigades. The regimental trains will be guarded in march, 
as far as practicable, by convalescents, or men non-effective in the 
ranks, and in the cavalry by those who are dismounted. 

8.... When the trains are to be escorted, with a view to defence, 
they will then become convoys, and in such cases the conductor-* 
will be under the orders of the commanders of the escort. 

9.... The several trains will mafch in an order analagous to the 
rank of the Generals, and that of the corps to which they belong. 
The wagons, etc. loaded with the general supplies of the army, will 
have a place specially assigned to them. 

10.... Great care will be taken to prevent the baggage from in- 
terrupting the line of march, and in no case will it be allowed to 
occupy a place in the midst of the column. The divisions will be 
followed by their trains, which will be united at the rendezvous of 
the brigades. If otherwise ordered, the instructions given for the 
march of the divisions, brigades and regiments, will regulate for 
each of those corps, what may concern the union and direction of 
their trains. 

ARTICLE XXIV. 

GENERAL POLICE. 

1... When it shall become necessary, in the opinion of the Gene* 
ral-in-Chief, a provost guard will be formed, and a provost marshal 
appointed, under whose orders the guard is to act. 



FOR THE ARMY. 63 



General Police. . . .Jtevie-w. 



2 . . . . The appointment of a provost marshal is one of great 
responsibility, and it ought to be conferred on an officer of known 
firmness and discretion, and of great vigilance and activity. It is 
the particular duty of the provost marshal to take charge of pri- 
soners confined for offences of a general nature; to preserve good 
order and discipline; and to use every possible means to prevent 
the commission of crime, by frequently visiting those places at which 
breaches of order and discipline are likely to occur. He is to take 
cognizance of the conduct of all followers and retainers of the 
camp, as well as that of soldiers of the army. 

3.... With this view, he is frequently to make the tour of the 
camp and its environs, in order to prevent and detect disorders 
and depredations. 

4.... Plundering and marauding— at all times disgraceful to sol- 
diers—when committed on the persons or property of those whom 
it is the duty of the army to protect, become crimes of such enor- 
mity, as to admit of no remission of the awful punishment which 
the military law awards against offences of this nature. 

ARTICLE XXV. 



1....A battalion being in the order of battle, the Colonel will 
command, 

I. Battalion, prepare for review. 2. To the rear, open order— 
March! 

o At the word march, the field and staff officers dismount; the 

company officers and the color rank advance four paces in front of 
the first rank and place themselves opposite to their respective 
places in the order of battle; the staff officers place themselves on 
the right of the rank of company officers, according to their rela- 
tive rink, one pace from each other; the music advances through the 
centre and forms in two ranks, the hand, if there be one, in front, 
between the colors and the line; the color guard replace the color 
rank; the Quartermaster Sergeant, and the] Sergeant Major on the 
right of the front rank of the battalion. 



64 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Review. 



3.... When the ranks are aligned, the Colonel will command, 

Front! 

And place himself eight paces, the Lieutenant Colonel and Major 
two paces, in front of the rank of company officers, and opposite 
to their respective places in the order of battle. 

4... .A camp color is to be originally placed 80 or 100 paces in 
front of* the centre of the battalion where the reviewing officer is 
supposed to take his station: and although he may choose to quit 
that position, still the color is to be considered as the point to 
which all movements and formations arc relative. 

5. .. .When the reviewing officer presents himself before the cen- 
tre, and is 50 or 60 paces distant, the Colonel will command, 

Present — Arms! 

The men present arms, and the officers salute, so as to drop their 
swords with the last motion of presented arms; the music will 
play and all the drums will beat, according to the rank of the re- 
viewing officer. The colors only salute such persons as, from their 
rank and by regulation, are entitled to that honor. 
6.... The Colonel will next command, 

Shoulder — Arms! 

When the men will shoulder, and the officers recover their swords 
with the last motion. 

7.... The reviewing officer will then go towards the right, the 
whole remaintng perfectly steady, without paying any further com- 
pliment, while he passes along the front of the battalion and pro- 
ceeds round the left flank and along the rear to the right. When 
the reviewing officer is going round the battalion, the band will 
play, and will cease when he has returned to the right flank ol 
the battalion. 

8 ••••While the reviewing officer is proceeding to the place him- 
self in the front, the Colonel will command, 

1. C'fo.ve order. 2. March! 



FOR THE ARMY. 65 



Review. 



"When all persons, except the Colonel, will resume their places in 
the order of battle; the field and staff officers mounted. 

9 The reviewing officer having taken his position near the 

camp color, the Colonel will command, 

1. By company, right wheel — March! 2. Pass in review. 
3. Forward, guide right— March! 

The battalion will break into column of companies, right in front, 
and the column will be put in motion; the Colonel four paces in 
front of the Captain of the leading company; the Lieutenant Co- 
lonel on a line with the leading company; the Major on a line with 
the rear company; the Adjutant on a line with the second com- 
pany; the Sergeant Major on a line with the company next to the 
rear; each six paces from the flank opposite to the reviewing officer; 
the staff officers in one rank, according to the order of precedency, 
four paces in rear of the column; the music, preceded by the prin- 
cipal musician, six paces before the Colonel; the pioneers, preceded 
by a Corporal, four paces before the principal musician; and the 
Quarter Master Sergeant two paces from the side opposite to the 
guides, and in line with the pioneers. 

10... .All other officers and non-commissioned officers will march 
past in the places prescribed for them in the march of an open co- 
lumn. 

11 The guides and soldiers will keep their heads well to the 

front in passing in review. 

12. ...The color bearer will remain in the ranks while passing 
and saluting. 

13.... Points will be fixed by the Adju ant for the several wheel- 
ings of the divisions; so that their right flanks, in marching past, 
shall be only four paces distant from the camp eoler, where it is 
supposed the reviewing officer places him; elf to reoeite the salute. 

14.... The column will matzh past in common time, with closed 

ranks. 

15.... The music will begin to play jus' after the leading com- 
pany has made the eccorul whe 3 l: it will wheel to the left out of 
the column, and take a position opposite to, and facing, the reviewing 
5 



66 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Jteview. 

officer, and will continue to play until the rear of the column shall 
have passed him, when it will cease to play and follow in the rear 
of the battalion. 

16.... The officers will salute the reviewing officer when they 
airive within six paces of him, and recover their swords when ten 
paces past him, without in the least altering the rate of march. 
All officers in saluting, will cast their eyes towards the reviewing 
officer. The Colonel, when he has saluted at the head of the bat- 
talion, will place himself near the reviewing officer, and will remain 
there until the rear has passed, when he will join the battalion. 

17.... The color will salute the reviewing officer when within six 
paces of him. When the color salutes, the drums will pay the 
prescribed compliment. 

18.... When the rear of the column has passed the reviewing 
officer, the Colonel will command, 

Guide left. 

19 ••••The column will proceed on the alignment until it shall 
have arrived at the point where its head or right is to be placed, 
when the Colonel will command, 

1. Column halt. 2. Left into line, ivheel. 3. March. 

It will then be wheeled into line, and placed in the order of battle. 

20 When the line shall have been formed, the Colonel will 

cause the battalion to perform such exercises and manoeuvres as 
may be required by the reviewing officer. 

21.... The review will terminate by bringing the troops into 
line opposite to the reviewing officer, ranks opened, and the whole 
saluting as at the beginning. 

22.... When two or more battalions are to be reviewed, they 
will be formed in parade order, with the prescribed intervals, and 
will perform the same movements that are laid down for a single 
battalion, observing the additional directions that are given for such 
movements when applied to the line. The Brigadier and his staff, 
on foot, will place themselves opposite the centre of the brigade; 
the Brigadier two paces in front of the rank of Colonels; his aid 



FOR THE ARMY. 67 



Review . • . . Inspection. 



on his right, one pace retired; and the other brigade staff' officers, those 
having the rank of field officers, in the rank of Lieutenant Colonels 
and Majors; and those below that rank, in the rank of company 
officers. 

23.... In passing in review, a Major General will be four paces in 
front of the Colonel of the leading battalion of his division; and the 
Brigadiers will be on the right of the Colonels of the leading bat- 
talions of their brigades: staff officers on the left of their Generals. 

24.... Upon occasions when the line exceeds two battalions, the 
reviewing officer may, at his option, cause them to march past in 
quick time, in order to save time. Upon these occasions the mounted 
officers only will salute. 

25.... A number of companies less than a battalion, will be re- 
viewed as a battalion; and a single company, as if it were with the 
battalion. In the latter case, the company will pass in column of 
platoons, according to the order of the reviewing officer. 

26.... The review of cavalry or artillery, mounted, or with pieces, 
will be conducted on the same principles, allowing for the differ- 
ence of organization, and the words of command appropriate to the 
respective arms. 



ARTICLE XXVI. 



IXSPECTIOJf. 



l....The inspection of the troops will generally be preceded by 
a review. The present example embraces a battalion of infantry. 
The inspecting officer and the field and staff officers will be on 
foot. 

2.... The battalion being in the order of battle, the Colonel will 
cause it to break into open column of companies, right in front. 
He will next order the ranks to be opened, when the color rank 
and color guard, will take post ten paces in front, and the band ten 
paces in rear of the column. 

3 The Colonel seeing the ranks aligned, will command, 

1. Officers and non-commissioned officers. 2. To the front of your 
companies — March! 



68 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Inspection. 

The officers will form themselves in one rank, eight paces, and the 
non-commissioned cfficeis in one rank, six paces, in advance, along 
the whole fronts of their respective companies, from right to left, 
in the order of seniority; the pioneers and music of each company, 
in one rank, two paces behind the non-commissioned officers. 
4 ....The Colonel will next command, 

1. Field and staff. 2. To the front — March! 

The commissioned officers thus designated, will form themselves 
in one rank, six paces in front of the colors, from right to left, in 
the order of seniority; and the non-commissioned staff, in a simi- 
lar manner, two paces in rear of the preceding rank. The Co- 
lonel, seeing the movement executed, will take post on the right 
of the Lieutenant Colonel, and wait the approach of the inspect- 
ing officer. 

5.... The inspection will commence in front. After inspecting 
the cress and general appearance of the field and commissioned 
stall' under arms, the inspector, accompanied by these officers, will 
pass down the open column, looking at every rank in front and 
rear. 

6.... The Colonel will now command, 

1. Order arms. 2. Rest! 

When the inspector will proceed to make a minute inspection 
the several ranks or divisions, in succession, commencing in front. 

7 As the inspector approaches the non-commissioned staff, 

color rank, the color guard, and the band, the Adjutant will give 
the necessary orders for the inspection of arms, boxes, and knap- 
sacks. The colors will be planted firm in the ground, to enable 
the color bearers to display the contents of their knapsacks. The 
non-commissioned staff may be dismissed as soon as inspected; but 
the color rank and color guard will remain until the colors arc to 
be escorted to the place from which they were taken. 

8.... As the inspector successively approaches the companies, the 
Captains will command, 

1. Jtlcntion 2. Inspection of arms. 



FOR THE ARMY. 69 



Inspection. 



The Inspector will go through the whole company, commencing 
with the non-commissioned officers. The Captain will then com- 
mand, 

Open — Boxes! 

When they will also be inspected. 

9.... The Captain will next command, 

1. Stack — Arms! 

2. To the rear, open order. 

3. March! 

4. Front rank, about face. 

5. TJnsling — Knapsacks. 

6. Open — Knapsacks. 

The arms of the non-commissioned officer* will he stacked in the 
centre of their rank. 

10. ...The knapsacks will be placed at the feet of the men, the 
flaps from them, with the great coats on the flaps, and the knap- 
sacks leaning on the great coats. In this position the Inspector 
will examine the contents of the whole, or of as many as he may 
think necessary, commencing with the non-commissioned officers. 

11 As the Inspector passes the companies, they will successively, 

under the orders of their respective Captains, re-pack and re-sling 
knapsacks, resume their arms, and file off to their tents or quarters; 
except the company that is to re-escort the colors, which will wait 
the further orders of the Colonel. 

12. ...In an extensive column, some of the rearmost companies 
may, after the inspection of dress and general appearance, be per- 
mitted to stack arms, until just before the Inspector approaches 
them, when they will be directed to take arms and resume their 
positions. 

13.... The inspection of the troops being ended, the field and 
staff will next accompany the Inspector to the hospital, magazine, 
arsenal, quarters, sutler's shop, guard house, and such other places 
as he may think proper to inspect. The Captains and subalterns 
will precede him in his visits to their companies and sections respec- 
tively. 



70 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Inspection. 

14.... The hospital being at all times an object of particular in- 
terest, it will be critically and minutely inspected. 

15. ...The men will be formed in the company quarters in front 
of their respective bunks, and on the entrance of the Inspector the 
word attention! will be given by the senior non-commissioned officer 
present, when the whole will salute with the hand, without unco- 
vering. 

16.... The Inspector will examine the general arrangement of the 
interior of the quarters, the bunks and bedding, cooking and table 
utensils, and such other objects as may present themselves; and 
afterwards the exterior. 

17.... The Adjutant will exhibit to the Inspector the regimental 
books and papers, including those relating to the transactions of the 
council of administration. The company books and papers will also 
be exhibited, the whole together, generally at the Adjutant's office, 
and in presence of all the officers not otherwise particularly em- 
ployed. 

18. .. .Inspections, similar to those embraced in this article, will 
be made monthly, and as much oftener as may be deemed neces- 
sary by the commanders of regiments and posts. Captains will do 
the like on every Saturday morning, and Lieutenants of sections- 
on every Wednesday morning, each in regard to his company or 
section respectively. Surgeons will also make a thorough inspec- 
tion of their hospitals every Saturday morning. 

19... .Besides these inspections, frequent visits will be made daily 
to the quarters of their men or patients by company officers and 
Surgeons; and the Colonel or other commander will make frequent 
general visits in the course of the month, to the men's quarters, 
the hospital, guard house, and the like. 

20.... The muster of the troops for payment, will be preceded 
by an inspection. 

21.... The inspection of cavalry and artillery will conform to the 
principles laid down fcr the infantry, regard being had to the 
words of command appropriate to the respective arms. 



FOR THE ARMY. 71 



Honors to be paid by the Troops. 
ARTICLE XXVII. 

HONORS TO BE PAID BY THE TROOPS. 

1 . . . . The President is to be saluted with the highest honors — all 
standards and colors dropping, officers saluting, drums beating, and 
trumpets sounding. 

2 The same compliments will be paid to the Vice President. 

3 A Major General commcOtdiltg in chief, is to be received — 

by cavalry, with swords drawn, trumpets sounding the march, and 
all the officers saluting, standards dropping— by infantry, with drums 
beating the march, colors dropping, officers saluting, and arms pre- 
sented. 

4 Jl Major General is to be received — by cavalry, with swords 

drawn, trumpets sounding twice the trumpet flourish, and officers 
saluting — by infantry, with three ruffles, colors dropping, officers 
saluting, and arms presented. 

5....J1 Brigadier General is to be received— by cavalry, with 
swords drawn, trumpets sounding once the trumpet flourish, and 
officers saluting — by infantry, with two ruffles, colors dropping, officers 
saluting, and arms presented. 

6 In Adjutant General or Inspector General, if under the 

rank of a General officer, is to be received at a review, or inspec- 
tion of the troops under arms— by cavalry, with swords drawn, officers 

sa l ut ing by infantry, officers saluting and arms presented. The 

same honors to be paid to any field officer, authorized to review 
and inspect the troops. When the inspecting officer is junior in 
rank to the officer on the parade, and in the command of the troops 
to be inspected, no compliments will be paid; he will be received 
with only swords drawn and arms shouldered. 

7.... AH guards are to turn out and present arms to General 
officers as often as they pass them, except the personal guards of 
General officers, which turn out only to the Generals whose guards 
they are, and to officers of superior rank. 

8.... To Colonels, the guards of their own regiments turn out, 
and present arms once a day; after which they turn eut with shoul- 
dered arms. 



72 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Honors to b' paid by i:ie Troops. 

9.... To Liiuier.ant Colonels aid Majors, their own guards 
Urn out with «W9uldcred arms, oi.ce a day; at other times with 
ordered arms. 

10.... 'When the command of a regiment devolves on a Lieute- 
nant Colonel tr Major, the regimental guards will pay him the 
same compliment as is ordered for the Colonel. 

11.... Officers in command of forts or garrisons have a right 
ta the complimentary honors from the troops under their command, 
which are due to the rank one degree higher than the rank they 
actually hold in the line of the army. 

12. ...To the Secretary of State, Treasury, War, and .Xavy 
Departments, and other members of the Cabinet; to the Chief 
Justice, the President pro tempore of the Senate, and Speaker 
of the Hons: of Jtepresentatives of the United States; and to Go- 
vernors, within their respective States and Territories — the same 
honors will be paid as are specified for a Major General command- 
ing in chief. 

13 Officers belonging to any foreign service, who may call 

at any camp or garrison, by invitation from the commander of the 
camp or garrison, may be complimented with the honors due to 
their rank or quality. 

14.... American and foreign Envoys or Ministers will be re- 
ceived with the compliments due to a Major General. 

15 The colors of a regiment passing a guard, are to be sa- 
luted with the utmost respect, the trumpets sounding and the drums 
beating a march. 

16.... When two regiments meet on their march, the regiment 
inferior in rank is to halt, and form in parade order, and salute the 
other regiment, which proceeds on its march, with swords drawn 
and bayonets fixed, trumpets sounding or drums beating, standards 
or colors flying, until it has cleared the front of the regiment which 
has halted. 

17 When guards present their arms, the officers, on all occa- 
sions, salute with their swords. 

18.... When General officers or persons entitled to a salute, pass 
in the rear of a guard, the officer is only to make his men stand 
shouldered, and not to face his guard about, or beat his drum. 



FOR THE ARMY. 73 



Honors to be paid by the Troops. 



19.... When General officers, or persons entitled to a salute, pass 
guards while in the act of relieving, both guards are to salute, re- 
ceiving the word of command from the senior officer of the whole. 

20 All guards are to be under arms when armed parties ap- 
proach their posts; and to parties commanded by commissioned 
officers, they are to present their arms, drums beating a march, and 
officers saluting. 

21 Sentinels will present arms to all General and field officers, 

and to the officer of the day; to all other officers they will carry 
arms. 

22 No compliments by guards or sentinels will be paid be- 
tween retreat and reveille, except as prescribed for grand rounds. 

23.... All guards and sentinels are to pay the same compliments 
to the officers of the navy, marines, and militia, in the service of the 
United States, as are directed to be paid to the officers of the 
army, according to their relative ranks. 

24.... It is equally the duty of non-commissioned officers and 
soldiers, at all times and in all situations, to pay the proper com- 
pliments to officers of the navy and marines, and to officers of 
other regiments, when in uniform, as to officers of their own parti- 
cular regiments and corps. 

25 Sergeants with swords drawn, will salute by bringing them 

to a recover— with muskets, by bringing the left hand across the 
body, so as to strike the musket near the right shoulder. Corpo- 
rals out of the ranks will carry their muskets at a shoulder, as Ser- 
geants, and salute in Kke manner. 

26.... When a soldier without arms, or with side arms only, 
meets an officer, he will continue to move on, but he is to raise 
his hand to his cap, looking at the same time in a respectful and 
soldier-like manner at the officer, who will make a suitable acknow- 
ledgment to the compliment thus received. 

Salutes. 

27 The President of the United States alone is to receive 

the national salute. 

28. The national salute is determined by the number of States 
composing the Union, at the rate of one gun for each State. 



74 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Honors to be paid by the Troops. 

29 The Vice President is to receive a salute of twenty-one 

guns. 

30. ...The Heads of the great Executive Departments of the 
National Government; the Major General commanding- the army; 
the Governors of States and Territories, within their respective 
jurisdictions; seventeen guns. 

31.... A Major General, fifteen guns. 

32.... A Brigadier General, thirteen guns. 

33 Foreign ships of -war will be saluted in return for a simi- 
lar compliment, gun for gun, on notice being officially received of 
such intention. 

34.... Officers of the navy will be saluted according to rank. 

35 ...Foreign officers invited to visit a fort or post, may be 
saluted according to their relative rank. 

36.... Envoys and Ministers of the United States and foreign 
powers, are to be saluted with fifteen guns. 

37.... All officers of the army having rank above that of Colonel, 
whether of the line or staff, by brevet or otherwise, will be compli- 
mented, on official visits, by salutes according to their highest rank; 
provided they be senior to the officer in command where the visit 
is made. 

38.. ..A General officer will be saluted but once in a year at 
each post, and only when notice of his intention to visit the post 
has been given. 

39.... Salutes to individuals are to be fired on their arrival only. 

40 ••••A national salute will be fired at meridian, on the anni- 
versary of the Independence of the United States, at each military 
post and camp. 

Escorts of Honor. 

41. . ..Escorts of honor may be composed of cavalry or infantry, 
or both, according to circumstances. They are guards of honor for 
the purpose of receiving and escorting personages of high rank, 
civil or military. The troops for this purpose will be selected for 
their soldierly appearance and superior discipline, and the duty must 
always be considered as one of high distinction. 



FOR THE ARMY. 75 



Honors to be paid by the Troops. 

42.... The manner of receiving and escorting the personage is as 
follows: 

43.... The escort will be drawn up in line, the centre opposite 
to the place where the personage presents himself, with an interval 
between the wings to receive the personage and his retinue. On 
his appearance he will be received with the honors due to his rank. 
When he has taken his place in the line, the whole will be wheeled 
into platoons or companies, as the case may be, and take up the 
march. The same ceremony will be observed, and the same hon- 
ors paid, on his leaving the escort. 

44. ...When the position of the escort is at a considerable dis- 
tance from the point where the personage is expected to be re- 
ceived, as for instance where a court-yard or wharf intervenes, a 
double line of sentinels will be posted from that point to the escort 
facing inwards, and the sentinels will successively salute as the 
personage passes. 

45. . . .An officer will be appointed to attend the personage escorted, 
to bear such communications as he may have to make to the com- 
mander of the escort. 

Funeral Honors. 

46.... On the receipt of official intelligence of the death of the 
President of the United States, at any post or camp, the command- 
ing officer shall, on the following day, cause a gun to be fired at 
every half hour, beginning at sunrise and ending at sunset. When 
posts are contiguous, the firing will take place at the post only 
commanded by the superior officer. 

47. . . On the day of the interment of a Major General com- 
manding in chief a gun will be fired at every half hour, until the 
procession moves, beginning at sunrise. 

48.... The funeral escort of a Major General commanding i?i 
chief shall consist of a regiment of infantry, a squadron of cavalry, 
and six pieces of artillery. 

49.... That of a Major General, a regiment of infantry, a squa- 
dron of cavalry, and four pieces of artillery. 

50. •••That of a Brigadier General, a regiment of infantry, one 
company of cavalry, and two pieces of artillery. 



76 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Honors to be paid by the Troops. 

51.... That of a Colonel, a regiment. 

52.... That of a Lieutenant Colonel, six companies. 

53.... That of a Major, four companies. 

54.... That of a Captain, one company. 

55. ...That of a Subaltern, half a company. 

56.... The funeral escort shall always be commanded by an officer 
of the same rank with the deceased; or if none such be present, by 
one of the next inferior grade. 

57.... The funeral escort of a non-commissioned staff officer shall 
consist of sixteen rank and file, commanded by a Sergeant. 

58. ...That of a Sergeant, of fourteen rank and file, commanded 
by a Sergeant. 

59.... That of a Corporal, of twelve rank and file, commanded 
by a Corporal; and 

60.. . .That of a private, of eight rank and file, commanded by 
a Corporal. 

61.... The escort will be formed in two ranks, opposite to the 
quarters or tent of the deceased, with shouldered arms and bayonets 
fixed; the artillery and cavalry on the right of the infantry. 

62.... On the appearance of the corpse, the officer commanding 
the escort will command, 

Present — Arks! 

When the honors due to deceased will be paid by the drums and 
trumpets. The music will then play an appropriate air, and the 
coffin will be taken to the right, where it will be halted. The 
commander will next order — 

1. Shoulder — Aims! 2. By company, (or platoon) left wheel 

3. March! 

5. Column, forward, guide right — March! 

63.... The column will be marched, in common time, to appro- 
priate music; and, on reaching the grave, will take a direction so 
as that the guides shall be next to the grave. When the centre 
of the column is opposite the grave, the commander will order, 

1. Column— Halt! 2. Right into line, wheel— March! 



FOR THE ARMY. 77 



Honors to be paid by the Troops .... Safeguards. 

C4 . . . . The coffin is then brought along the front, and the com- 
mander then orders, 

Present — Arms! 

And when the coffin reaches the grave, he adds, 

1. Shoulder — Arms! 2. Order— Arms! 3. Rest! 

62. ...After the. funeral service is performed, and the coffin is 
lowered into the grave, the commander will order, 

1. .Attention. 2. Shoulder — Arms! 3. Load in quickest time. 
4. Load. 

"When three rounds of small arms will be fired by the escort, taking 
care to elevate the pieces. 

66.... This being done, the commander will order, 

1. By Company, for platoon) right wheel. 2. March. 3. For~ 
ward, guide left, quick time. 4. March! 

67.... The music will not begin to play until the escort is clear 
of the enclosure or burying ground. 

ARTICLE XXVIII. 

SAFEGUARDS. 

1 .... Safeguards may be granted by any General commanding in 
chief, to hospitals, public establishments of instruction, religion, or 
charity; to museums, and depositories of the fine arts; also to mills, 
post offices, and other institutions of public benefit. They may also be 
given to individuals, whom it may be the particular interest of the 
army t& protect. 

2.... A safeguard may consist of one or more men, of fidelity and 
firmness; generally, non-effective non-commissioned officers, furnish- 
ed with a paper setting forth the object of the guard; or it may 
consist of such paper only, delivered to the inhabitant of the coun- 
try whose person, family, house, and property, it is designed to 
protect. 



78 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Safeguards ... • Leaves of Absence. 

3.. ..The safeguards left by one corps, may be replaced by a suc- 
ceeding corps; and if the country be evacuated, they may be with- 
drawn, or instructed to wait for the arrival of the enemy, and demand 
of him a safe conduct to the outposts. 

^••" Form of a Safeguard. 

By authority of , 

Jl safeguard is hereby granted to [A. B., or the house and family of A. B., 
•r to 'the college, mills, or property, stating precisely the place, nature, and 
description, of the person, property, or buildings ] MX officers and soldiers be- 
longing to the army of the United States, arc, therefore, commanded to respect 
this safeguard and to afford, if necesaary, protection to [the person, family, or 

property, of , as the case may he.] 

Given at Head Quarters, the day of . 

A. B. 
Maj. Gen. commanding in chief. 
By command of the General, 
C. D. 

Mjutant General. 

55th Article of the Rules and Articles of War. 
"Whosoever, belonging to tho armies of the United States, employed in fo- 
reign parts, shall force a safeguard, shall suffer death." 

ARTICLE XXIX. 

LEAVES OF ABSENCE. 

1 . . . . When the state of the service will permit, a reasonable leave 
of absence may be granted to an officer: but in no instance will 
leave of absence exceed one year. 

2. ...All leaves of absence, in time of peace, will be granted from 
general head quarters, on application received through the imme- 
diate commander of the officer requesting the indulgence, and the 
commandant of the post; the latter, after endorsing thereon his 
approval or disapproval, as he shall see fit, will transmit the same 
to the Adjutant General. 

3.... If the applicant be a staff officer, or an officer not serving 
in the line, leave of absence will not be granted until his appli- 
cation shall have been referred by the Adjutant General to the 
chief of the staff department to which the officer belongs. 



FOR THE ARMY. 79 



Leaves of .Absence, 



4 The commanding officer who forwards the application, if 

he approve thereof, will state the grounds on which he recom- 
mends it for favorable consideration; if the officer be a company 
officer, the rank and number of officers present, with his company, 
will be stated; and he will also particularly note, whether the 
period of service, &c. &c. under the regulations entitle the officer 
to the indulgence requested. 

5 Generals of departments will grant leave only to officers 

of their personal staff. 

6 Every commanding officer of a separate post may, in time 

of peace, and when the state of the service will permit, absen 
himself on his own leave from duty, for a period not exceeding 
ser-en days in the same month. He may also extend the like 
indulgence to officers under his immediate command, provided that 
in no case a company be left without at least one commissioned 
officer for duty with it. The same rule will apply to officers 
stationed at arsenals, provided that in no case the arsenal be left 
without at least one commissioned officer for duty. 

7.... When a commanding officer wishes to avail himself of the 
indulgence herein allowed, he will, when in the vicinity of a 
General, or other common commander, notify his superior officer 
of his intentions, that he may approve or disapprove of the same, 
according to circumstances; if he disapprove, the commanding offi- 
cer of the post or arsenal will defer his absence to some time more 
convenient to the public service. 

8.... No leave of absence, except on very extraordinary occasions, 
when the circumstances must be particularly stated, (also except for 
seven days,) shall be granted to any officer until he has joined his 
regiment or corps, and served with it at least two years. 

9.... Officers are not to leave the United States without per- 
mission from general head quarters. This rule is not intended to 
interdict in time of peace visits across the lines, along the frontiers 
near a military post. 

10.... No leave of absence upon the tender and acceptance of the 
resignation of a commission, shall exceed the following rates: 
Twelve months in cases of service exceeding twelve years. 



80 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Leaves of Absence. 

Ten months in cases of service exceeding ten years, and not 
over twelve years. 

Eight months in cases of service exceeding eight years, and not 
over ten years. 

Five months in cases of service exceeding six years, and not 
over eight years. 

Three months in cases of service exceeding four years, and not 
over six years. 

One month in cases of service exceeding three years, and not 
over four years. 

11.... No such indulgence will be granted to any officer until he 
has served three years. In computing the period of service, the 
time will be excluded which may have been occupied by leaves 
of absence immediately preceding the tender of the resignation. 

12 ....Three months' leave of absence from the first of July of 
each year, will be allowed to cadets on their graduation at the 
Military Academy, to visit their friends and to equip themselves 
for service; within which time they are to join the regiments or 
corps to which they may respectively be attached. Any graduate 
failing to join within the specified time, will be considered as not 
having accepted his appointment, and his name will be dropped 
from the rolls of the army. 

13. ...In time of war, Generals commanding in chief, in the 
field, will exercise the same discretion as herein authorized, except 
as to leaving the United States. 

14.... During a campaign no leave of absence will be granted, 
except on the most urgent necessity. 

15. ...It will be distinctly understood, that the indulgencies men- 
tioned in these regulations are not matters of right, and to be 
granted of course; but they are intended as limitations, and as es- 
tablishing the utmost extent. Applications will, therefore, in all 
cases, be decided upon the circumstances as they are presented, 
and upon the professional character and military services of the 
officers respectively. 

16 When an officer apphes for leave, on account of ill health, 

his application will be accompanied by a certificate of a Surgeon, 



FOR THE ARMY. 8l 



Leaves of Absence. 



of the state of his health. The Surgeon is to state candidly 
and explicitly his opinion as to the period which will probably 
elapse before such officer will be able to resume his duties; and 
when there is no reason to expect a recovery, and when the pros- 
pect of recovery is distant and uncertain, it must be so stated. 
The following is the form of the certificate: 

Form of Medical Certificate. 

of the regiment cf , having applied for a certificate 

on which to ground an application for leave of absence, I do hereby certify, that 

I have carefully examined this ojficer, and find that . [Here the nature 

of the disease, wound, or disability, is to be fuily stated, and the period 
during which the officer has suffered under its effects.] And that, in consequence 
thereof, he is, in my opinion, unfit for duty. I further declare my belief, that he 

will not be able to resume his duties in a less period than [Here state 

candidly and explicitly the opinion as to the period which will probably elapse 
before the officer will be able to resume his duties. When there is no reason 
to expect a recovery, or when the prospect of recovery is distant and uncertain, 
it must be so stated] 

Dated at , this day of . 

Signature of the ) 

Medical Officer. > 

I have the honor to forward the above certificate of my ill state of health, 
which renders me at present incapable of performing my duty, and to state that 

J have already been absent, with leave, from the day of to the 

day of - , by permission of , and from the 

da y of to the day of , by permission of 

Signature of the Officer. ■ 

Place of residence. 



17 When an officer is prevented by ill health from joining 

his regiment, he will transmit certificates, in the above form, of the 
state of his health, to the commanding officer of his regiment or 
post, and also to the Adjutant General. These certificates will be 
signed by a medical officer of the army; but should no medical 
officer of the army be in the vicinity to sign such certificate, a resi- 
dent physician of the place will sign the same, attested by a ma- 
gistrate. These certificate* are to be transmitted so as to arrive, if 
possible, at the heid quar.e.ri of the regiment, and at the office of 
the Adjutant Generil, before tl e expiration of the period of leave, 
which the officer may have received. 
6 



82 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Absence without Leave.. . . Deceased Officers. 

18.... Whenever an officer shall remain absent, unable to do 
duty, for two years, his case will be specially reported for the 
consideration of the President of the United States. That period 
will generally be found sufficiently long to decide whether the dis- 
ability be permanent; if judged to be so, the case, in all its cir- 
cumstances, looking to the physical condition of the officer, as well 
as to his services and the origin of the disorder, whether owing 
to exposure in the line of his duty, or other causes, will be the 
subject of examination and decision by the Executive. 

ARTICLE XXX. 

ABSENCE WITHOUT LEAVE. 

1 . . . . The pay and allowances of all officers who may be reported 
absent -without leave, shall be suspended until a satisfactory expla- 
nation shall have been given as to the cause of their being so 
absent, and a justification of the same shall have been made to 
general head quarters, through the Adjutant General, to be laid be- 
fore the Secretary of War; in order, that if no satisfactory account 
can be obtained as to the cause of their absence without leave, the 
names of the officers so offending may be dropped from the rolls 
of the army. 

To ensure the execution of this regulation, so far as it regards 
the suspension of pay, the names of all such officers as may be 
found absent without leave will be transmitted by the Adjutant 
General to the Paymaster General, who will instruct the Pay- 
masters to withhold payment of their accounts, until their cases 
respectively shall be determined by the War Department. 

ARTICLE XXXI. 

nECEASED OFFICERS. 

1.... Whenever an officer dies or is killed at any military post 
or station, or in the vicinity of the same, it will be the duty of the 
commanding officer to report the fact to the Adjutant General, with 
the date, and any other information proper to be communicated. If 



FOR THE ARMY. 83 



Deceased Officers .... Sutlers Councils .... Funds. 

an officer die at a distance from a military post, any officer having 
intelligence of the same, will, in like manner, communicate it, spe- 
cifying the day of his decease. 

2.... Inventories of the effects of deceased officers, required by the 
94th Article of War, will be transmitted to the Adjutant General. 

3.... If a legal administrator or family connexion be presmt, and 
take charge of the effects, it will be so stated to the Adjutant Ge- 
neral. 

ARTICLE XXXII. 

SUTLERS COUNCILS OF ADMINISTRATION POST AND COMPANY FUNDS. 

1.... Sutlers shall receive warrants of appointment under the hand 
of the Secretary of War, and shall be considered as superior to al 
enlisted soldiers, but not entitled, in consequence of their warrants, 
to assume any military command or authority over the non-commis- 
sioned officers or soldiers. They arc to be treated with respect, and 
protected in their places. 

2.... A sutler will be appointed to each military post, who shall 
be recognised and known as the Post Sutler. 

3.... Whenever circumstances may render it expedient, the War 
Department will appoint such additional number of sutlers to any 
post, as, in the opinion of the Secretary of War, the state of the 
service may require, to be termed Extra Sutlers. The companies 
to be supplied by extra sutlers will be designated in the warrant of 
such extra sutlers, or in orders issued from the Adjutant General's 

office. 

4.... Whenever detachments are made from a post so as to reduce 
the garrison to four companies or less, the temporary appointment 
of the extra sutler, if any have been made, shall cease, and that of 
the post sutler alone remain in force. 

5... Every sutler shall hold his appointment during the period 
of four years, unless sooner revoked; but, besides his amenability 
under the 60th Article of War, he may be suspended from the 
privilege of sutling by the commander of the post, for improper 
conduct, till the orders of the Secretary of War can be received in 
the case. 



84 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sutlers"-' Councils of Administration.. .. Post and Company Funds. 

6 For the privilege er joyed by the sutler, he shall be assessed 

and held to pay to the post fund, at the end of every two months, 
or oftener, as may be determined by the council of administration, 
at a rate not exceeding fifteen cents a month for every officer and en- 
listed soldier serving at the post: the monthly average number of such 
persons to be determined equitably by the said council. The com- 
manding officer will lend his authority as often as may be necessary, 
to protect, within his local command, the privileges of the sutler; 
and no further tax or burden, in any shape beyond what is herein 
authorized, will be imposed on him. If there be a spare building 
at the post, the use of it may be allowed to the sutler, he being 
responsible that it be kept in repair. If there be no such build 
ing, he will be permitted to erect one suitable to his purpose: it is 
expressly to be understood, however, that this article gives the 
sutler no claim to quarters or transportation for himself or goods, 
or to any military allowance whatever. 

7.... For the purpose of carrying the provisions of this article 
into effect, and such others as may be prescribed, the commander of 
ihc post shall from time to time, but at least once in every two 
months, call a council of administration, to consist of the three 
officers next in rank to himself, and a fourth to act as secretary; 
which council shall cause its secretary to record its proceedings, in 
a book to be kept for the purpose, to be submitted to the com- 
manding officer for his approval or disapproval, and orders or 
remarks thereupon. 

8.... If there be not four officers for duty under the commander, 
the junior member of the council will act as secretary; if there 
be but two officers for duty under the commander, they will 
be ordered to constitute the council, the junior member acting 
as above; and finally, if there be but one officer, under the com- 
mander for duty, he shall be appointed to act a? administrator; 
and, if there be no officer, the commanding officer himself shall 
discharge this duty, and act also as secretary. 

9.... If, when the council is constitute J of other officer > than the 
commanding officer, the latter approve the acts a id decisions of the 
council, the general result will be published in orders for the infer- 



FOR THE ARMY 



Sutlers •■ • • Council* of Administration. . . .Post and Company Funds-. 

mation and government of all persons concerned. If he disapprove 
and send back the proceedings, and the council, after giving due 
weight to his objections, shall unanimously adhere to the first 
decision or decisions, a copy of the whole proceedings shall be sent 
by the commanding officer, to the next common commander for his 
decision and orders in the case, which shall be considered final, and 
entered in the council book. 

10.... The secretary of each meeting, after entering the whole 
proceedings of the council in the council book, together with the 
final order thereon, will deposite the book with the commanding 
officer. The proceedings will be authenticated by the signatures of 
the president and secretary of the council. In like manner the 
approval or objections of the commanding officer, entered in the 
book, will be signed by his own hand. 

11.... The council shall have power from time to time, to pre- 
scribe the quantity and kind of clothing, small equipments and 
soldiers' necessaries, groceries, and all other articles which the 
sutlers may be held bound to keep on hand, to supply the probable 
wants of the officers and men at the post; to examine the sutler's 
books and papers, and on actual inspection, to fix the tariff of prices 
of the said goods or commodities; for this purpose the council shall 
also examine, as far as practicable, the prices at which similar 
articles are sold by the nearest merchants, and fix the prices accord- 
ingly; to inspect the sutler's weights, measures, &c. 

12.... The assessments imposed on, and collected of, the sutler, 
shall constitute the basis of what shall be called the post fund, 
which fund shall be under the administration of the council. 

13.... The money will be collected by, and held in the hands of 
a treasurer, who shall be some discreet officer of the post, to be 
appointed by the commander, and who shall be allowed five per 
cent. on all moneys disbursed by him under directions of the council. 

14. ...The treasurer shall open an account with the fund, subject 
to the inspection of the commander of the post and the council, 
and make payments or purchases, on the warrants of the com- 
mandant, which warrants shall only be drawn in pursuance of 
specific resolves or decisions of the council. 



86 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Sutlers Councils of Administration Post and Company Funds. 

15.... The sums received and expended by the treasurer, and the 
balance of the fund in hand, shall be reported quarterly to the 
Adjutant General of the army, through the commanding officer of 
the post, stating in detail from what source the funds were obtained, 
and at what time and for what particular objects expended, together 
with the cost of each item of expenditure. 

10 The following are the objects to which the fund is pledged 

and will alone be appropriated, and in the order in which they are 
mentioned: 1. Immediate or temporary relief to indigent widows 
and orphans of officers or soldiers. 2. Temporary relief to indigent 
or disabled officers and soldiers, honorably discharged from the 
service, under circumstances which may entitle them to it. 3. The 
education of soldiers' children at the post school. 4. The estab- 
lishment of a library, and for newspapers and periodicals. 5. The 
maintenance of a band. 6. Garden seeds. 7. The expenses of 
the bakehouse. 

17 The tariff, fixed as above, shall be exposed in some con- 
spicuous place in the sutler's shop, or canteen, for the information 
of all concerned. The prices shall not be exceeded, neither shall 
the sutler make any difference between the officers and enlisted 
men, cither on cash or credit sales. 

18.... The sutler shall not credit any enlisted soldier within the 
same month, as January, February, &c. to an amount exceeding 
one half of his monthly pay, without the special sanction, in 
writing, of the soldier's company commander. Neither shall he 
sell or give to any enlisted soldier, even the smallest quantity of 
vinous or fermented liquor, without special sanction, in every case, 
of the commanding officer of the regiment or post. 

19. .. .Sutlers are not to keep ardent spirits, nor are they to mix 
them with any beverage allowed to be sold to the troops, under the 
penalty of losing their situations. 

20 Due bills are, in no case, to be issued to soldiers by sutlers. 

21.... Every facility will be afforded to the sutler, in the collec- 
tion of the just debts contracted with him, within the limits of this 
article. The Paymaster, when about to make payments to the 
troops, will notify the sutler, in order that he may take his place 



FOR THE ARMY. 37 



Sittffrs.... Councils a/Administration* • .. Post and Company Funds. 

at the pay table, with his books or accounts; and at least one 
officer of each company will attend the pay table, if practicable, 
on a like notice from the Paymaster, to see that justice be done to 
his men. 

22... 1 If the soldier admit the amount demanded by the. sutler to 
be just, it will be handed to the latter, as a matter of course, by 
the Paymaster, and deducted from the pay of the soldier. If the 
amount be disputed, the sutler shall be required to produce a wr 
ten acknowledgment of the soldier, duly attested, which shall be 
sufficient as to the then settlement. But the company officer, and the 
Paymaster will be required to sec that the stoppages on account of 
Government be first made; next, the just accounts of laundresses; 
and after these, the sutlers and others, 

22 ....The foregoing stoppages, except those on account of Go- 
vernment, need not be noted on the pay and receipt rolls; it will be 
sufficient that the soldier give to the Paymaster a receipt in full; 
that his creditors abovementioncd, be satisfied; that he receive a 
proper acquittance on account of those payments; and that he re- 
ceive the balance, if there be any, of his pay; the whole settlement 
being made openly and under the guardianship of his officer. 

24.... If the troops be removed, or a part of them detached from 
the post, leaving unsatisfied debts due to the sutler, he or his agents 
shall be admitted to the pay table at the next settlement with all 
the men in his debt, and with the same privileges as above. 

25... .If an individual leave the post on furlough or on com- 
mand, the commanding officer of his company will note on the 
descriptive roll the amount claimed by, and which may appear to 
be due to the sutler, in order that the same may be stopped by 
the Paymaster making the next payment, in case the soldier should 
be settled with whilst absent from the post. In such case the Pay- 
master shall make the stoppage, and transmit the amount to the 
sutler. The same rule will be observed on the final discharge of 
a soldier, at a time when the Paymaster is absent from the post. 

26.... In case of the death or desertion of any enlisted soldier, 
at the time a debtor to the laundress or sutler, the demands against 
the soldier will be submitted to the council of administration, whose 



88 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Sutlers Councils of Administration Post and Company Funds 



duty it shall be in every such case, to receive and audit the ac- 
count, and if satisfied on unequivocal evidence that the debts were 
justly due under the regulations, at the time of the death or deser- 
tion, the said council shall certify accordingly. 

27 Debts thus certified to be due the laundress and sutler, are 

to be noted on the muster rolls and to be settled by the Paymaster 
out of the arrearages due to the soldier, at the time of decease or 
desertion. But if deserters are apprehended and convicted by courts 
martial before the making out of the muster rolls, then the expenses 
of apprehension are to be added to the other stoppages on account 
of the Government, and are to be deducted before the laundress' 
and sutler's claims can be admitted. The decisions of courts mar- 
tial and the proceedings of councils of administration, will furnish 
the commanding officers of companies with the data to enaMe 
them to make the necessary remarks on the muster rolls of 
their companies. The secretary of the council will notify company 
commanders of such decisions, in writing, as affect the pay of indi- 
viduals of their respective companies. 

28.... When a post is about to be evacuated, or any company 
or companies are to be detached permanently, it shall be the duty 
of the commanding officer of the post to call a council of adminis- 
tration and direct it to make an equitable distribution, among the 
several companies composing the garrison, of the post funds remain- 
ing on hand unappropriated; and also of the articles procured by 
means of the post fund, such as books, pamphlets, etc., etc., which 
funds and articles are to be transferred and added to the post 
fund of the new post to which such company or companies may 
be ordered, immediately on their arrival. 

29.... As the difference between bread and flour is 33£ per 
centum in favor of flour, the troops will bake their own bread as often 
as practicable, and the saving produced thereby carried to the credit of 
the post fund. It is to be understood, however, that the commanding 
officer is to determine whether the whole or any part of the flour shall 
be baked. 

30.... Laundresses, employed to wash soldier's clothing, will be 
paid according to a rate to be fixed by the council of adminis- 
tration. 



FOR THE ARMY. 89 



Military Discussions and Publications •••.Jlrresls and Confinement*. 

Company Fund. 

31. .. .Besides the post fund, there may be established in every 
company a fund to be called the company fund, to be created out 
of the savings arising from an economical use of the rations, except 
from the general baking, which pertains to the post fund. 

32.... The commanding officer of the company is the depository 
of the company fund, and is to dispose of it exclusively for the 
benefit of the enlisted men, with the approbation of the council of 
administration, to which his project of expenditure is to be sub- 
mitted before any disbursement shall be made. The company fund 
is in no instance to be appropriated in any respect for the benefit 
of the commissioned officers of the company. 

33.... The account of this fund will be subject to the revision 
of the council of administration, at least once in every two months; 
and besides it is the duty of the commanding officer of the post 
or regiment to examine into the same, during the same period. 

ARTICLE XXXIII. 

MILITARY DISCUSSIONS AND PUBLICATIONS. 

1 . . . . Meetings for deliberations or discussions among any class of 
military men, having the object of conveying praise, censure, or 
any mark of approbation towards their superiors or others in the 
military service; and all publications relative to transactions between 
officers, of a private or personal nature, whether newspaper, pam- 
phlet, or handbill, as well as all private letters or reports relative 
to military marches or operations during the campaign, are strictly 
prohibited, as being unmilitary and injurious to the public interest. 

ARTICLE X X X I V . 

ARRESTS ANfl CONFIN E.MEXTS. 

l....None but commanding officers have power to place officers 
under arrest, except for offences expressly designated in the 27th 
Article of War. 

2.... Officers are not to be put in arrest for light and trifling 



90 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

. Irrests and Confinement!;. 

offences. For these, an expression of disapprebation by the com- 
manding officer will, in most cases, answer every purpose necessary 
for the maintenance of discipline. 

3. ...It is not obligatory on the commander to place an officer in 
arrest, on application to that effect from an officer under his command. 
He will exercise a sound discretion on the subject. But in all appli- 
cations for redress of supposed grievances inflicted by a superior, 
it will be his duty, in case he shall not deem it proper to order an 
investigation, to give his reasons in writing, for declining to act; 
these reasons, if not satisfactory, the complaining party may, should 
he think fit so to do, forward to the next common superior, together 
with a copy of his application for redress. 

4. . . .An officer in arrest may, at the discretion of his commanding 
officer, have larger limits assigned him, than those pointed out by 
the Articles of War, on written application to that effect. 

5.... No Paymaster is to be put in arrest except by order of the 
commanding officer of the department or district to which the Pay- 
master may be assigned to duty; and when so arrested, the fact wall 
be immediately reported to the Paymaster General. 

6.... To avoid the inconvenience resulting from the suspension 
of the functions of officers of the medical staff", it is recommended 
to officers in command, that whenever charges are preferred against 
a Surgeon or Assistant Surgeon, to transmit the charges to the officer 
having authority to order a general count martial for his trial; and 
not to put the Surgeon or Assistant Surgeon in arrest, until the 
court martial ordered for his trial shall have been assembled. 

A 

7.... The arrest of an officer or confinement of a soldier, will be, 
as soon as practicable, reported to his immediate commander. 

8. ...Individuals placed in arrest may be released without being 
brought before a court martial, by the authority ordering the arrest, 
or by superior authority. 

9.... Individuals placed under guard with written charges, signed 
by an officer, will not be released, except by the direction of the 
commanding officer. 

10.... All prisoners under guard without written charges, will bo 
released by the officer of the day at guard mounting, unless orders 
to the contrary should be given by the commanding officer. 



FOR THE ARMY. 91 



Arrests and Confinements"" Courts Partial. 



11.... On a march, company officers and non-commissioned officers 
in arrest will follow in the rear of their respective companies, unless 
otherwise particularly ordered. Field officers, commissioned and 
non-commissioned staff officers, under the same circumstances, will 
follow in the rear of their respective regiments. Other persons in 
arrest will be under the conduct of the camp guard, or a detachment 
from it. 

12.... The arms and accoutrements of non-commissioned officers 
and privates in arrest will be deposited with the First Sergeants of 
companies. Should it be deemed unsafe to allow the prisoners 
on a march, to carry their arms, they will be transported with the 
baggage of the company, otherwise the prisoners will be made to 
carry them. 

13. ...An officer under arrest will not wear a sword, or make a 
visit of etiquette to the commanding officer, or other superior officer, 
or call on them, unless sent for; and in case of business, he will make 
known his object in writing. 

ARTICLE XXXV. 

COURTS MARTIAL. 

1 The discipline and reputation of the army, are deeply in- 
volved in the manner in which military courts are conducted, and 
justice administered, the duties, therefore, that devolve on officers 
appointed to sit as members of courts martial, are of the most grave 
and important character— that these duties may be discharged with 
justice and propriety, it is incumbent on all officers to apply them- 
selves diligently to the acquirement of a competent knowledge of 
military law; to make themselves perfectly acquainted with all orders 
and regulations, and with the practice of military courts. 

2.... In drawing up charges, the utmost precision must be ob- 
served in specifying the fact to which criminality is attached, and 
in describing the time when, and the place where, such fact oc- 
curred. 

3.... Facts of a distinct nature, are not to be included in one 
and the same charge or specification of a charge, but must be 
made the subject of a distinct charge or specification. 



92 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Courts Martial. 



4.... All extraneous matter is to be carefully avoided, and noth- 
ing is to be alleged, but that which is culpable, and which the 
complainant is prepared to substantiate before a court martial. 

5.... It is not necessary to specify in a charge that the offence 
alleged was committed in breach of any particular Article of War. 

6.... A charge is not necessarily to be laid before a court mar- 
tial in the form in which it has been drawn up by the com- 
plainant, the officer who may order the court to assemble being 
competent to make such alterations in it as he may deem requisite. 

7.... But after a charge has been approved by the proper authority, 
and ordered to be investigated, neither the judge advocate nor 
any other person, is competent to change it, without the consent of 
such authority. 

8 .... It is highly improper to hold charges in reserve against an 
officer or soldier, in order that they may accumulate so as to form 
collectively, a crime of sufficient mag»'tude to justify a prosecution. 
If the facts as they arise, are not fit to be made matters of charge 
at the time, they should never, but in extraordinary cases, be subse- 
quently revived. 

9.... An officer has no right to demand a court martial, either 
on himself or on others; the General in chief, or officer compe- 
tent to order a court, being the judge of its necessity or propriety.. 

10.... Nor has an officer who may have been placed in arrest, 
any right to demand a trial, or to persist in considering himself 
under arrest after he shall have been released by proper authority. 

11.... After a prisoner has been arraigned on specific charges, 
it is irregular for a court martial to admit any additional charge 
against him, even though he may not have come on his defence. 
The trial on the charges first preferred must be regularly concluded, 
when, if necessary, the prisoner may be tried on any further accu- 
sation brought against him. 

12.... No officer or soldier being acquitted, or convicted of an 
offence, is liable to be tried a second time for the same. But this 
provision applies solely to trials for the same identical act and crime, 
and to such persons as have in the first instance been legally tried. 
If any illegality take place on the trial, the prisoner must be dis- 



FOR THE ARMY. 93 



Courts Martial. 



charged, and be regarded as standing in the same situation as be- 
fore the commencement of these illegal proceedings. The same 
charge may, therefore, be again preferred against the prisoner, who 
shall not plead the previous illegal trial in bar. 

13 A prisoner cannot plead in bar of trial, that he has not 

been furnished with a copy of the charges, or that the copy fur- 
nished him differs from that on which he has been arraigned. It 
is customary and proper to furnish him with a correct copy, but 
the omission shall not void, though it may postpone, the trial. 

14 General courts martial may consist of any number of com- 
missioned officers from five to thirteen inclusively; but they shall 
not consist of less than thirteen, when that number can be convened 
without manifest injury to the service. 

15.... Any General officer commanding an army, or officer having 
at least the rank of Colonel, commanding a separate department, 
may appoint general courts martial. 

16 In ordering a general court martial, it is not necessary to 

designate the president by name, as the officer highest in rank will 
preside— that rank being determined by the Articles of War applica- 
ble to that subject. 

17.... la detailing officers to form a general court martial, it will 
be sufficient to order as many as can be convened without manifest 
injury to the service, within the limits mentioned in the 64th Article 
of War, of which the ordering officer must be the judge. 

!8 When the number of officers detailed falls short of thirteen, 

there can be no supernumeraries. It is only when the maximum 
is exceeded, that that term properly applies. 

19.... The greatest number of officers that can be detailed without 
manifest injury to the service, will, in all cases, be ordered; but on 
the appointed day of meeting the court may consider itself authorized 
to organize and act, provided the number present does not fall short 
of five, unless otherwise ordered. 

20 But when the court is ordered to consist of thirteen mem- 
bers, it may be proper and convenient to detail supernumeraries to 
supply such vacancies as may occur at the day of meeting, or at 
any subsequent day. 



94 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Courts Jlfartial. 

21.... Whatever is done in the court, is done by the whole court. 
The president is a member of the court; — it is his duty, as the pre- 
siding officer, to see that order be maintained, and the business of 
the court conducted with regularity. But all the decisions and 
orders must be the acts of the court, and not merely the acts of the 
president. The court, after being duly organized, is to adjourn, and 
meet within the limits prescribed by law; that is, between eight in 
the morning, and three in the afternoon, on the vote of the court, 
and not at the discretion of the presiding officer. 

22.... All members at a general court martial, of whatever num- 
ber it may consist, must be duly sworn, vote, and give their opinions, 
beginning with the youngest in rank. 

23.... The seat of a member of a court martial, who is absent 
from sufficient cause, shall be considered as permanently vacated 
by him, and filled up accordingly. 

24.... Officers assembled to constitute a court martial may meet 
and adjourn even when all the members are not present, but no other 
act of theirs can be legal, without the presence of the whole court, 
except in deciding on the validity of a challenge against a member. 

25.... The day and place of meeting of a general court martial 
having been published in orders, they shall not be changed, but by 
the authority ordering the same, and the officers appointed as 
members, the parties, and witnesses, must attend accordingly. The 
judge advocate, at the opening, calls over the names of the members, 
who arrange themselves on the right or left of the president, 
according to their rank. 

26 The prisoner is then called into court, and however he 

may have previously been confined, he must then appear without 
bonds of any kind, unless there be danger of escape, or rescue. 

27.... Before the members of a general court martial are sworn, 
both prosecutor and prisoner shall have the right of challenge. 

28.... Peremptory challenges are not allowed at a court martial; 
the party must, therefore, assign his cause of challenge, which is to 
be regularly entered on the proceedings. The member objected 
to, then withdraws, and the court being closed, deliberates and 
decides on the validity of the challenge. 



FOR THE ARMY. 95 



Courts Martial. 



29.... Sufficient causes of challenge arc — the expression of an 
opinion relative to the subject to be investigated having been a 
member of a court of inquiry which gave an opinion, or of a general 
court martial, in which the circumstances were investigated, either 
principally, collaterally, or incidentally — prejudice, malice, or the 
like. 

30 ••••On the arraignment of a prisoner, he must plead, simply, 
either guilty or not guilty; for, at this stage of the trial, he cannot 
enter into any explanation or exculpation of his conduct; but must 
confine himself to the mere confession of his guilt, or to the simple 
and unqualified denial of the offence laid to his charge. 

3 1 .... Whatever may be the prisoner's conduct or reply on the 
arraignment, whether he plead guilty or stand mute, it is the duty 
of the court martial, in all cases, where the punishment of the 
offence charged is discretionary, and especially where the discretion 
includes a wide range, and great variety of punishment, and the 
specifications do not show all the circumstances attending the offence, 
to receive and report, in its proceedings, any evidence the judge 
advocate may offer, for the purpose of illustrating the actual char- 
acter of the offence, notwithstanding the party accused may have 
pleaded guilty, or stood mute; such evidence being necessary to an en- 
lightened exercise of the discretion of the court, in measuring the pun- 
ishment, as well as to those whose duty it may be to report on the 
case, or to carry the sentence into effect. If there be any exception 
to this rule, it is where the specification is so full and precise as 
to disclose all the circumstances of mitigation or aggravation which 
accompany the offence. When that is the case, or when the punish- 
ment is fixed, and no discretion is allowed, explanatory testimony 
cannot be needed. 

32.... As Government is the prosecutor of all military offences, 
it is the duty of the judge advocate to prosecute, in the name of 
the United States, all persons who may be brought before a general 
court martial. But it has been established by practice, that the 
officer who prefers the charges, and is supposed to be the best 
acquainted with the circumstances of the case, or who has been 
aggrieved by the prisoner to be tried, shall be allowed to share in 



96 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Courts Martial. 

the prosecution. Such officer will, therefore, he permitted to act 
jointly with the judge advocate. 

33.... But if the accuser, or person aggrieved, belong neither to 
the army nor navy, he can appear in the case only as an inform- 
ant, leaving the prosecution to be conducted by the judge advocate 
alone. 

34 Both the prosecution and defence may be allowed, on 

request, the assistance of a friend or professional gentleman; but 
such assistant shall not address the court, or be permitted to inter- 
fere, in any way, with its proceedings. 

35.... When more prisoners than one are arraigned on different 
charges, before the same court martial, the members are liable to 
be challenged, and the court is to be re-sworn at the commence- 
ment of each case; and the proceedings are to be made up separately 
and signed, as if each prisoner had been tried by a distinct court 
martial. 

36.... All preliminary forms having been duly gone through, the 
regular course of trial is as follows: 

37.... The prosecutor calls his witnesses, and produces his writ- 
ten evidence; and may, if he desire it, be examined as a witness in 
support of the charges which he has himself preferred. 

38.... In adducing his evidence, the prosecutor must not be al- 
lowed to aggravate the guilt of the prisoner by examining into facts 
unconnected with the specific offence alleged in the charge; but he 
must confine his proof to such circumstances only as clearly tend 
to convict the prisoner of the particular accusation preferred against 
him; and no matter not put in issue by the charge, can be received 
by the court, which would implicate the prisoner in a new or dis- 
tinct offence, or in a greater degree or extent of guilt than appears 
in the charge on which he has been arraigned. Nor can the pro- 
secutor adduce any evidence with respect to the prisoner's charac- 
ter, except so far as it is put in issue by the charge. 

39 The prosecutor must, during the prosecution, and before 

the prisoner comes on his defence, produce all the evidence he has 
to support the charge; and, after the prosecution has been closed, he 
shall not be permitted to adduce any further evidence in proof of 
the specific facts alleged in the charge. 



FOR THE ARMY. 97 



Courts Martial. 



40.... The prosecution being closed, the prisoner then enters on 
his defence, and adduces his evidence. 

41 In conducting his defence, a prisoner is allowed every 

facility of proving his innocence, or of extenuating the culpability 
of which he is accused. He is, therefore, at liberty to bring for- 
ward and establish, by evidence, every circumstance which, in his 
opinion, tends to palliate his conduct, or to repel, entirely, the 
charge preferred against him. He may even vindicate himself by 
throwing blame or criminality on others, who are no parties to the 
trial, by showing that he was compelled to commit the alleged of- 
fence, or that the act imputed to him was, in reality, committed 
by others. 

42.... But a court martial ought never to allow a prisoner to im- 
plicate the characters of persons not present to defend themselves, 
unless he previously satisfies the court that such proof is essential 
to his justification. Whenever, therefore, it is evident that the 
prisoner, in impeaching the character of others, is proceeding on 
vague and ill-founded suppositions, or that he is actuated by resent- 
ment, and not by a desire to exculpate his own conduct, the court 
ought immediately to interpose, and reject all such evidence. 

43.... In drawing up his defence, the prisoner should recollect 
that unwarranted recrimination on the prosecutor, illiberal reflections 
on his motives or his witnesses, and most particularly the unnecessary 
impeachment of the character of any person not a party to the trial, 
will ever meet the most marked disapprobation of the approving 
officer, and greatly diminish the chances for lenity, and a favorable 
consideration of his case. 

44.... In all cases where a prisoner produces evidence on his de- 
fence, the prosecutor has a right to reply; but he cannot adduce any 
fresh evidence, unless new matter has been introduced on the defence; 
in which case he is allowed to controvert it by corresponding proof. 
45.... When the prisoner adduces no evidence on his defence, it 
remains in the discretion of the court to determine whether the 
prosecutor shall be permitted to reply or not. In deciding this point, 
the question should be, whether any matter has been introduced 
on which the prosecutor has not previously had an opportunity of 



98 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Courts tMdriial. 

addressing the court; the only object necessary to be kept in view 
being to afford both the court and the approving officer a full under- 
standing of the case. 

46.... A rejoinder is not a matter of right, and should never be 
permitted by a court martial except when evidence has been adduced 
on the reply. 

47.... All persons, of whatever religion or country, that have the 
use of their reason, arc to be received and examined as witnesses, 
except such as are infamous, or are interested in the cause. 

48.... Infamy is incurred by having been convicted of certain 
crimes and misdemeanors, and judgment passed. But to render a 
witness incompetent, no proof of such conviction can be received,, 
except a copy of the record itself. 

49.... Interest in the cause is inferred from the fact that immediate 
and certain gain, or a similar loss, is likely to be incurred by the 
testimony given. A contingent, or barely possible gain or loss, 
does not, however, render a witness incompetent. 

50.... But an accomplice, or particeps cri minis, is a competent 
witness against the persons who are his associates in the commission 
of an offence. 

5 1 .... Parties to a trial being allowed to support their witnesses, 
money received bona fide for that purpose, does not render the 
witness incompetent. 

52.... It is not only allowable for either party to ascertain, by 
previous inquiry, the evidence which persons may have it in their 
power to give in his favor, but it is a duty, as it saves the time of 
the court, which might be wasted in examination of witnesses un- 
acquainted with the circumstances of the case. 

53.... Such communications, therefore, do not, in themselves, 
affect the credibility or competency of the witness. But the oppo- 
site party and the court are at liberty to examine the witness 
rc:-peeting the nature of any communication on the subject of the 
charges under investigation, which he may have had with the party 
producing him; and should it at any stage of the trial appear from 
such examination, that he lias an interest in the evidence which he 
is giving, the couit shall immediately filence and reject him; or, 



FOR THE ARMY. 99 



Courts Martial. 



should no circumstances appear to render the witness incompetent, 
still, if the party producing him have used any means to create 
an improper bias on his mind, or to suggest in any manner the 
evidence to be given, the court will give little or no credit to his 
testimony. 

54 Husband and wife cannot be witnesses for or against 

each other, in any case where either is a party, but no other rela- 
tion of kinched, nor that of a servant, produces incompetency, 
though the favorable bias produced by such relationship, will naturally 
be considered by the court. 

55 Neither counsellors nor attorneys can be called upon to 

disclose the secrets which their clients may have confided to them 
for the purpose of enabling them to conduct a cause. 

56 The admissibility of children as witnesses is not regulated 

by their age, but by their apparent sen* and understanding. Chil- 
dren, therefore, of any age, may be examined, if capable of distin- 
guishing between good and evil, but always under oath. 

57.... If a child be unfit to be sworn, it follows as a necessary 
consequence, that any account which it may have given to others 
is not to be admitted. 

58.... The exception to a witness ought, in strictness, to be made 
before he is sworn. But it is also competent for a court martial, 
at whatever stage of a trial the incompetency of a witness appears, 
to arrest his evidence and to discharge his testimony from their 

minds. 

59.,.. Both prosecutor and prisoner are allowed to take exceptions 
to the competency of a witness, but they must be stated in open 
court, and recorded on the proceedings, after which the court 
decides on their validity. 

60 When no exception is made to a witness he is to be duly 

sworn, and then examined in chief by the party which produces 
him; the opposite party next cross-examines him, and, in case new 
matter be elicited by this cross examination, the party calling him 
may re-examine him as to that new matter; after which the court 
puts such questions as it may think necessary. 

61.... It is essential to the regularity of the proceedings of a 



]C0 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Courts Martial. 

court martial, that this mode of examining witnesses be strictly 
adhered to; as a less regular mode, permitting a mixed or inter- 
changeable examination, confuses the witness, perplexes the case, 
and materially diminishes the benefit, which the party producing 
the witness, is likely to derive from his testimony. 

62.... The trial being finished, the court is closed, and proceeds 
to deliberate on its verdict and sentence. 

63.. . .Members of courts martial ought then to bear in mind, 
that they have two distinct duties to perform; the one, that of jurors, 
and the other, that of judges. 

64.... In the first of these capacities, they are bound to find a 
verdict, according to the evidence, which has been produced before 
them. But this verdict may either be general, declaring the 
prisoner guilty, or not guilty, of the whole charge preferred against 
him, or it ma)- be particular 1 , finding that such and such allegations 
have been proved, and acquitting the prisoner of the others. They 
may also, in cases where the offence admits of gradations, acquit 
of the degree charged, and find the prisoner guilty in a lesser 
degree. But, they must in all cases exhaust the charge, and declare 
their opinion on each particular allegation which may be contained 
in it. 

65 In their other capacity, if the verdict be "guilty," all the mem- 
bers of a court martial, though a minority may have voted for the ac- 
quittal of the prisoner, are bound by their oath, to duly administer 
justice, by awarding such a punishment as is proportionable to the 
degree of guilt of which the prisoner has been convicted. No 
mitigating circumstances whatever ought then to influence their judg- 
ment, and their attention ought solely to be directed to the nature 
of the offence, to the custom of war in like cases, and to the effect 
which their sentence may produce towards maintaining the disci- 
pline of the army. 

66.. . .If mitigating circumstances have appeared during the trial, 
though they may not enter into consideration in determining the 
sentence, they may afford adequate grounds for recommending the 
prisoner to mercy. 

67.... No recommendation to mercy will be embraced in the body 



FOR THE ARMY. 101 



Courts JWartial. 



of the sentence, but will be inserted after the signatures of the 
president and judge advocate. Such members only, who recommend, 
will sign the same. 

68 .... In cases where the prisoner rests his defence on the plea of 
intoxication or insanity, it is to be remarked, that the law considers 
madness voluntarily contracted by intoxication as an aggravation, 
and not an extenuation of any criminal misbehavior. Such a plea 
ought, therefore, to have no influence on the sentence awarded by 
the court, though it might, in certain cases, induce to a recom- 
mendation of the prisoner to mercy. 

69.... With regard to insanity, the law holds that, if there be 
only a partial degree of insanity, mixed with a partial degree of 
reason, not a full and complete loss of reason, but enough to have 
restrained those passions which produced the crime; if there be 
thought and design, a faculty of distinguishing the nature of 
actions, to discern the difference between moral good and evil; 
then upon the fact of the offence being proved, the judgment of 
the law must take place. It is also to be remarked, that in all 
acquittals on account of insanity, the court must find specially, 
whether the prisoner was insane when he committed the crime, 
and must declare in the finding, that he was acquitted on that 
account. 

70.... In all cases wherein the offence of which a prisoner is 
convicted, comes under any particular Article of War, the court 
can award no other punishment than the one prescribed in such 
article. 

71 When, however, the punishment is left to the discretion of 

the court, it should be exercised according to the custom of war 
in like cases; and courts martial should award no unusual punish- 
ment, except when the circumstances of a particular case impe- 
riously require it. 

72.... The usual penalties to which an officer may be subjected 
are cashiering, dismissal, reprimand, and suspension from rank, pay, 
and emoluments. 

73.... When an officer is brought to trial for conduct unbecom- 
ing an officer and a gentleman, the court must find him either 



102 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Courts JMartial. 



guilty or not guilty of the charge. For these words constitute but 
one single offence; and it is, therefore, not competent for the court 
to divide them, and to declare the prisoner guilty to a certain 
extent only. 

74 The usual punishment awarded against non-commissioned 

officers, is reduction; but further penalties may be added, according 
to the nature of the case. 

75.... To sentence a non-commissioned officer merely to be repri- 
manded, is both unusual and inefficacious as a punishment; such 
a sentence, therefore, ought wever to be awarded by a court martial. 

76.... The usual punishments of a soldier are, imprisonment, 
solitary or otherwise, hard labor, and stoppage of pay. 

77.... Courts maitial should be caieful not to award a punish- 
ment so excessive, and disproportioned to the offence, as to suggest 
a doubt in the mind of the approving officer, as to the expediency 
or justice, of confirming it. 

78.... In drawing up the findings and sentences of courts mar- 
tial, the utmost precision is to be observed in specifying how far 
the prisoner is guilty or not guilty of each charge or instance of 
charge, and in specifying the exact nature and degree of punish- 
ment which the court has awarded. 

79.... Whenever the proceedings of a court martial are ordered 
to be revised, it is highly irregular and objectionable for the court 
to call and examine fresh witnesses. The revision is to be con- 
fined entirely to a re-consideration of the matter already recorded 
on the proceedings. 

80.. ..It is to be particularly observed, that however excusable 
may be an adherence, from conscientious motives, to a finding and 
sentence once pronounced, yet, where error in judgment, arising 
from a misconception of the law, or of the custom of war in like 
cases, is brought to the notice of a court martial, supported by 
respectable authority, perseverance in error is a dereliction of duty 
and unjust in its consequences. 

t 81«««.In making up the record of the proceedings of courts mar- 
tial, a copy of the order appointing the court and detailing its 
members, will be inserted on the record in each case; also the 



FOR THE ARMY. 103 



Courts Jlfartial. 



fact that the court was duly sworn in presence of the priscr.c. 
on trial; that he was asked whether he had any objections to the 
members detailed for his trial, and his answer thereto. The record 
will be neatly written on letter paper, with a margin of one inch 
on the inner edge of each sheet. The pages in each case will be 
correctly numbered, and the documents which are to accompany 
the proceedings, will be noted and marked in such manner as to 
afford an easy reference. 

82 The original proceedings of all general courts martial, 

will, after receiving the final action of the approving officer, be 
sent to the office of the Adjutant General for safe keeping. 

83 General and other officers in command, who have authority 

to approve and confirm the sentence of a court martial, are to l>e 
particular in stating, at the end of the proceedings, their determina- 
tion in each case, and the manner in which the case is disposed of. 
84.... The foregoing remarks and directions concerning the pro- 
ceedings and records of general courts martial, apply equally to 
regimental and garrison courts martial. 

85 Every officer commanding a regiment or corps, has autho- 
rity, by the Articles of War, to appoint, for his own regiment or 
corps, courts martial, to consist of three commissioned officers, for 
the trial and punishment of offences, not capital, and to decide upon 
their sentences. 

86 For the same purpose, all officers commanding any of the 

garrisons, forts, barracks, or other places where the troops consist 
of different corps, may assemble courts martial, to consist of three 
commissioned officers, and decide upon their sentences. 

87 Regimental and garrison courts martial, have power to try 

cases only that arc not capital; nor does their jurisdiction extend to 
the trial of commissioned officers. They cannot inflict a fine ex- 
ceeding one month's pay, nor imprison, nor put to hard labor, 
any non-commissioned officer or soldier for a longer term than one 

month. 

88 All fines imposed by courts martial, whether general, regi- 
mental, or garrison, by way of punishment, are to be paid to the 
United States, and not to any particular corps or company; and 



104 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Courts Martial •. '.Recruiting Service. 

where those fines are approved, it is the duty of the commanding 
officer approving the same, to report the sentence to the Adjutant 
General. All such fines will be noticed on the muster rolls, that 
the stoppages may be made accordingly. 

89.... The proceedings of regimental and garrison courts martial 
remain at the head quarters of the regiment, or post, and are not 
to be deposited in the Adjutant General's office, unless specially 
ordered to be forwarded thither. 

90... .General and other officers in command of separate military 
departments, posts, garrisons, or detachments, have authsrity, under 
the 9 1st and 92d Articles of War, to order courts of inquiry on the 
demand of any officer or soldier, to examine into the nature of any 
transaction, accusation, or imputation, reported to the prejudice of 
such officer or soldier, should the matter to be inquired into, in the 
opinion of the commanding officer, be of sufficient importance to 
justify it. Courts of inquiry, however, are expressly prohibited un- 
less demanded by the individual accused, or directed by the Presi- 
dent of the United States. 

9 1 .... Transactions may become the subject of investigation by 
courts of inquiry after a lapse of any number of years, on the ap- 
plication of the party accused, or by order of the President of the 
United States; the limitation mentioned in the 88th Article of Wa r 
being applicable only to general courts martial. 

92.... It is a well established fact that the infrequency of courts 
martial is in proportion to the intelligence and well regulated zeal 
of the officers of the army. It is as much a duty to prevent as to 
punish crime. An officer may do much to this effect, by timely in- 
terference. A judicious inte: course with his men, gives him that 
knowledge of their characters, which enables him to admonish, with 
equal benefit to them and advantage to the service. They should 
feel an assurance, that while their rights are guarded, their offences 
will be punished. 

ARTICLE XXXVI. 

RECRUITING SERVICE. 

l....The recruiting service will be regulated at general head 
quarters. 



FOR THE ARMY. 105 



Recruiting Service. 



2.... There will be selected such number of field officers to con- 
duct the general recruiting of the army, as the interest of the ser- 
vice may require; to whom all officers assigned to the general re- 
cruiting duty, will report for orders and instructions, according to 
the district to which they respectively may be attached. 

3.... Selections tor the recruiting service will be made without 
reference to the roster. The requisite number of recruiting officers 
will be determined at general head quarters, and announced in gene- 
ral orders. The Captains and subalterns, for recruiting rendezvous, 
will be selected by the Colonels of regiments, unless otherwise di- 
rected. Officers on the general recruiting service are not to be 
ordered on any other duty, except by orders from general head 
quarters. 

Duties of Superintendents. 

4.... As soon as the recruiting stations are designated, the super- 
intendents will notify the assistant commissaries of subsistence, at 
the military posts nearest to their recruiting stations, to supply ra- 
tions, and will make requisitions for funds on the Adjutant General, 
and for clothing, camp equipage, arms, and accoutrements, on the 
several departments to which these supplies appertain; forwarding 
their requisitions through the Adjutant General. They will settle 
with said departments for the items of expenditure under their dif- 
ferent heads, rendering the proper accounts and vouchers for the 
same, quarterly. 

5 Funds will be transmitted direct to each recruiting officer, 

on the monthly estimates of the superintendents. After the first 
remittance, estimates based on the monthly expenditures at each 
recruiting station, are to be transmitted by the several recruiting 
officers, at the close of the month, to their respective superinten- 
dents. 

6.... Each superintendent will transmit to the Adjutant General, 
monthly returns of recruits, and of the recruiting parties under his 
superintendence, with a record of the names, the dates, and places 
of all discharges, deaths, or desertions, during the month: to be 
accompanied with the enlistment of each recruit enlisted within the 



106 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Recruiting Service. 

month. He will transmit, in like manner, a muster roll of all en- 
listed men belonging to each recruiting station, including the names 
of all who may have joined since the last muster, or have ditd or 
deserted, been transferred or discharged, during the period embraced 
in the muster roll. 

7. .. .Whenever, in his opinion, the good of the service requires 
that the recruits, or any part of them, should be sent to regiments, 
the superintendent will report to the Adjutant General for instruc- 
tions in reference thereto. And whenever recruits are to be sent 
from a depot or rendezvous, to a regiment or post, a separate muster 
and descriptive roll, and a separate account of clothing of each 
detachment, will be placed in the hands of the officer ordered to 
conduct such detachment. A duplicate of the muster and descrip- 
tive roll, will, at the same time, be forwarded to the Adjutant 
General by the superintendent, who will report the name of the 
officer assigned to the command, and the day of the departure of 
the detachment from the depot or rendezvous. 

8 ....A recruiting party will consist, as a general rule, of one 
commissioned officer, one non-commissioned officer, and two privates. 
The recruiting parties will be selected at the principal depots, and 
care will be taken that none but suitable non-commissioned officers 
and privates are sent upon this duty. 

9.. . .Music is not considered essential, but if musicians can be 
enlisted, the usual instruments will be supplied on requisitions pro- 
perly made, and the musicians may be retained at the rendezvous. 

10.... Tours of inspection by superintendents will be made only 
on instructions from general head quarters; nor will officers on the 
recruiting service be sent from place to place without orders from 
the same source. No expenses of transportation of officers will be 
admitted that do not arise from orders emanating from general head 
quarters. 

Duties of Recruiting Officers. 

11.... Success in obtaining recruits depends much on the activity 
and personal attention of recruiting officers. They will be careful 
not to allow any man to be deceived or inveigled into the service 



FOR THE ARMY. 107 



Recruiting Service. 



by the tricks or false representations of the soldiers or non-commis- 
sioned officers of their parties. None but men of good character, 
sound in body and mind, of good appearance and well formed, and 
fit, in every particular, to perform the duties of a soldier, will be 
received. The nature of the service, the length of the term, the 
pay, clothing, rations, and other allowances to which a soldier is 
entitled by law, must be fully set forth and explained to every man 
who offers to enlist; and it will be proper, at the same time, to 
caution him to consider well before he enters into the contract with 
the Government, as no man is wanted who does not come volun- 
tarily to the standard of his country. It will be equally proper to 
inquire whether the men who offer are married or single, as those 
with 'families arc not, in time of peace, to be enlisted without spe- 
cial authority from general head quarters, obtained through the su- 
perintendent. This rule is not to apply to non-commissioned 
officers and soldiers who may re-enlist. If very young men pre- 
sent themselves, they are to be treated with great candor: the 
names and residences of their parents or guardians, if they have 
any, must be ascertained, and their friends must be informed of 
their wishes to enlist, that they may make their objections or give 
their consent. 

12.... After a man has been thus treated, and is willing to enlist, 
he may be allowed twenty-four hours to consider on the subject; 
the oath is, therefore, not to be administered to him until after that 
time, or even after two days, if the officer thinks he is not yet 
settled in his mind as to becoming a soldier: and if the recruit 
should see proper to cancel his engagement previously to taking 
the oath, he shall be at liberty to do so. 

13.... Recruiting officers must be very particular in ascertaining 
the true age of a recruit. They are not always to take the word 
of a recruit, but are to rely on their own judgment for the ascer- 
tainment of his probable, if not actual age. 

14 It is in the power of any recruiting officer to make his 

party respectable and respected. He must, in his own person, set 
an example of that courteous and moral deportment which ought 
ever to characterize military men. A paternal care must be con- 



108 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Recrititinp- Service. 



stantly extended to the recruits. Should they be sick, they will 
claim his particular attention, to see that they are not neglected, 
and that every essential comfort is procured for them. If the re- 
cruits are disposed to be troublesome to the neighborhood, the 
officer must make it his duty to suppress every irregularity, and 
correct the disorderly, using first mild admonitions, which, if season- 
ably resorted to, will generally produce the desired effect. No in- 
instance of impropriety should go unnoticed. 

15.... The cultivation of a good understanding with the people of 
the town, village, or neighborhood, on the part of the recruiting 
officers, may tend much to advance the interests of the service, 
and often be the means of procuring good men: when a distant 
deportment, a frigid, unbecoming hauteur, will not only repe*l the 
thinking and worthy part of the community, but frequently defeat 
the very object for which an officer may have established his party 
in the place. 

16.... The magistrate employed to swear in the recruits may, if 
treated with due respect and confidence, be often instrumental in 
discovering the true character of those who may propose to enlist. 
It would, then, be well to ask his opinion and advice as to the 
propriety of enlisting any individual brought before him to be 
sworn in If it be generally known around the country that the 
enlistment l on fair terms, that the pay is sufficient to induce 
respectable young men to enter the service, and that none others 
will be received, the character of the army will be held in due esti- 
mation, and the objections to join it will, in a great measure, be 
removed. 

17. ...The personal appearance of the men is highly important. 
The recruiting officer will give his particular attention to this subject. 
He will see that the men under his command are neat in their 
appearance, and that they are made to wear their military dress in 
a becoming manner. 

18.... These instructions are thus particular, that the officers inte- 
rested may know that it is not desirable to fill the ranks, unless it 
can be done fairly and honorably, and with men of suitable character. 

19.... All free white male persons, above the age of 18, and 



FOR THE ARMY. 109 



Recruiting Service. 



under 35 years, being at least 5 feet 6 inches high, who are " effec- 
tive, able-bodied citizens of the United States," native or naturalized, 
sober, free from disease, and who speak and understand the English 
language, may be enlisted. This regulation, so far as it respects 
the height and age of the recruit, shall not extend to musicians, or 
to those soldiers who may rc-enlist into the service. 

20.... No person under the age of 21 years is to be enlisted 
without the written consent of his parent, guardian, or master, 
if he have any. 

21.... Before a minor, as such, can be enlisted, the written consent 
of his parent, guardian, or master, must be first obtained, and ap- 
pended to the enlistment. If the minor assert that he has no parent, 
guardian, or master, the recruiting officer, in order to prevent impo- 
sition on the public, as well as to guard himself against the penalty 
of the law, shall procure the best authentication of the fact, which 
he will in like manner append to the enlistment. 

2 2.... Enlistments must, in all cases, be taken in duplicate, one 
of which the recruiting officer will transmit to the superintendent 
for the Adjutant General; the other he will forward direct to the 
Second Auditor of the Treasury, as a voucher in the settlement of 
his accounts. The enlistments will be filled up in a fair and legible 
hand, and the real name of the recruit be ascertained and correctly 
spelled. Each enlistment will be endorsed as follows: 
No.—. 

A B 

enlisted at 



January — , 183-, 
By Lt. C D , 

— Regiment of . 

The number to correspond with the names alphabetically arranged. 

23 Whenever a soldier re-enters the service, the officer who 

enlists him will endorse on the enlistment, next below his own sig- 
nature, " second (or third) enlistment," as the case may be, together 
with the name of the regiment and the letter of the company in 
which the soldier last served. 



110 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Recruiting Serxnce. 

24.... The tilling up of, and endorsement on the enlistment, will 
be in the hand writing of the recruiting officer, or done under his 
immediate inspection; as evidence of which, he will sign his name 
on the margin. 

25.... As there is no bounty allowed to recruits, they are to be 
mustered and paid with the recruiting parties, and those at the 
depots are to be regularly mustered and paid in the same manner 
as other soldiers. 

26.... After a man has enlisted, the recruiting officers will have 
his hair cut according to the military fashion, and cause him to be 
well washed from head to foot; after which he will have him dress- 
ed in the clothing furnished by Government, properly fitted to his 
person, and cause his citizen's dress to be disposed of. No soldier 
is to be allowed to keep in his possession any articles of clothing 
other than such as he receives from Government, and belong to his 
military character. 

27.,.. It is the duty of the recruiting officer to see that the 
quarters for the men are comfortable, and supplied with such con- 
veniences and bedding as are allowed in barracks; that the provisions 
are good, and regularly supplied; that they are properly cooked and 
economized; and that there be regularity in the messes, and due 
decorum preserved at all times. 

28. . . .In order to make a fund for obtaining the necessary 
equipage for the table of his men, the recruiting officer will be 
permitted to cause to be sold or commuted for money, the rations 
due the party, or not consumed; believing, that by proper manage- 
ment and economy, the rations allowed will more than suffice; 
out of which fund, the table furniture, vegetables, and other com- 
forts are to be procured. For the accountability of this fund, the 
principles laid down under the head of Council of .idministration, 
will apply. 

29.... The instruction of the recruits will commence from the 

moment of enlistment, as well to provide against the vice of idleness 

> 
as to qualify them to join some regiment. In general, and under 

favorable circumstances, two months ought to be sufficient to 

make them acquainted with the first duties of police and the schools 

of the soldier and company in infantry tactics. 



FOR THE ARMY. 1 1 1 



Recruiting Service. 



30.... Every officer commanding a recruiting party where there is 
no quarter master, will procure the necessary transportations, forage, 
fuel, straw, and stationary, taking the requisite vouchers; but no 
non-commissioned officer or soldier is to be allowed to become a 
contractor for the supplying of any article which may be required 
of the quarter master's or subsistence departments. 

31.... The necessary blank enlistments, muster rolls, printed 
returns, and forms, will be furnished by the Adjutant Genera!, to all 
officers employed on the recruiting service, on their requisitions: 
they are, therefore, prohibited from using any other forms or blanks 
whatever. 

32.... Recruiting officers in charge of rendezvous, will transmit 
to the proper officers, the following rolls, returns, and documents. 

To the Superintendent. 

33 1 monthly return of recruits and of the recruiting party, 

accompanied with the enlistment of every recruit enlisted within 
the month. 

Z^.... Muster rolls of the permanent recruiting party, and of the 
recruits; one for the Adjutant General, and two for pay, which 
latter may be sent direct to the nearest Paymaster, when authorized 
by the superintendent. 

35 Muster and descriptive rolls of every detachment of 

recruits ordered to the principle depot. If the recruits be ordered 
to proceed from the rendezvous direct to join any regiment or post, 
hese rolls will be made in duplicate, one of which will be delivered 
to the officer placed in charge of the detachment, and the other 
sent to the superintendent. 

36 in account of clothing; issued to each man belonging to 

the detachment of recruits ordered to principal depots, or to regi- 
ments direct. 

To the Quarter Master General. 

37 1 quarterly return of clothing, of camp equipage, and of 

all public property in his charge; a copy of each to te sent to 
the superintendent. 



112 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Recruiting Service. 

To the Ordnance Department. 

38.... A quarterly return of arms, accoutrements, ammunition, 
and of all ordnance stores. 

To the Second Auditor of the Treasury. 

39.... Recruiting accounts, and accounts current, monthly, accom- 
panied with one set of enlistments. 

40.... Abstract of contingent expenses for recruiting, monthly, 
to be forwarded within the three first days of the month; copies of 
which abstracts will be transmitted to the superintendent. 

41.... Whenever an officer is relieved or withdrawn from the 
recruiting service, he will pay over the balance of any unexpended 
recruiting funds in his possession, to the officer appointed to suc- 
ceed him, or to the Paymaster, if no officer be so designated; and if 
there be no Paymaster or other proper officer convenient to receive 
such balance, the amount will be deposited to the credit of the 
Treasurer of the United States, in some bank in which the public 
moneys are kept. In either case, the officer will forward to the 
Second Auditor, the evidence of the disposition he may make of the 
funds, and report the fact to the Adjutant General and to the super- 
intendent, or to his Colonel, if on regimental recruiting service. 

Regimental Recruiting Service. 

42... Every Colonel or commandant of a regiment will endeavor 
to keep his regiment up to its establishment; and for that purpose, 
will obtain the necessary funds in the manner prescribed for the 
superintendents of the general recruiting service, by requsitions on 
the Adjutant General, at Washington. 

43.... At each station occupied by his regiment, or any part of 
it, the Colonel will designate an officer to attend to the recruiting 
for his regiment, which designation will not relieve such officer 
from his ordinary duties. The officers thus designated, will be fur- 
nished by the Colonel with the necessary funds, on estimates and 
requisitions made on him, (in the manner prescribed for the officers 
on the general recruiting service,) and they will, with the approba- 



FOR THE ARMY. H3 



Recruiting Service. 



tion of the commanding officer of the station, enlist all suitable men, 
and make all the disbursements incidental to such enlistments, ren- 
dering their accounts monthly for settlement, in the manner pre- 
scribed for officers on the general recruiting service. The Colonel 
will transmit to the Adjutant General, a monthly return of recruits, 
with an enlistment of each man enlisted within the month. 

Inspection of Recruits. 

44.... The superintendent or commanding officer will cause a mi- 
nute and critical inspection to be made of every recruit received 
at a depot, three days after his arrival; and should any recruit be 
found unfit for service, or to have been enlisted contrary to law or 
regulations, he shall assemble a Board of Inspectors, to consist 
of the three senior officers present for duty, and the senior officer of 
the medical staff, to examine into the case. If the board decide 
to reject the recruit, and recommend his discharge, the reasons there- 
for will be stated in detail, in a special report to the Adjutant 
General, which report will be accompanied with the Surgeon's certi- 
ficate of disability. 

45.... Every detachment ordered from a principal depot to any 
regiment or post, shall, immediately preceding its departure, be cri- 
tically inspected by the superintendent or commanding officer and 
Surgeon. Should it be necessary to assemble the board cf inspec- 
tors, and any recruit be then rejected, the report and Surgeon's 
certificate in the case, will be forwarded to the Adjutant General, 
as above precscribed. 

46 Every detaclunent of recruits received at a military post or 

station, shall be carefully inspected by the commanding officer and 
Surgeon, on the fourth day after its arrival; and if, on such inspec- 
tion, any recruit, in. their opinion, be unsound or otherwise defec- 
tive in such degree as to disqualify him for the duties of a soldier, 
then a board of inspectors will be assembled to pass upon the re- 
cruit; and should he he rejected by the boaxd, the required report 
in the case, with the Surgeon's certificate, will be transmitted to 
the Adjutant General, by the commanding officer of the post, for 
the decision of the General in chief. 
8 



114 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Recruiting- Service. 



47 Whenever a recruit is rejected, the board will report whe- 
ther, in its opinion, the disability, or other cause of rejection, ex- 
isted or originated before or after the date of his enlistment; and 
if the former, whether with due care and proper examination, such 
disability might not, in its opinion, have been discovered by the 
recruiting officer and examining Surgeon, at the time the recruit 
enlisted. 

48.... As the decision of boards of inspectors may often involve 
the recruiting officers in pecuniary liabilities, by being required to 
refund to the United States the amount of any loss occasioned by 
the discharge of a rejected recruit, the board will, in all cases, 
make the proper discriminations, and always state whether the want 
of due examination of the recruit at the time of enlistment, be at- 
tributable to the recruiting officer or examining Surgeon, or to both; 
and as far as may be practicable, to state the amount with which 
cither ought, in its opinion, to be chargeable. 

49.... Boards of Inspectors for the examination of recruits, will 
be composed of the three senior officers present on duty in the line, 
and senior medical officer of the army present; and when organized 
at the principal depot, the superintendent, or, in his absence, the 
commanding officer, will preside: if at a military pest, the com- 
manding officer will preside at the board of inspection. 

50.... When a recruit is rejected and discharged in consequence 
of the non-observance of the recruiting regulations by the recruiting 
officer and examining Surgeon, they shall be charged with the 
amount of the bounty and clothing which the recruit, so rejected, 
may have received from the public, to be deducted out of the pay 
and emoluments of such officers. 

Recruits sent to Regiments. 

51.... An officer intrusted with the command of recruits ordered 
to regiments, will, on arriving at the place of destination, complete 
the muster and descriptive roll furnished him at the time .of 
setting out, by inscribing in the columns of remarks the time and 
place of any death, desertion, apprehension, or other casualty that 
may have occurred en the route, and present the same, properly 



FOR THE ARMY. H5 



Recruiting Service. 



signed, to the commanding officer of the regiment or post, together 
with the account of clothing issued to each recruit. He will 
furnish the Adjutant General and the superintendent each, with a 
descriptive roll of such men as may have deserted, died, or been 
left on the route from any cause whatever. He will forward, in 
like manner, a special report of the execution of his orders, and 
will notice all circumstances worthy of remark which may have 
occuned on the march; he will also report the condition and strength 
of the detachment when turned over to the commanding officer, as 
well as the day of his arrival at the post. 

52.... It is the duty of the recruiting officer to be always present 
at the examination of the recruits, and to sec that it he conducted 
in strict conformity with the regulations. 

53.... Surgeons will attend at the rendezvous at least twice a 
day, at such hours as the recruiting officer shall establish. 

Depots for Collecting and Instructing Recruits. 

54.... For the purpose of collecting and instructing the recruits 
enlisted at the several reudezvous, there will be establishel depots 
at convenient points. 

55.... To each depot there will be assigned a suitable number of 
officers to command and instruct the recruits. The recruits, as 
they arrive, are to be thoroughly inspected and examined as to 
their fitness for the service, by a board of inspectors. 

56.. ..It will be determined at general head quarters what number 
of recruits may be required for each arm, and on instructions from 
the Adjutant General the number will be assigned accordingly. 

57. . . .The recruits are to be dressed in uniform like the other 
troops, according to their respective arms, and are to be mustered 
and paid in like manner. They are to be regularly drilled in the 
infantry tactics, through the school of the soldier to that of the bat- 
talion, and in the exercises of field and garrison pieces. Duty is 
to be done according to the rules of service as set forth in the 
regulations. 

58.... In order to furnish the requisite number of musicians for 
the several regiments, such of the recruits as are found to possess 



116 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Recruiting Service. 

a natural talent for music, may, besides the drill, be instructed on 
the fife, bugle, drum, or other military musical instrument. 

59.... As it is desirable to give encouragement to the recruits, 
and hold out inducements to good conduct, the commanding officer 
of the depot may promote such of them to be lance-corporals and 
lance-sergeants, as exhibit superior military tact and the requisite 
qualifications, not exceeding the proper proportion to the number of 
recruits at the depot. These appointments will be announced in 
orders in the usual way, and will be continued in force until they join 
their regiments, unless sooner revoked. No allowance of pay or 
emoluments is to be assigned to these appointments; they are only 
to be considered as recommendations to the captains of Companies 
and Colonels of regiments, for the places in which they may have 
acted; they are nevertheless to be treated with all the respect, and 
to have all the authority which may belong to the stations of Ser- 
geant and Corporal. 

61.... The rules and Articles of War are to be read to the re- 
cruits every week, after the inspection, particularly so much thereof 
as relates to the duties of non-commissioned officers and soldiers » 
The commanding officer is to sec that each recruit be furnished with 
a " soldier $ booh," and that his accounts are regularly entered, and 
that the book is properly filled, according to the directions contained 
in it. The sutler of the post is to supply these books and receive 
payment for the same from the recruits at their first payment. 

62. . ..Whenever recruits are permitted to go abroad, they are to 
be dressed in their full uniform, and to appear in a neat, soldierly 
manner; every reasonable indulgence ought to be extended towards 
them; and they ought at all times to be treated with kindness and 
propriety. 

63.... Recruits are not to be put t3 any labor or work which 
would interfere with their instruction, nor are they to be employed 
otherwise than as soldiers, in the regular duties of garrison or camp. 

Recruits in Depot at Military Posts. 

64.... When recruits are received at a military station, the com- 
manding officer will place them under the charge of a commissioned 



FOR THE ARMY. H7 



Organization of Jhilitary Departments and Commands. 

officer, whose duty it will be to see that they are comfortably 
quartered, kindly treated, and well taken care of; and that they are 
properly drilled and instructed in their duties as soldiers. They are 
not to be put on any fatigue duty or working parties, except for 
the ordinary police, and then only by regular detail, in common 
with the other men of the garrison. 

65 When recruits are ordered from a post, or are attached to 

companies, the commanding officer of the post will be responsible 
that the regular descriptive rolls and account of clothing and pay 
of each recruit, are furnished to the Captain or other officer, who is 
to receive the recruits. The original muster and descriptive roll of 
«ach detachment, with remarks, showing the final disposition of each 
recruit, and the regiment and letter of the company to which at- 
tached, will be signed by the commanding officer, and forwarded to 
the Adjutant General. 

ARTICLE XXXVII. 

ORGANIZATION OF MILITART DEPARTMENTS AND COMMANDS. 

l....With a view to the general defence of the Union, and a 
convenient distribution of the troops for that purpose, the country 
will be divided into military departments, according to the circum- 
stances of the several frontiers. The command of a department 
will embrace all the regular forces stationed within it, as well as 
such militia as may be called into the service of the General Go- 
vernment, to aid in its defence. 

2 The distribution of the troops and the assignment of the 

officers to commands, will be determined at general head quarters. 
These arrangements are not to be altered by commanders of depart- 
ments, without special authority, except on some urgent necessity, 
when the fact will be promptly communicated to general head quar- 
ters, with the reasons which induced the alteration. 

3.... In time of peace, divisions, brigades, or geographical com- 
mands, are not to be organized without instructions from general 
head quarters. 

4.... When a commander of a department is ordered to make a 



118 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Militia. 

tour of inspection, he will be governed by the instructions under 
the head of Inspector's Department. 

5.... No expenses, beyond the ordinary demands for the service, 
will be created by commanders of departments or posts. When, in 
their opinion, any improvements can be made, whether in the forti- 
fications, quarters, or communications, officers in command will 
respectively submit their views, with estimates, in detail, of the cost 
of the proposed improvements, to the Generals of departments, who 
will communicate the same, with their remarks, to the General in 
chief, for the consideration and determination of the Secretary of 
War. 

ARTICLE XXXVIII. 



1. .. .Whenever detachments of militia are called into the service 
of the United States, by any officer authorized to make such call, 
the number of officers, non-commissioned officers, and privates, will 
be stated in the requisition, and the proportions between them will 
be the same as is prescribed by the act of Congress. Requisitions 
will never be made for companies, regiments, or brigades. 

2.... Such detachments as are called or received into the service 
of the United States, will be mustered before they shall be considered 
in service, by an Inspector General, or some other officer of the regu- 
lar army, to be designated by the officer requiring such militia aid. 

3.... It shall be the duty of the officer designated to muster and 
inspect militia detachments, to organize them into companies, ba- 
ialions, and regiments, and to forward muster rolls of each com- 
pany, and of the field and staff of each organized regiment, direct 
to the Adjutant General of the army, Washington; and he will also 
immediately forward a consolidated return, by regiments and corps, 
of the force so received into service, for the information of the War 
Pepartment. 

4 . . . Officers charged with the duty of mustering militia, properly 
ordered into the service of the United States, preparatory to pay- 
ment, will take care that the muster rolls contain all the information 



FOR THE ARMY. H9 



Militia. . . . The Commander of the Army. 



that may in any way affect their pay: the distance from the places 
of residence to the place of rendezvous or organization, and the 
date of arrival, must be stated in each case; the date and place 
of discharge, and the distance thence to the place of residence; 
all stoppages for articles furnished by the Government must be 
noted on the rolls, and in cases of absence at the time 'of discharge 
of the company, the cause of absence must be stated. When the 
necessary information cannot be obtained, the mustering officer will 
state the cause, otherwise he will be held accountable for the defect. 

5.... No general staff officers will be mustered or received into 
^service, except such general officers, with their aides-de-camp, as 
may be required to complete the organization of brigades or divi- 
sions, where the strength of the detachments renders such organ- 
ization necessary. 

6.... All supernumerary officers will be rejected, and the organi- 
zation of each detachment will correspond with the acts of Congress 
regulating the militia. 

7.. ..Payments will, in all cases, be made by the Paymasters of 
the regular army, and only upon rolls which shall have previously 
been submitted to the Paymaster General, and found by him to be 
in conformity with law, and the regulations of the department. 

ARTICLE XXXIX. 

THE COMMAXUER OF THE ARMY. 

1 The military establishment is placed under the orders of 

the Major General commanding in chief, in all that regards its dis- 
cipline and military control. Its fiscal arrangements properly belong 
to the administrative departments of the staff and to the Treasury 
Department, under the direction of the Secretary of War. While 
the General-in chief will not interfere with the concerns of the 
Treasury, he will see that the estimates for the military service are 
based upon proper data, and made for the objects contemplated by 
law, and necessary to the due support and useful employment of 
the army. The General will watch over the economy of the ser- 
vice, in all that relates to expenditure of money, supply of anus, 



120 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Commander of the Ann y. . ..The Staff of the Ann;!. 



ordnance, and ordnance stores, clothing, equipments, camp equipage 
medical and hospital stores, barracks, quarters, transportations, forti- 
fications, military academy, pay, and subsistence; in short, every 
thing which enters into the expenses of the military establishment, 
whether personal or materiel. In carrying into effect these impor- 
tant duties, he will call to his council and assistance the staff', and 
those officers proper, in his opinion, to be employed in verifying 
and inspecting all the objects which may require attention. The 
rules and regulations established for the government of the army, 
and the laws relating to the military establishment, are the guides 
for the commanding general, in the performance of his duties. 

ARTICLE XL. 

THE STAFF OF THE 1HXT. 

I -...The general staff comprises all the officers concerned in 
regulating the details of the service and furnishing the army with the 
means necessary for its subsistence, comfort, mobility, and action. 
These officers act in the name of the commanders under whom 
they are placed, or perform their functions according to the rules 
and regulations established for the government of their respective 
departments. 

2.... The departments of the staff are : 

The Adjutant General's Department; 

The Inspector's General Department; 

The Quarter Master's Department; 

The Engineer Department; 

The Topographical Department; 

The Ordnance Department; 

The Subsistence Department; 

The Pay Department; 

The Medical Department; 

The Purchasing Department. 



FOR THE ARMY. ]21 



Adjutant GeneraVa Department. 



ARTICLE XLI. 

ADJUTANT GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT. 

l....The Adjutant General is the channel through which are 
issued all orders emanating from the head quarters of the army, 
and all regulations necessary to be communicated to the troops. 
He is charged with the details of the service— with the record 
of all military appointments, promotions, resignations, deaths, and 
other casualties, as well as the inventories of the effects of de- 
ceased officers and soldiers— with the registry, making out, and 
distribution of all commissions of the army and of the militia of 
th- District of Columbia— with the safe keeping of the monthly 
returns of regiments and posts, and muster rolls of companies; 
the annual returns of the militia; the proceedings of general courts 
martial; and the records of the War Department, which relate to 
the personnel of the army— with the duties connected with the 
recruiting service, and the enrolment of all enlisted soldiers, show- 
ing the description, date of enlistment, discharge, desertion, death, 
and every thing connected with their military history— with the 
examination of all applications for pensions, previously to their 
being sent to the Pension Office; and finally, with the making out 
of the annual returns of the army, and of the militia of the several 
States and Territories, and the publication of the annual Army 
Re gister. 

Orders. 

2 Orders are either general or special. General orders, U-u^l 

from the head quarters of the army, are styled— General Orders— 
from other head quarters, they are simply styled— Orders. They 
are the orders of the day, and are published as often as circum- 
stances may render it necessary. They announce the orderly hours 
at head quarters; the time and places of the distribution of supplies; 
the time and order of march; the hours of the different beats and 
signals, of guard mounting, and the assembling of detainments; 
the regulations of police; the strength and composition of guards, 



122 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Adjutant General's Department. 



and the periods of their relief; the number and grades of Orderlies; 
the acts of Congress, and the regulations of the War Department, 
which have reference to the troops, and with which they ought to be 
made acquainted; the appointing of general courts martial, courts 
of inquiry, boards of officers, and their sentences and opinions; 
the commendations, or animadversions which the conduct of the 
troops may elicit, as well as exhortations suitable to particular oc- 
casions; and in general, every occurrence proper to be communi- 
cated to the troops or others interested. 

3.... Special orders, are such orders as do not relate to the ser- 
vice in general. They have reference to particular objects and in- 
dividuals only. They need not, therefore, be published to the whole 
army, or to the whole command of the officer who issues them. 
Besides the particular individual to whom such orders may be sent 
direct, they are, however, to be communicated, as a matter of course, 
to Colonels, or other commanders whom they interest. 

4.. ..Orders are to be numbered — general orders, in one series — 
special orders, in another. Each series for an army, army-corps, 
division, or brigade, in the field, will commence and terminate with 
a campaign. In departments, regiments, companies, and garrisons, 
they will commence and terminate with the year. 

5.... Should it happen that general orders are not received in 
regular succession, commanding officers will report the fact to the 
proper head quarters, in order that the deficient numbers may be 
supplied. 

6....TAe parole, and countersign, at watchword, arc issued from 
the head quarters of the highest in command. They are in the na- 
ture of orders, but arc neither general nor special. 

7. . . . The parole, is imparted to such officers only, as have a 
right to visit the guards, and to make the grand rounds; and to 
the officers commanding guards, by which they are enabled, at night, 
to recognise the grand rounds. No person under the rank of com- 
missioned officer, is entitled to receive it. 

8....2/ie countersign, or watchword, is given to such persons as 
are entitled to pass and repass during the night, and to the officers, 
non-commissioned officers, and sentinels of the guards. The object 



FOR THE ARMY. 



123 



Adjutant General' 's Department. 



of this word is to prevent improper persons, or those not author- 
ized to pass the chain of sentinels, from either entering or going 
out of camp or garrison, and to guard against surprise. 

9 The head of the order will indicate the source from which 

it emanates, as well as the place and date, and the foot of the order 
will cite the name of the commander who gives the order, as for 

example: 

Head Quarters of the Army, 
Adjutant General's Office, 

Washington, January 1st, U'35. 

GENERAL ORDERS, > 

No. 1. 5 

By command of Maj. Gen. J. B. 

R. J. Adj. Gen. 

For a particular army in the field, thus: 

Head Quarters, Northern Army. 
Plattsburg, l\th, Sept. 1814. 



ORDERS 

No 



Rs, I 
•25. 5 



For a division: 



ORDEUS, > 

No. 6. J 



For a brigade: 



ORDERS, ( 
No. - 5 



For a regiment: 



ORDERS, ) 

No. 2. 5 



By order of Brig. Gen. A. M. 

J. D. Asst. Adj. Gen. 

Head Quarters, \st Division, Southern Army. 
New Orleans, 23<2 December, 1814 

By order of Maj. Gen. A. J. 

R. B. Adj. Gen. 

Head Quarters. 1st Brigade, 4tk Dioision. 
Chippewa, oth July, 1814. 

By order of Brig. Gen. W. S. 

R. J. Asst. Adj. Gen. 

Head Quarters, 1st Regiment of Artillery, 
Fort Washington, 6th January, 1831. 



By order of Col. J- H. 

J. R. Adj. 1st Reg't Artillery. 



124 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Adjutant Gent/ral's Department. 



10 The same form will be observed in the orders of a depart- 
ment, or a detachment or post consisting of more than one 
company. A company order will omit the words "head quarters," 
and in lieu of them will give the letter of the company and regi- 
ment to which it belongs. 

11.... It is important that the place at which an order is issued 
should be very particularly mentioned, and if beyond the frontiers, 
the position should be identified with some remarkable object, as, 
camp at the Blue Mound, near Ouisconeia River, Michigan Terri- 
tory. 

12.... The orderly hour having been fixed at each head quarters, 
the staff officers will either attend in person, or send their assistants 
to obtain the orders of the day: The chief of the staff for an army- 
corps, to general head quarters; the chief of the staff of a division, 
to army-corps head quarters; the chief of the staff of a brigade, to 
division head quarters; the Adjutant of a regiment, to brigade head 
quarters; the First Sergeants of companies, to regimental head quar- 
ters. 

13.... Engineer, ordnance, and other distinct corps, or staff 
departments, will apply, in like manner, for orders, at the head 
quarters of the command to which they are attached. The military 
Bureaux of the War Department will be furnished with such orders 
as refer to duties appertaining to them, and the several chiefs will 
transmit copies of them to the officers serving under them. 

14.... During marches and active operations, and when the regu- 
lar orderly hours cannot be observed, ali orders will be either sent 
directly to the troops; or the respective commanders of regiments 
or corps will be notified when to send to head quarters for them. 
Under the same circumstances, orders will be read to the troops 
during a halt, without waiting for the regular parades. 

15.. ..Care must be taken that all orders are correctly transcribed, 
otherwise errors may be introduced into them that might not only 
pervert their meaning, but mislead those for whose guidance they 
are designed. Commanding officers will see that orders are cor- 
rectly read to the troops under their command. 



FOR THE ARMY. 125 



Adjutant General's Department. 



Military Correspondence. 

16.... From the great extent of country occupied by the troops, 
and their consequent subdivisions into small commands, it frequently 
may become necessary that orders, circulars, and other official com- 
munications should go directly from general head quarters to the 
commanders of regiments, detachments, and posts, and to individuals, 
without observing the regular channels of communication. In al' 
such cases of departure from the established rule, copies of the 
orders or communications, or notices of their import, will be trans- 
mitted to the commanding officers through whom, in the regular 
course the communication would have to pass, with information of 
the fact of their having been sent direct. 

17. ...In the ascending line of correspondence, all written com- 
munications and applications will be addressed to the chief of the 
staff of the next commander, as the Adjutant at regimental head 
quarters; the Assistant Adjutant General, at brigade or department 
head quarters; the Adjutant General, at general head quarters. The 
same rule will be observed in verbal applications, as, for example, 
a lieutenant seeking an indulgence, will first obtain the sanction 
of his Captain, before applying to a higher commander. 

18.. ..All official letters, applications, and reports from Generals, 
and Commanders of regiments or posts, which are designed to be 
laid before the General-in-Chief, or intended for department head 
quarters, or for the chief of any staff department, are to be signed 
by the commanding officers themselves. 

19.. ..Officers, in making written communications and reports, are 
to specify, under their signatures, their rank, and the regiment, 
corps, or staff department to which they belong; and if by order, 
to state by whose order. 

20 In transmitting rolls and returns, a letter is to accompany 

tlit m ; and where more than one roll, or return, are transmitted 
at a time, they will be enumerated in the same letter, and the 
whole placed under one envelope. 

21.... Official letters will generally refer to one subject only — such 
as Infers relating to Indian affairs — letters transmitting certificates 



126 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Adjutant General's Department. 

for pension — certificates of ordinary disability — the report of boards 
of inspection — in cases of rejected recruits. When the subject refers 
to enlisted men, the name, company, and regiment of the soldier, 
are to be clearly specified. 

22.... Correspondence on matters of military details and points of 
duty, with the Executive Departments of the Government, is prohi- 
bited to either officer or soldier. 

23.... All official letters, reports, and documents, forwarded under 
cover to the head quarters of the army, generals of departments, or 
the chief of any branch of the staff, by the commanders of regiments, 
posts, or by any junior officer, will be folded and endorsed in the 
following manner: 



Here endorse the post or station, date of letter, report, or docu- 
ment, and name, rank, and regiment of the writer. 



Here state a concise analysis of the contents. 



If several papers are transmitted, they will be numbered 
.\o. —. 



The officer -who transmits the report or document to higher au- 
thority, -will here add such remarks as he may have to make, and 
sipn his name and rank. 



FOR THE ARMY. 127 



Adjutant GeneraVs Department. 



24-... Each letter will be folded in three equal folds, par- 
allel with the writing, and the inner edge of the sheet will be con- 
sidered the top when folded, on which the endorsements are to 
be made. Letters of transmittal will specify the document enclosed, 
and the name of the writer (if it be a letter or report) and the num- 
ber which may be endorsed thereon. 

25 The receipt of all official letters is to be acknowledged 

by the first opportunity. Commanding officers of regiments and 
corps, as well as of separate posts, are to report, in their monthly 
returns, such orders, official regulations, and circulars, as they may 
have received during the preceding month, specifying their num- 
ber, date, and purport; date of receipt; and from what head quarters 
or department. 

The Foster. 

26.... In all duties, whether with or without arms, the tour of 
duty shall be from the eldest downwards. 
2 7-... Of duties, 

The first is, detachments of the army or out posts. 
The second, General officers' guards, according to rank. 
The third, the ordinary guards, in camp or garrison. 
The fourth, the pickets. 

The fifth, general courts martial, and duty without arms, 
or of fatigue. 
28.... Officers on the inlying picket are to be considered as lia- 
ble to be relieved and employed upon other duties. If an officer's 
tour of duty happen when he is on the inlying picket, he shall 
immediately be relieved and go upon that duty, and his tour upon 
the picket credited to him. 

29.... If an officer's tour of duty for the picket, general court 
martial, or fatigue, happen when he is upon any other duty, he 
shall not make good that picket, court martial, or duty of fatigue, 
when he comes off, but his tour shall pass; and, in like manner, 
if he should be upon a general court martial, or duty of fatigue, 
and his tour of guard or detachment happen, such tour shall be passed 
to his credit. 



]28 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Adjutant General's Department. 

30 ...After the adjournment sine die. of a court martial, the 
members will return to their respective corps and duties, unless 
otherwise ordered. 

31.... The session of a general court martial, the members of 
which have been sworn, shall be reckoned a tour of duty, though 
it shall have been adjourned without trying any person. The same 
rule will apply to courts of inquiry. 

32 ... . When an officer is designated in orders from head quar- 
ters for one duty, he is not to be put on any other duty without 
previous permission from head quarters. 

33.... An officer is not to exchange duties with another, without 
leave of the commanding officer of his regiment or post. 

34.... A regiment is not to receive credit for a tour of duty, 
unless it has marched off the place of parade. 

35. ...In like manner a guard or detachment which has not 
marched off the place of parade or rendezvous, is not to be reck- 
oned as having performed a tour of duty; but if it shall have 
marched off, it shall have credit for a tour, though dismissed im- 
mediately afterwards. 

36.... When a picket is ordered to march to any parade, it is 
not to be accounted as having performed a tour of duty, unless it 
shall have marched off that parade. 

Muster Rolls — Returns — Reports. 

37... The established printed forms and blanks of all returns 
enjoined by the Articles of War and these regulations, will be fur- 
nished annually, by the Adjutant General, to the commanders of 
regiments, corps, companies, and posts, on their requisitions annu- 
ally made, or oftener, if necessary. The receipt of these forms and 
blanks will be immediately acknowledged, and afterwards accounted 
for on the next monthly returns. 

38.... The returns and rolls required by these regulations, will 
be made on the blanks furnished, and according to the forms pre- 
scribed. All manuscript returns, rolls, certificates, and other docu- 
ments, as substitutes, are prohibited; unless it shall be made mani- 
fest that the proper printed forms could not have been received 



FOR THE ARMY. 129 



Adjutant General's Department. 



in time; but in no case will the manuscript returns differ from th« 
printed forms. 

39. ...Muster rolls of every troop, company, or detachment, and 
of the field and staff of every regiment, are to be made out at the 
end of every two months, commencing with January, except for the 
months of May, and June, and November, and December. They 
will contain all the changes which have taken place within the pe- 
riod of muster. 

40.... Semi-annual muster rolls of every troop, company, or de- 
tachment, and of the field and staff of every regiment, will, in like 
manner, be made out on the 30th of June and 31st December, and 
will embrace all alterations and casualties during the half year. 

41... Muster and pay rolls to be made out at the end of every 
two months, commencing with January, will correspond with, and 
embrace all the remarks contained on the ordinary muster rolls. 
The space under the head of pay roll will be left vacant, to be filled 
up by the Paymaster. 

42... The muster a?id pay rolls, of the stewards, ward masters, 
and nurses, will be made out by the Surgeon, or Assistant Surgeon, 
having charge of the hospital. 

43.... All remarks relating to pay and stoppages will be con- 
tinued on all subsequent " muster and pay rolls," until payment 
be made. 

44.... One copy of each muster roll, and semi-annual muster roll, 
will be transmitted by the Inspector General or mustering officer, 
to the Adjutant General, within three days after the muster. In like 
manner, duplicate muster and pay rolls will be furnished to the 
proper Paymasters of the troops. 

45 Musters of the troops, including the hospital attendants, will 

take place on the last days of February, April, June, August, Oc- 
tober and December; and unless an officer is particularly directed to 
muster the troops, the commanding officer of every post and station 
will perform that duty. 

46. . . .Monthly returns. The commanding officers of regiments, 
corps, separate posts, and stations, will make to the Adjutant Gene- 
ral a monthly return of their respective regiments, corps, separate 
9 



130 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Adjutant General's Department. 

posts, and stations. In like manner, commanding officers of com- 
panies will make to the Adjutants of their regiments, monthly re- 
turns of their respective companies. The returns are to be made 
out according to the forms prescribed, and are to be sent to their 
places of destination on the first of every month, except the monthly 
returns of regiments, which may be withheld for the space of 
twenty days, to afford time for the receipt of the returns of de- 
tached companies. 

47... .Where leaves of absence are prolonged, the date from 
which the first leave commenced, and not the date of extension, 
will be given in the column of remarks on monthly returns. The 
same rule will be observed in reporting the period of absence of 
officers on detached service, whenever, during their absence, they 
are assigned to a new duty. 

48.... When a post or station is garrisoned by different regiments 
or parts of different regiments, the troops will be reported on the 
monthly return by regiments; but if the troops be of the same regi- 
ment, they will be reported by companies. 

49.... All officers required to furnish returns or other documents, 
are to see that they are made in a correct, neat, and legible manner. 

50 • • • . Annual returns of casualties, by regiments, to be trans- 
mitted by Colonels of regiments, to the Adjutant General, at the 
close of every year. 

51.... Transcript of the record of deceased soldiers, to be for- 
warded to the Adjutant General, by the Colonels of regiments, quarterly 

52.....Z?ei«r7i of captured property. A return of all property 
captured from an enemy, will be made by the commanding officer 
of the troops by whom such capture was made, to the Adjutant 
General at Washington, in order that it may be disposed of accord- 
ing to the orders of the War Department. 

53.... Reports. Whenever any change takes place in the posi- 
tion or location of troops, the fact will be reported by the imme- 
diate commanders to general and department head quarters, specifying 
the date of departure of the whole, or any part of the troops, or 
the date of arrival of the same, as well as all other circumstances 
connected with the movement. A similar report will be made on 
the next monthly return of the post or station. 



FOR THE ARMY. ]3[ 



Inspector's Department. 



54.... The date of appointment, of detail, and of removal of all 
staff officers, or of officers selected for duty in staff departments, 
which may entitle them to receive additional pay, will be imme- 
diately reported, by the officer making such appointment, detail, 
or removal, to the Adjutant General and to the Paymaster of 
the department or command, to which such officers belong. 

55.... Officers arriving at the head quarters of a department, 
regiment, or military post, are, if inferior in rank to the com- 
manding officer, to report personally; if superior, by writing or 
otherwise, as may be convenient. 

56. ., .Officers arriving at the seat of government are to report 
at the office of the Adjutant General, and record their names in a 
book to be kept for that purpose. 

57.... Military etiquette and propriety require, that all officers 
who call on official occasions, or for the purpose of making visits 
of ceremony to commanding officers of rank superior to their own, 
appear in their respective uniforms, according to established regu- 
lation. This rule is not to be dispensed with, except for good and 
sufficient reasons. 

58.... Officers absent with leave are to report their address 
to the Adjutants of their regiments, and to the Adjutant General 
monthly. 

59.... During a campaign, or other active operations in the field, 
the general or commanding officer will transmit to the Adjutant 
General at Washington, frequent reports of the condition and 
strength of the troops under his command, as well as of every 
occurrence which may be important to be communicated to general 
head quarters. In the event of an engagement with an enemy, the 
commanding officer will make a special report of the killed, 
wounded, and missing, of his command; and of killed, wounded, 
and captured, of the enemy, as far as the same can be ascertained. 

ARTICLE XLII. 

IJfSPSCTOll's DEPABTMEN'T. 

1 .... It is through this department that the Secretary of War, 
and the commanding General, are to be mvde acquainted with the 



132 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Inspector s Department. 

actual state and condition of the army, and more especially the 
character and proficiency of the officers. 

2. ...It is, therefore, made the duty of the Inspectors General, 
critically to inspect, as often as the Secretary of War or the com- 
manding General may direct, every branch connected with the 
military service, including the armories, arsenals, military posts, the 
departments of the staff, the department of the Commissary General 
of Purchases, the Military Academy at West Point, and the troops 
in general. At the end of every tour, or by the 15th of November 
in each year, they will transmit to the commanding General, to 
be laid before the Secretary of War, reports of all that may have 
passed under their observation during their inspections. These re- 
ports will embrace the information required under the following 
heads, viz.: 

Officers in command of Brigades, Regiments, Corps, or 
Military Posts. 

3.... What officers have been in command since last inspec- 
tion. Whether the officers in command appear to discharge their 
duties with zeal and ability. What degree of attention has been 
paid by them to the instruction and training of the officers, cadets, 
or men, placed under their command, in field exercises, and such 
other duties as are required by regulations. To ascertain whether 
the troops have been properly instructed in the exercises and evolu- 
tions of the field, the Inspectors will cause them to be exercised and 
manoeuvred as prescribed by regulations; and all officers in com- 
mand of troops, though superior in rank to the Inspector General 
present, will direct in person the evolutions. This is not, however, 
to preclude junior officers from manoeuvring the troops, if required 
by the Inspector. 

Officers of the Army in general. 

4.... Whether the officers in general appear to understand their 
duties, and are intelligent and zealous in the performance of them. 
Whether the company and staff officers are sober, active, and afford 
their superior officers that support which they are entitled to require 



FOR THE ARMY. 133 



Inspector s Department. 



from them. Whether that unanimity and respect for each other, 
which are essential to good order and discipline, prevail among them. 
Whether any of the officers appear, from infirmity, or any other 
cause, to be unfit for the service, or have been absent from their 
regiments, corps, or posts, for any unusual length of time. 

5 .... If it should be discovered that an officer is not qualified to 
perforin his duty in the regiment or corps to which he may belong, 
a special report of his incapacity will be made; and when any officer 
has been absent for an unusual period, the circumstances which 
may have occasioned his absence will be fully stated, and also the 
probable time of his return. 

Non- commissioned Officers, Musicians, and Privates. 

6.... Whether they arc obedient and well instructed in the pre- 
scribed drill; and attentive to personal appearance; and parti- 
cularly whether the non-commissioned officers perform their duty 
correctly, and with promptitude. Whether the numbers actually in 
the ranks correspond with the returns, and whether any men are 
kept on the rolls of the regiment or corps, who are not clothed and 
equipped, and who do not do their duty as soldiers. 

Officers, Non-commissoncd Officers, Musicians, and Pri- 
vates of Cavalry. 

7 Whether the officers, non-commissioned officers, musicians, 

and privates of cavalry, are properly instructed in their duties. 
Whether they are expert in the exercise of the sword, carbine, and 
pistol; and perform with accuracy and promptitude the evolutions 
prescribed by regulations. Whether the officers have attained that 
knowledge of horsemanship which is requisite for a due performance 
of their duty. 

Regimental and Company Books. 

8.... Whether the regimental and company books are regularly 
and accurately kept, and in the form and manner prescribed by 
regulations. 



134 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Inspector 's Department. 

Quarter Masters, Paymasters, and Commissaries of Sub- 
sistence, and all Disbursing Officers of the Army. 

9.... Whether the Quarter Masters, Paymasters, and Commissaries 
of Subsistence, and other disbursing officers of the army, discharge 
their duties faithfully, and in a satisfactory manner; and whether 
their books and accounts are kept with accuracy and regularity; 
and whether their accounts are transmitted to the proper depart- 
ments within the time required by regulations. Whether they are 
engaged in any commerce or traffic; and whether the funds placed 
in their hands are always at command, and appropriated to their 
proper use, and where, or in what banks they are deposited. 

Ordnance Department. 

10.. ..Whether the officers of this department are intelligent, 
active, and industrious, and competent to the duties required of 
them; whether they keep the arsenals, magazines, store houses, 
ordnance, and ordnance- stores, in their charge, in a state of pre- 
servation. Whether the carriages, guns, implements, and equip- 
ments, are made according to prescribed models and patterns, and 
whether the system pursued is calculated to establish uniformity in 
the Ordnance Department. If any neglect of duty, waste, or destruc- 
tion of property, should be discovered in this department, a special 
report of the same will be made in order that measures may be 
taken for a prompt correction. 

Armories. 

1 1 .... Whether the superintendents and under-officers of the 
armories are attentive, industrious, and capable of performing the 
services required of them. Whether the arms are well made, and 
according to the patterns prescribed by the Ordnance Department. 
Whether the books and accounts are regularly and accurately kept, 
as well those of the Paymasters, as of the superintendents. Whether 
due attention is paid to the purchase of materials for the manufac- 
ture of arms; and whether the system pursued in the manufacture 
is calculated to ensure the best quality of aims. And whether 
payment for all purchases is regularly made. 



FOR THE ARMY. 135 



Inpectors Department. 



Medical Department. 

12 Whether the officers of this department are faithful in the 

discharge of their duties. Whether suitable hospitals are furnished, 
and well supplied with medicines and hospital stores of good quality, 
and whether the sick are well attended. 

Veterinary Department of Cavalry. 
13.... Whether the veterinary surgeon is competent to the duties 
of his station. Whether, according to prescribed regulations, the 
registry of the veterinary practice be regularly kept. Whether 
the farriers arc properly instructed and expert in their business. 
Whether the horses are shod in a proper manner, and on the most 
approved principle. Whether the stables are properly ventilated. 
Whether any diseases, more especially the glanders, have prevailed 
among the horses, and what remedies have been adopted, and with 
what success. 

Commissary General of Purchases. 
14.... Whether the Commissary General of Purchases discharges 
his duty with efficiency and promptitude; and whether the clothing 
in store is of good quality, well made; and according to prescribed 
patterns. 
Repairs of Forts, Quarters, Barracks, Magazines, etc. 
15.... Whether any repairs are necessary for the better security 
or preservation of forts, quarters, barracks, magazines, or other 
public buildings. If any should be required, a special report of 
the same will be made. 

16.... In all cases, it is made the duty of commanding officers to 
inform the Inspectors General, at the time of their visits, of the 
extent of the repairs necessary, with an estimate in detail of such 
repairs for the preservation of either forts, barracks, quarters, 
magazines, and other public buildings and works. The estimates, 
with the remarks of the Inspector, will be transmitted to the 
chief of the proper department, in order that means may fee pro- 
vided for euch repairs in due season. 



136 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Inspector's Department. 

Arms. 

17.. ..Whether in a serviceable state, and cleaned and preserved 
in a proper manner. 

Clothing and Equipments. 

18.... Whether the officers, non-commissioned officers, musicians, 
and privates, strictly conform to regulations. Whether the clothing 
is regularly furnished, of good quality, and made according to 
prescribed patterns. 

Cavalry Horses. 

19.... Whether of sufficient size, strength, and activity; and 
whether they are generally of a description adapted to the par- 
ticular service for which they are designed. Whether well trained, 
and in good condition. 

Forage. 

20.. . .Whether regularly furnished in sufficient quantity, and of 
good quality. 

Subsistence Department. 

21 Whether the supplies of this department are regularly 

furnished, and of good quality; and whether the meat, bread, and 

other articles allowed to the men for their subsistence, are sufficient 
for their proper wants. 

Quarters and Barracks. 

22 Whether preserved in a state of cleanliness; and whether 

the interior arrangements are according to prescribed regulations. 

Additional Duties of Inspectors General, when with an 
Army, including Militia and Volunteers, on active 
Service and in the Field. 

23.... The Inspectors General will muster and inspect the militia 
aiul volunteers, as well as the regular troops, as often as the com- 



FOR THE ARMY. 137 



Quarter Master's Department. 



mantling General of the army may direct. The object of which shall 
be, to ascertain the exact state of the arms, equipments, and 
clothing, and any other circumstance tending to show the actual 
state and condition of the troops. Whether the militia and volun- 
teers are organized according to law; and whether the officers are 
duly proportioned to the men, in rank and number. It will be 
their duty, under the direction of the General in Chief, to de- 
signate all guards for the security and good order of the camp; 
to review and inspect them previous to their being detached for 
the service of the day. — To take charge of all prisoners; to ex- 
amine and report their several cases to the commanding Gene- 
ral for his orders in relation to their future disposal. — To inspect 
the state of the tents and other camp equipage, and barracks and 
hospitals, and to report any want ot care and cleanliness. — 
To regulate all sutlers and markets within any camp, cantonment, 
or garrison; and to inspect and enforce the order of march. — To 
ascertain whether there has been any irregularity in the proceed- 
ings of courts martial, or in the execution of sentences pronounced 
by them. — To inspect, quarterly, dragoon, artillery, and all other 
horses belonging to the public, employed by the army in the field 
Those unfit for service, will be branded with the letter C, and 
turned over to the Quarter Master's Department, for public sale. 

24.... The Inspectors General will report separately under the 
heads pointed out in these regulations, and not blend the whole 
together, with one general remark. Each inspection report should 
be complete in itself, and contain a full and faithful representa- 
tion, with such suggestions as they may consider necessary for 
the improvement of all the objects to which their attention may be 
directed. 



ARTICLE XL II I. 

aUARTF.Il MASTER'S DEPARTMENT. 



l....The Quarter Master General is stationed at the City of 

Washington, and, under the direction of the Secretary of War, is 

Uharged with the military and administrative details of his depart- 



138 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Quarter Matter's Department. 



ment. He has a complete administrative control of all the officers 
belonging to his department, as well as of those appointed to act 
therein, or make disbursements on account thereof. Officers of regi- 
ments and corps are also subject to a like control, by the Quarter 
Master General, in regard to every thing relating to barracks and 
quarters, and to the accountabilities for supplies of the Quarter 
Master's Department, as well as for those of the Purchasing 
Department. 

2.... The objects of this department are, to ensure an efficient 
system of supply, and to give facility and effect to the movements 
and operations of the army. 

3.... It is the duty of the department to provide quarters, hos- 
pitals, and transportation for the army, and transportation for all 
military stores, provisions, camp and garrison equipage, and artil- 
lery; to direct the survey, and superintend the opening and repair- 
ing of roads, and the constructing and repairing of bridges, which 
may be necessary to the movements of any part of the army, or 
as communications between the posts on the frontiers, and between 
those posts and the interior. 

4.... To provide good and sufficient store houses for all military 
supplies, and for all provisions deposited by the Commissary's Depart- 
ment, or under contract between individuals and the Government. 

5 ••••To purchase all fuel, forage, straw, and stationary, required 
for the army, and have them transported to the posts or places 
where they may be wanted, and issued to those entitled to them, 
according to the regulations. 

6.... To purchase all horses, oxen, mules, and harness; and all 
wagons, carts, and boats and other vessels, with their proper 
equipments, for the transportation of the army, and for garrison 
purposes; to have the custody of the same, and be responsible 
that they be not used for private purposes, but be employed or 
used exclusively in the public service. 

7.... To purchase dragoon and artillery horses; also, when spe- 
cially directed by the Secretary of War, to purchase the saddlos, 
bridles, and other necessary equipments required for the service: and 
cause them to be delivered to the officers of those corps who shall 
be authorized to receive them. 



FOR THE ARMY. 139 



Quarter Master's Department. 



8.... To provide materials, and direct and superintend the con- 
structing and repairing of quarters, barracks, hospitals, store houses, 
stables, and other necessary and authorized buildings for the accom- 
modation of the army, and the security of public property. 

9.... To provide materials for the constructing of block houses, 
and other necessary defences at the posts occupied by the troops on 
the interior frontiers, and in the Indian] country. 

10.... To select, under the orders of the Generals or other com- 
manding officers, sites for encampment, and to assign to the dif- 
ferent corps the ground they are to occupy. 

11 To have the general direction of foraging and working 

parties, when the army or detachments of it are in the field; and 
to have the direction of all artificers employed at posts, except 
those of the Ordnance and Engineer Departments, and of all sol- 
diers drawn from their companies and employed upon constant 
labor more than ten days. 

12 To direct the movement and be responsible for the prompt 

and safe transmission of all supplies required for the service of any 
part of the army in the field; and either send them direct to the 
army, or place them in such convenient depots, as the General in 
Chief, the Quarter Master General, ar the General commanding the 
troops in the field, may direct. 

13 To receive in bulk, from the Purchasing, Medical, Subsist- 
ence, and Ordnance Departments, all medicines and hospital stores, 
provisons, clothing, camp and garrison equipage, arms, ammunition, 
and ordnance, and transport them to the places of destination, and 
distribute them according to the direction respectively given to 
them, and, when necessary, to employ conductors to accompany 

them. 

14.... It shall be the duty of the Quarter Master General to make 
himself acquainted with the frontiers, both maritime and interior; 
and with all the principal avenues leading to the contiguous Indian 
and foreign territories; with the military resources of the country, 
and the means and facilities of transportation, particularly of the 
districts on the frontiers; with the most eligible points for concen 
trating troops and collecting supplies, whether in relation to offen- 



140 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Quarter Master s Department. 



sive or defensive operations; with the relative expense of concen- 
trating at particular positions, and the advantages of those positions; 
and he shall be prepared, at all times, to give detailed information 
on those subjects, when required to do so, either by the Secretary 
of War, or the General in Chief. 

15 He shall, under the orders, or with the approbation, of the 

Secretary of War or the General in Chief, designate the routes of 
communication between the different posts and armies; the course of 
military roads, and the sites for permanent and temporary depots 
of provisions and military stores. 

16. ...He shall assign the officers of his department to such sta- 
tions as he may think proper, having reference to their peculiar 
qualifications; and the officers so assigned shall not be removed 
from their stations, nor be subject to detail, nor be employed upon 
any other duties than those which properly appertain to their de- 
partment, but with his assent, or by the order of the Secretary 
of War, or the General in Chief — except that the Generals com- 
manding departments may require them to sit as members of general 
courts martial, at or in the vicinity of their respective stations; or 
should circumstances render it necessary for the troops at any post, 
or any frontier, suddenly to take the field, the General or other 
officer commanding the department, or on the frontier, shall have 
the authority to require any Quarter Master or Assistant within his 
command, to accompany them. 

17.... He shall visit the stations of the several officers of his de- 
partment for the purposes of inspection and supervision; or he may 
from time to time, assign that duty to such officers of the depart- 
ment as he may select; and Generals and others in command of 
departments, corps, and posts, will afford every necessary facility 
to enable them to make the inspections directed. 

18.... He shall decide upon all claims arising under the regula- 
tions of his department, subject to the revision of 'the Secretary of 
War or the Second Comptroller of the Treasury, as the case may 
require. 

19.... He shall prepare all estimates of the funds and supplies 
required for the service of his department; and he shall prepare 



FOR THE ARMY. 141 



Quarter* Master's Department. 



and submit, for the sanction of the Secretary of War, plans for 
barracks, quarters, and other improvements, and cause the plans, 
when approved, to be earned into effect, as far as the means 
provided by Congress shall enable him. He will report from time 
to time, to the Secretary of War, and at least once a quarter, 
the proceedings of his department; and he shall at all times be 
prepared to give information to him, or to the General in Chief, 
on all matters confided to his administration, when required to do 
so by either. 

20 He shall submit for the consideration of the Secretary of 

War, such retrenchments, amendments, additions, or alterations, as 
experience may demonstrate to be proper in his department. 

21... He shall have authority to employ, or cause to be em- 
ployed, all agents, extra clerks, superintendents, mechanics, laborers, 
and other persons necessary to the prompt and efficient performance 
of all the various duties of his department. 

Quarter Masters, Assistants, and Agents. 

22 A Quarter Master, or Senior Assistant, shall be stationed 

at each principal post; and he shall have a general supervision 
of the duties of the department at the posts and stations within 
the district which may be assigned to him; the principal posts, 
and the posts and stations forming districts, will be designated by 
the Quarter Master General, with the approbation of the Secretary 

of War. 

23. ...It shall be the duty of the officers in charge of districts, 
to be prepared at all times to furnish the Quarter Master General 
with correct information in regard to the military resources of the 
country, as well as in relation to the state of the roads and the 
condition of the water courses within the districts respectively assigned 
to their supervision; and they shall also, when required to do so by 
the Quarter Master General, receive and distribute all funds for their 
respective districts. 

24.... All Junior Assistant Quarter Masters, and other officers 
acting in the Quarter Master's Department, will consider them- 
selves subordinate to, and subject to the orders of the principal 
officers of the department within their respective districts. 



142 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Quarter Master's Department. 

25.... An Assistant Commissary, serving at a post where there 
is no officer of the Quarter Master's Department, will be considered 
ex officio Assistant Quarter Master, without any special assignment 
to duty as such, and may be required to perform any service which 
might properly be required of a Quarter Master or an Assistant. 

26.... At posts where neither an officer of the Quarter Master's 
nor Commissary's Department can be employed, the Quarter Master 
General may assign the duties of the department, for the time being, 
to any competent officer of the line, with the approbation of the 
General in Chief. 

27.... In the event of the sickness, arrest, or death, of the officer 
performing the duties of Quarter Master or Assistant, at any post, the 
commanding officer may appoint any officer of his command to 
perform the duties temporarily, which appointment must be reported, 
without delay, to the Quarter Master General. 

Allowances. 

28.... The allowances made to the army through the Quarter 
Master's Department, are the following, viz: 1. Fuel aud quarters, 
including office and barrack furniture. 2. Transportation. 3. Forage. 
4. Straw for soldiers' bedding. 5. Stationary: and 6. Incidental al- 
lowances, including the per diem authorized by law to officers at- 
tending general courts martial, per diem allowed by law to soldiers 
employed for more than ten consecutive days on working parties, 
and postage on public letters and packages. 

Fuel and Quarters, and Barrack and Office Furniture. 

29. . . .All public barracks and quarters and all lands occupied 
for military purposes, are under the direction of the Quarter Master's 
Department, and the barracks and quarters shall be assigned by the 
officers of that department to the officers of the army according to 
their rank, and to the troops according to the rank of their regiments 
and corps. 

30.... The following are the allowances of fuel and quarters to 
the several grades of the army; and no officer of any corps, or of 
any rank whatsoever, shall appropriate to his own use more than 



FOR THE ARMY, 



143 



Quarter Master's Department. 



the allowance authorized, without the express authority of the 
Secretary of War, communicated through the Quarter Master General; 
but the allowance may be reduced at any post, whenever the interests 
of the service may require "it. And it is to be distinctly understood, 
that the increased allowance of quarters, made to the officers of the 
army, is not to be construed to authorize the erection or hire of 
additional quarters at any of the established military posts, except 
when, in the opinion of the Secretary of War, such a measure is 
demanded by the good of the service. 



ICoitDS OF 

Rooms, wood peb 
month. 



GRADES. 



To a Major General, 

To a Brigadier General, a Colonel, the Surgeon ? 
General, and the Paymaster General, each, 5 

To a Lieutenant Colonel, Major, Paymaster,? 
Surgeon, each, J 

To a Captain, an Assistant Surgeon, who has 1 
served 5 years, Storekeeper, each, 5 

To all other commissioned officers, each 

To a Major General, or other officer command- ? _ 
ing a department, j 

To the commanding officer of a regiment or post,^ 
and to each Inspector General, Paymaster, 
Quarter Master, and Assistant Quarter Master; 
and to each Acting Assistant Quarter Master, 
if in the opinion of the Quarter Master Gene- 
ral, the extent of his duty should warrant it,J 

To every six non-commissioned officers, musiO 
cians, privates, and servants, including the ^ 
authorized number of washerwomen, J 



- oJ V 'C 

5 o O ft 



o 

(*, 2 



O vj 

£ 2 



i l 



31 To every six non-commissioned officers, musicians, privates, 

and servants, including the authorized number of washerwomen, two 
hundred and twenty-five square feet of room, at posts above the 38th 



144 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Quarter Master's Department. 

degree of north latitude, and two hundred and fifty-six square feet 
of room from the 38th degree inclusive, south. 

32.... Rooms for officers shall be estimated at two hundred and 
twenty-five square feet. 

33.... A reasonable allowance of fuel, not exceeding half a cord 
per month in summer, and two cords per month in winter, for each 
fire-place, shall be furnished for the use of the sick in hospital, 
to be regulated within those limits from time to time, by the com- 
manding officer and attending Surgeon. 

34.... A like allowance, not exceeding three cords per month for 
each fire place occupied by guards, will be furnished from the 1st 
October to the 30th April. 

35.... A quantity not exceeding half a cord of wood per month, 
will be allowed from the 1st of October to the 30th of April, to 
each Quarter Master, Assistant Quarter Master, and Assistant Commis- 
sary of Subsistence, for the use of his store house, on his certificate 
that it is necessary to the service, and actually to be used in said 
store house. 

36 Where the officers of a post or regiment, or a majority of 

them, unite in a general mess, and actually mess together, they shall 
be allowed, if the mess consist of less than six officers, one room of 
dimensions equal to two hundred and twenty-five square feet, as a 
mess room, and half a cord of wood per month from the 1st October 
to the 30th of April — if the mess consist of six or more offi- 
cers, they shall be allowed, if it can be furnished without incon- 
venience to the service, a room of dimensions at least equal to 
three hundred and sixty square feet, for a mess room, with a cord 
of wood per month from the 1st of October to the 30th of April. 

37.... Neither mess rooms nor fuel for them is to be allowed to 
officers who live in taverns or public boarding houses; nor is fuel 
furnished for a mess room to be used at any other place, or applied 
to any other purpose. 

38. ...At all posts, garrisons, and cantonments, from the 39th to 
the 43d degree of north latitude inclusive, the allowance of fuel may 
be increased one fourth; and north of the 43d degree, one third 
during the months of November, December, January, and February. 



FOR THE ARMY. 145 



Quarter Master s Department. 



3 9.... Where grates have been put up at the public expense in 
either the quarters of officers or soldiers, or in hospitals, offices, or 
mess rooms, coal shall be furnished at the rate of fifteen hundred 
pounds for each cord of wood; and it may be issued in lieu of 
wood in the same proportion at all posts where it can be obtained, 
at the discretion of the Quarter Master General. 

40.... Fuel furnished for the use of officers or troops at any post, 
camp, cantonment, station, or quarters, is to be considered public 
property until used— it is on no account to be sold for the benefit 
of those to whom it is issued; nor to be removed from the post, 
camp, cantonment, station, or quarters, but by order of the Quarter 
Master General, or of the senior officer of the Quarter Master's 
Department present, or in the vicinity; and any surplus of fuel 
beyond that which has been used by, or which may be necessary 
for the use of the officers or troops at such post, camp, cantonment, 
station, or quarters, shall revert to the United States.' 

41.... Fuel shall be issued only within the month for which it 
may be due, except when in the opinion of the Quarter Master 
General or the General or Colonel commanding, the circumstances 
of the service may render it proper to furnish the winter supply 
for any officer or post in advance. 

42.... When an officer arrives at a post, if he be entitled to 
quarters and fuel, he shall make a written requisition for them on 
the officer of the Quarter Master's Department stationed there, 
accompanied by a copy of the order placing him on duty. If he 
be accompanied by troops, his requisition must embrace his whole 
command, and designate the number of officers of each class or 
grade, as well as non-commissioned officers, musicians, artificers, 
private soldiers, servants, and authorized washerwomen. 

43. ...The quarters to be occupied having been designated by 
the officer of the Quarter Master's Department, the senior officer 
shall, in every instance, have the right of choice, from the highest 
to the lowest grade, except that in regular barracks or cantonments, 
regimental officers shall be stationed convenient to their regiments, 
and company officers convenient to their companies. Should any 
officer, in the exercise of his right of choice, select the quarters 
10 



146 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Quarter Jtf aster's Department. 

occupied by a junior, they must be vacated for him: but having 
made his choice, he must abide by it, and he shall not be allowed 
to displace a junior a second time during his service at the post, 
unless he be displaced by the arrival of a senior. In the exercise 
of their right of choice, officers will be limited to the sets of 
quarters as arranged by the Quarter Master's Department, and shall 
not be allowed to select their rooms in different sets of quarters, 
even should the rooms composing those different sets be in the 
same building. 

44. ... Quarters shall not be rented for officers or troops, at any 
post or station where the public quarters, if distributed according to 
the regulations, shall be sufficient for their accommodation; and it is 
made the duty of all commanding officers to cause the regulations 
to be enforced, and to see that the officers of their commands be 
put in possession of the quarters to which they are entitled, 
according to their rank. Should any officer be subjected to expense 
for the hire of quarters, in consequence of the failure of his com- 
manding officer to cause a proper distribution to be made of the 
quarters at the post, he shall be reimbursed the expense actually 
incurred, and the amonnt shall be charged to the commanding 
officer, and be refunded by him to the Treasury. 

45.... When officers and troops are assigned to duty at stations 
where there are no public buildings which they can occupy, the 
officers of the Quarter Master's Department shall hire quarters for 
them, not exceeding the number of rooms to which the officers 
are entitled, and the space to which the troops are entitled. 

4 6.... Officers are held accountable that the quarters occupied by 
themselves, or by troops under their command, shall not sustain 
any damage beyond the ordinary wear and tear, during such occu- 
pation; for any extraordinary damage, the officer occupying the 
quarters or commanding the troops, as the case may be, shall be 
accountable. 

47.... No barracks, quarters, or hospitals, shall be erected at the 
public expense, but by order of the Secretary of War, and accord- 
ing to plans which he shall have approved; and no officer, what- 
soever may be his rank, shall make the slightest alteration in any 



FOR THE ARMY. 147 



Quarter Master's Department. 



plan of barracks, quarters, or hospital, so approved, without the 
order of the Secretary of War, communicated through the Quar- 
ter Master General. These restrictions do not extend to temporary 
huts, where troops may be compelled, by the unhealthiness of 
their positions, to leave their quarters during the summer season; 
or where, from the circumstances of the service, they may be re- 
quired to occupy positions on the Indian frontier, in advance of 
the established posts. 

48.... No changes or alterations are to be made in the barracks, 
quarters, er hospitals, at permanent or established posts, but by the 
authority of the Quarter Master General, or of the Secretary of 
War, communicated through the Quarter Master General; should any 
change or alteration involving expense be made without such authority, 
the officer causing it shall not only be charged with the whole ex- 
pense incurred, but also with that of restoring the barracks, quar- 
ters, or hospital, thus altered, to their former condition. 

49 The rooms of officers' quarters, at every post, shall be 

numbered in a regular series, exclusive of attic rooms, which are 
not subject to assignment, except as appendages to the rooms 
regularly numbered. 

50 The barrack rooms of soldiers shall also be numbered. 

51. . . .Materials shall be furnished at the public expense for bunks, 
benches, and tables, for soldiers' barracks, and hospitals, which shall be 
made under the direction of the officers of the Quarter Master's 
Department, by artificers drawn from the companies. These articles 
shall be considered as fixtures, and shall bear the numbers of the 
rooms for which they are provided, and shall not be removed, ex- 
cept by the authority of the officers of the Quarter's Master's Depart- 
ment of the respective posts. Commanding officers of companies, 
and attending Surgeons, will receipt and be held accountable for 

them. 

52.... Two common desks or tables, with a paper case, an ink- 
stand, and a sand box, to each, six common chairs, and one pair 
of common andirons, and shovel and tongs, will be provided for 
each office authorized by the regulations, for which articles, the 
officers receiving them shall be held accountable; but no public ma- 



148 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Quarter Master's Department. 

terials arc to be used in making furniture for officers' quarters, 
unless an appropriation for that purpose be obtained from Congress. 
53.... At stations where officers serve without troops, and where 
there are no public quarters, the Quarter Master General is autho- 
rized to cause quarters to be hired for them; or, if it be found 
more convenient to the service, to allow them a reasonable commu- 
tation in money. Provided that the allowance shall, in all cases, be 
so apportioned by the Quarter Master General, that the whole sum 
paid for rent or commutation shall not exceed the present actual 
expenditures for these objects. 

54. .. .Non-commissioned officers attached to general or depart- 
ment head quarters, or to the head quarters of the administrative 
departments, where public quarters cannot be furnished, may be 
allowed, according to circumstances, a reasonable commutation in 
lieu thereof, to be approved by the Secretary of War. 

55. ...When a commutation is made for quarters, a commutation 
will also be allowed for fuel, to be paid by the authority of the 
Quarter Master General, not to exceed the average market price. 

56.... No commutation will be made for mess-rooms or office*, 
or for the fuel for them. 

57.... Good merchantable oak wood is to be the standard, and 
the cord is to be estimated at one hundred and twenty-eight cubic 
feet. 

58.... Fuel provided by the labor of soldiers on extra duty, shall 
be taken up, on the returns of the officer of the Quarter Master's 
Department of the respective posts, and accounted for, as public 
property, according to the regulations. 

59.... Officers are entitled to quarters at their permanent stations, 
whether the quarters be owned by the public or hired; and tem- 
porary absence on duty shall not be construed to deprive them of 
this allowance, except when on court martial, or other temporary 
duty, for which they are allowed a per diem, or when furnished 
with tents by the public. 

Transportation and Travelling Allowance. 

60.... Officers having first joined their regiments- or companies, or 
the stations where they are required to perform duty, shall, on all 



FOR THE ARMY. 149 



Quarter Master's Department. 



subsequent journeys, performed by proper authority, and in discharge 
of their duties, be allowed transportation for their baggage, or reim- 
bursement of the expenses of the journey, according to the rules, 
and subject to the restrictions hereinafter stated. The allowance 
will be made to the graduates of the Military Academy, from the 
Academy to the posts or stations to which they are ordered to 
perform duty. 

61... Officers who travel under orders, without troops or military 
stores, beyond the range of their appropriate daily duties, not less 
than twenty miles, shall be allowed ten cents per mile, or if they 
prefer it, the actual cost of their transportation for the whole jour- 
ney, provided they shall have travelled by the shortest mail route. 
Staff officers, such as Inspectors General, Paymasters, etc., who travel 
under the general authority of the regulations, are to be considered as 
travelling under orders. 

62. ...Officers who travel with military stores or supplies of any 
description, in their charge, will be furnished with transportation 
in kind, or will be reimbursed the actual cost of their transporta- 
tion. 

63 No extra allowance, as reimbursement of expenses, will be 

made to any officer attending a general court martial, if on 
duty, or leave of absence, at the post or place where the court is 

held. 

64 Every citizen who shall attend a court martial, as a wit- 
ness, upon a regular summons, shall be allowed his actual trans- 
portation or stage fare, and three dollars a day for the time occu- 
pied in travelling to, attending on, and returning from the court, 
computing the travel at the rate of fifty miles a day. 

65.. ..Whether journeys performed by officers on duty, be by 
land or water, the distance shall be estimated by the shortest mail 
route, according to the book of distances issued by the Post Office 
Department; or, when there is no direct mail route, by the shortest 
practicable route. 

66.... Officers who exchange stations with each other, or who 
obtain transfers from their own to other corps, will not be enti- 
tled to any allowance for the journeys performed in consequence 
of such exchange or transfer. 



150 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Quarter JMaster's Department. 

67... .All officers on leave of absence must return to their duty 
without expense to the public. Orders given for their return to 
duty are not to be so construed as to entitle them to transporta- 
tion of baggage. 

68.... When troops are required to change their stations, trans- 
portation shall be provided by the Quarter Master's Department, 
on the requisition of the commanding officer, for the whole force 
required to move, including all the officers who are to change sta- 
tion with the troops, whether attached to the companies or not, as 
well as their authorized servants and the regulated number of 
women to companies; and officers who fail to avail themselves of 
the means of transportation provided, will be considered as having 
forfeited all claim to the allowance; and no reimbursement or com- 
pensation will, in any shape, or under any pretence whatever, be made 
to them in lieu of it. This rule applies to all officers moving with 
detachments of troops, whether large or small, or whether they 
move by land or water. 

69.... When public property is to be moved, transportation shall 
be provided by the Quarter Master's Department, on the requisition 
of the officer having charge of it, except in the cases already pro- 
vided for by these regulations. 

70.... Arrangements made for the transportation of troops, or sup- 
plies, by the Quarter Master's Department, are not to be changed by 
any commanding officer whatsoever, unless there be such a neglect 
or disregard of duty by the Quarter Master, as shall lead to 
his arrest and trial. Should any commanding or other officer take 
upon himself to change the arrangements of the Quarter Master's 
Department, he shall be responsible for all the consequences. 

71.... Whenever troops move by land, the following transportation 
shall be allowed for their baggage: For the field and staff of a regi- 
ment, including the attending Surgeon, one four horse wagon and 
team, or an equivalent in pack horses or mules, and in that propor- 
tion for such of the field and staff as may be present; for a company 
or detachment of from fifty to seventy-five men, including company 
officers, one four horse wagon and team, or an equivalent in pack 
horses or mules, and in that proportion, according to the number of 



FOR THE ARMY. 151 



Quarter Master's Department. 



men; for the sick, hospital stores, and medicines, the necessary 
transportation will be provided on the requisition of the Surgeon, 
approved by the commanding officer, in proportion to the number 
of the sick unable to march, and the quantity of medicines and 
stores to be transported. 

72.... The baggage of the army which is to be transported at the 
public expense, is limited to officers' mess chests, clothing, and 
bedding, and the camp equipage of the troops, consisting of cooking 
utensils and table furniture, tents, tent poles, and company clothing 
not issued. 

73.... Whenever troops or stores are moved by water, passages 
must be provided for the officers who accompany them, in the cabins 
of the steamboats, or other transports employed; and every accom- 
modation consistent with a liberal economy, must be provided for the 
troops, especially in the case of recruits; but no unauthorized baggage 
is to be transported at the public expense, for either officers or 
soldiers. 

74.... Tf the Surgeon who accompanies a detachment of troops 
moving by water, should require it, a separate apartment must, if 
possible, be prepared for the sick. 

Forage. 

75.. ..Officers will be allowed to draw forage in kind, when on 
actual service in the field, or when under orders to hold themselves 
in readiness for the field, for the number of horses actually kept by 
them in service, not to exceed the following rates: 

Major Generals ...-.--7 
Brigadier Generals -....--5 

Colonels of Cavalry 5 

Other Colonels, each 4 

Lieutenant Colonels and Majors of Cavalry - - 4 
Other Lieutenant Colonels and Majors; and Captains 
of Cavalry; each -------3 

All other officers entitled to forage, each 2 

76.... Officers on duty in camp or quarters, and not under orders 

for the field, if entitled to forage for three or more horses, will be 



152 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Quarter Master's Department. 



allowed to draw in kind for two horses; all others entitled to forage, 
to draw in kind for one each. 

77.... Officers are not entitled to forage in kind while on leave 
of absence; nor when travelling with their horses without troops, 
whether on duty or not. 

78.... The ration of forage shall consist of fourteen pounds of hay 
or fodder, and twelve quarts of oats, or in lieu of oats, eight quarts 
of corn. 

79.... Forage shall not be allowed in kind for any horse not 
actually present at the post at which it may be required. It is 
furnished to officers for their horses, to enable them to perform their 
public duties, and is not, on any pretence, or under any circum- 
stances whatever, to be sold by them as a matter of profit. 

80.... A 11 forage procured for the dragoons or other public horses 
or cattle, belongs to the public, and if not consumed, is to be 
accounted for as public property. 

Straw. 

81.... One truss of straw, weighing eighteen pounds, is allowed 
to every two men at the commencement of the month. At the 
expiration of fifteen days, each truss will be refreshed with four 
pounds, and at the expiration of the month, the whole straw will 
be removed and burnt, and a fresh bedding of one truss furnished. 

82.... The same quantity of straw is allowed to servants and 
batmen, not soldiers, and for washerwomen, in the proportion of one 
to every seventeen persons. 

83.... The allowance and change of straw for the sick in hospitals 
will be regulated by the senior attending Surgeon. 

84. ...At all posts in the vicinity of prairies belonging to the 
public, hay will be used in lieu of straw, and provided by the troops. 

85.... Straw is not a personal allowance or emolument — it is 
furnished to secure the health and comfort of the soldiers, and is 
not, on any account, to be sold for their benefit; if not used by 
those for whom it is provided, as bedding, it is to be returned to 
the Quarter Master's Department. 



FOR THE ARMY. 153 



Quarter Master's Department. 



Stationery. 

86.... To a General, or other officer commanding an army or de- 
partment, to an Adjutant General, to an Inspector General, and to 
the chief of each branch of the staff at the seat of government, as 
much stationery will be allowed as may be necessary in the dis- 
charge of his public duties. 

87.... To every officer commanding a brigade, or section of a 
department, for the use of himself and staff, forty-eight quires of 
paper per annum. 

88.... To a Colonel or commanding officer of a regiment, or of 
a post garrisoned by not less than five companies, for the use of 
himself and staff, thirty quires of paper per annum. 

89.... To a Lieutenant Colonel or Major not in command of a 
Tegiment or post, twelve quires of paper per annum. 

90 To the commanding officer of a company, twenty quires of 

paper per annum. 

9 1.... To the commanding officer of a separate post, garrisoned 
by more than two, and less than five companies, twenty quires of 
paper. To the commanding officer of a post of two companies, 
fifteen quires; and to the commanding officer of a post of one com- 
pany or less, ten quires per annum. 

92.... To officers of the Pay, Quarter Master's, and Subsistence 
Departments, such blank books and blanks as may be prescribed by 
their respective chiefs, and such other stationery as may be neces- 
sary in the performance of their duties. 

93.... All officers not enumerated above, will be allowed six 
quires of paper per annum for their public duties, unless they shall 
be supplied with stationery by their respective departments. 

94.... A proportion of other stationery will be allowed at the 
rate of twenty-four quills, half an ounce of wafers, one paper of 
ink-powder, four ounces of sealing wax, half a quire of cartridge 
paper, and one piece of tape, to every six quires of writing paper. 

95 The term stationery must be construed strictly to embrace 

such articles only as are above named. 

96.... Generals, and other officers commanding armies, depart- 



154 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Quarter Master's Department. 



ments, or sections of departments, are authorized, at their discretion, 
to cause all orders relating to general courts martial, or courts of 
inquiry, to be printed at the public expense; and, on extraordinary 
occasions, they are authorized to cause other general or department 
orders to be printed, where there are numerous copies to be dis- 
tributed, and great despatch is required, the necessity for which 
must be set forth in the order for the printing, or be certified on 
the account by the officer giving the order, or by an officer of his 
staff. 

9 7.... Officers of the Quarter Master's Department will furnish 
such authorized stationery as may be necessary for the use of gen- 
eral, regimental, and garrison courts martial, and courts of inquiry, 
convened by competent authority, on requisitions signed by the 
judge advocate or recorder, as the case may be, and countersigned 
by the president of the court. All stationery not used by the 
court for which it was drawn, must be returned by the judge advo- 
cate or recorder, to the Quarter Master's Department. 

98.... The stationery necessary for military boards ordered by 
the Secretary of War, or the General in Chief, shall be furnished 
upon the same principles, and accounted for in the same manner; 
and also the blank regimental and company books, authorized by 
these regulations. 

Incidental Allowances. 

99.... Per diem to judge advocates. [See section 21 of the 
Act of March 16th, 1802.] 

100.... Per diem to officers for travelling, and sitting on general 
courts martial. [See section 22 of the Act of March 16th, 1802.] 

101.... Per diem to non-commissioned officers, musicians, and 
privates, employed on fortifications, in surveys, in cutting roads, 
and other constant labor, of not less than ten days. [See Act 
of March 2d, 1819.] 

102.... Officers of the army are entitled to reimbursement for 
the postage actually paid by them for letters and packages on 
public service, connected with their official duties, on producing 
satisfactory evidence of the amount paid, and certifying that the 
postage accrued on letters on public service. 



FOR THE ARMY. 155 



Quarter Master's Department. 



Appropriations. 

103.... The appropriations for the Quarter Master's Department 
being made for specific objects, they are not to be applied to any 
other purposes whatsoever; should the exigencies of the service, 
however, in the opinion of the General or other officer command- 
ing in the field, on the upper lakes, or the Indian frontiers, be such 
as to render it expedient that the officers of the Quarter Master's 
Department, be required to make purchases or payments not author- 
ized by the regulations of the department, nor coming within the 
range of their appropriate duties, the officer ordering the purchase or 
payment shall furnish the necessary funds by his draft on the de- 
partment, to which the expenditure properly appertains; and in his 
letter of advice, a triplicate of which shall be sent direct to the 
Quarter Master General, and another accompany the draft, it shall 
be his duty to explain the circumstances fully, so that the Secre- 
tary of War may be able to judge of the necessity and propriety 
of the course adopted; and the chief of any co-ordinate branch of 
the staff may, on furnishing the necessary funds from his own 
appropriations, require the services of the officers of the Quarter Mas- 
ter's Department, to make purchases and payments at the several 
posts; and it is hereby made the duty of the officers of the depart- 
ment to perform the services required, on the condition above stated. 

104... «Any account paid or article furnished by an officer of the 
Quarter Master's Department, by order of a superior officer, shall 
pass to his credit as a matter of course; but if the sum paid or 
article furnished, be not admitted at the Treasury, the pecuniary 
accountability shall devolve on the officer giving the order, who shall 
be charged with the amount, and held to a strict accountability 
for it. But this paragraph is not to be considered as sanctioning, 
under any circumstances, any order inconsistent with the regulations. 
The authority authorized by law to make regulations can alone mo- 
dify them, or authorize a departure from them. 

105.... Any account paid by an officer of the Quarter Master's 
Department agreeably to prescribed forms, on the certificate of an 
officer of the army, shall pass to his credit; and the officer making 



156 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Engineer Department. 



such certificate shall be held accountable for the accuracy of the 
facts therein set forth. 

iflccountabilily. 

106 The system of accountability prescribed by the existing 

regulations will be continued in force until changed or modified 
by the authority of the Secretary of War, or of the Second Comp- 
troller; and officers acting in the department, whether permanently 
or temporarily, will make their returns, reports, and estimates, and 
furnish their accounts, both of money and property, according to 
the forms and at the periods prescribed by those regulations. 

ARTICLE XLIV. 

ENGINEER DEPARTMENT. 

] . . . . The duties of this department comprise the construction and 
repair of fortifications, and such other public works as may be con- 
fided to it by the War Department; also, with the selection of 
sites and the formation of plans and estimates for these objects. 

2... -The chief of the corps of engineers shall be stationed at the 
seat of Government, and shall be charged with the general superin- 
tendence of the Engineer Department. He shall regulate the du- 
ties of the officers of the corps of engineers, and of all other officers 
and agents who may be employed in the department; and he shall, 
under the direction of the Secretary of War, have the control of 
such officers and agents, in every thing relating to their duties in 
the department, and to the disbursement of the funds placed in their 
hands, in the performance of those duties. He shall personally 
inspect the public works of the Engineer Department, at such 
times as he may think necessary. 

Military Jlcudemy. 

3.. ..The commandant of the corps of engineers, is the inspector 
of the Academy. The orders of the Secretary of War, relative to 
the Academy, will be communicated through him; and he will make 
a thorough inspection of the Academy at least once a year. 



FOR THE ARMY. 157 



Topographical Department Ordnance Department. 

4.... A permanent superintendent of the Academy, appointed from 
the corps of engineers, will have the immediate government of the 
institution, and be held responsible for its correct management. He 
will direct the studies, field exercises, and all other academic duties; 
and all professors, teachers, academic officers, and cadets, shall be 
under his command. He will render all returns, estimates, and com- 
munications, concerning the institution, to the inspector. 

5 No officer of the army, of any rank whatever, except 

the commandant of the corps of engineers, shall exercise command 
in the Military Academy, unless subordinate to the superintendent. 

ARTICLE XLV. 

TOPOGRAPHICAL DEPARTMENT. 

l....The duties of this department embrace reconnoitering and 
surveying for military and other purposes, and the superintendence 
of such public works as the War Department may think proper to 
assign to it. The bureau at Washington is the depository of all 
topographical and geographical drawings, as well as of all books, 
maps, plans, charts, and other property belonging to the Topogra- 
phical Department. 

2.... The chief of the bureau shall be stationed at Washington, 
and shall be charged with the superintendence of the Topographical 
Department, and of all officers and agents who may be employed 
in that department; and he shall, under the direction of the Secre- 
tary of War, have the control of such officers and agents in 
every thing relating to their duties in the department, and to the 
disbursement of the public funds placed in their hands for the per- 
formance of their duties. 

ARTICLE XLVI. 

ORDNANCE DEPARTMENT. 

1.... The senior officer of the Ordnance Department is, under the 
direction of the Secretary of War, charged with its superintendence 
and administration. He will be stationed at the saat of Government; 



158 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Ordnance Department. 

and may select an officer of the Ordnance Department, as an as- 
sistant, in his bureau. 

2.... The officers of the Ordnance Department, including artillery 
officers selected for ordnance service, shall, under the direction of 
the senior officer, have charge of all arsenals, ordnance depots, and 
magazines, and all property belonging to the Ordnance Department, 
not issued to the troops; for the safe keeping and preservation of 
which they shall be held strictly responsible. They shall furnish 
all arms, ordnance, and ordnance stores, and supplies required for 
the military service, on proper requisitions, and in conformity with 
the regulations of their department. 

3.... There shall be established, under the direction of the 
Secretary of War, as many arsenals of construction as the public 
service may require, not exceeding six in number, one of which 
shall be at Washington City, one at Watervliet, one at Pittsburgh, 
and one at Fort Monroe; at which (arsenals of construction) all 
artillery carriages required for the public service shall be fabri- 
cated, and such other articles of ordnance stores as the Colonel of 
Ordnance may direct. Arsenals of construction shall be under the 
immediate command and direction of the officers of the Ordnance 
Department. 

4.... No right of choice shall exist in the command of the various 
ordnance stations. Officers shall be assigned to such commands at 
the discretion of the chief of the Ordnance Department, in such 
manner as the public interest may require. 

5 .... Lieutenants of artillery selected for ordnance service, shall 
be subject to the control of the chief of the Ordnance Department 
in the same manner as ordnance officers. The selections, the 
number selected, and period of service, shall be determined by the 
Secretary of War, to be communicated through the General in 
Chief, who will direct the execution of the detail, according to a 
system of rotation, by which they shall continue in that service, 
not more than four years, and by which one-fourth shall be 
Telieved on the first day of January in each year. 



FOR THE ARMY. ] 59 



Ordnance Department. 



Ordnance and Ordnance Stores. 

6. ...The general denomination, "ordnance and ordnance stores," 
comprehends all cannon, howitzers, mortars, cannon balls, shot, 
and shells, for the land service; all gun carriages, mortar beds' 
caissons, travelling forges, and pontons, with their equipments; and 
all other apparatus and machines required for the service and 
manoeuvres of artillery, in garrisons, at sieges, or in the field, to- 
gether with the materials for their construction, preservation, and 
repair. Also, all small arms, side arms, and accoutrements, for the 
artillery, cavalry, infantry, and riflemen; all ammunition for ord- 
nance and small arms; and all stores of expenditure, for the service 
of the various arms; materials for the construction and repair of 
ordnance buildings, utensils, and stores for laboratories, including 
standard weights, gauges, and measures; intrenching and miners' 
tools, for the attack and defence of places; and all other tools and 
utensils required for the performance of ordnance duty. The ordi- 
nary articles of camp equipage and pioneers' tools, such as axes, 
spades, shovels, mattocks, &c, are not embraced as ordnance supplies. 

7.... Ordnance and ordnance stores shall be provided by pur- 
chase, fabrication, or contract, as may be judged most advantageous 
to the public service. They shall be provided by ordnance officer* 
only, except when otherwise specially, directed by the chief of the 
Ordnance Department, or in cases of urgent necessity, and in such 
cases a report and certificate showing the necessity, from the officer 
ordering the purchase, will be required for the admission of the 
account of purchase at the Treasury. 

Artillery. 

8 The artillery for field service shall be divided into batteries, 

half batteries, and sections. Six pieces of field artillery, with the 
necessary carriages and equipments, will constitute a field battery. 

9~..To insure simplicity and uniformity in the pattern and 
caliber for the land service, all guns, howitzers, mortars, and carron- 
ades, hereafter provided, shall be of caliber and kind as follows: 

C 6, 9, and 12 pounder cannon, (light,) 
For the field, | 12 and 24 pounder howitzers, (long.) 



160 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Ordnance Department. 



f 12, 18, and 24 pounder cannon. 

„ , . J 8 inch howitzers, (light.) 

Siege and garrison, <j g inch ^^ (Ught) 

V_10 inch mortars, (light.) 
T24, 32, and 42 pounder cannon. 
Sea-coast batteries, < 18, 24, and 32, and 42 pounder carronades. 
£10 inch mortars, (heavy.) 

10.... All cannon, in the land service of the United States, of 
calibers and patterns different from those now, or which may be 
hereafter established, in conformity with the next preceding para- 
graph, shall be withdrawn from service whenever they can be 
replaced by others of the established calibers and patterns. 

11.... The calibers of small arms to be provided for the military 
service of the United States, shall be as follows, to wit: 

„, ... , ...,., C To carry, for service, a leaden 

The caliber for the musket shall be, £ ^^ ^ ging j_ lg of a lb 

TT „, ,. „ C To carry, for service, a leaden 

Hall s carbine, " -? , „ . ■ i • i oo „<•« ik 

£ bullet, weighing 1-32 ot a lb. 

" " common rifle, " ~) m e ■ i™,i™ 

tt i„ n ,, /To carry, for service, a leaden 

Hall s rifle, " >, „ . J ■ , • , oc> .- •. 

. ' C bullet, weighing 1-32 ot a lb. 



12.... No slave, the property of any officer or person in the 
service of the United States connected with the War Department, 
shall be employed in the Ordnance Department. 

13.... Enlisted men in the Ordnance Department will be mustered 
in either of the grades autherized by law, except that of master 
■workmen, at the discretion of the senior ordnance officer at the 
arsenal or depot at which they may be stationed; provided that 
each ordance man mustered in the second grade of workmen, viz. 
that of armorer, carriage-maker, or blacksmith, be a competent and 
skilful mechanic in the particular occupation of the grade in which 
he is mustered; and provided, that each ordnance man mustered in 
the third grade, viz. that of artificer, be a good and competent 
mechanic, or skilful in the preparation of ammunition, and in the 
performance of other laboratory duties, or skilful in the performance 
of the duties of a clerk; and provided, that each ordnance man 
mustered in the fourth grade of workmen, viz. that of laborer, as 



FOR THE ARMY. ]61 



Ordnance Department. 



well as other grades, be in all respects able-bodied and efficient. 
Master workmen will be appointed, when required, by the chief 
of the Ordnance Department, upon recommendations, if necessary, 
of the senior officers of arsenals or depots. Ordnance men will 
be discharged by their commanders on expiration of enlistment; 
but for any other cause they can be discharged only by the War 
Department, or sentence of a general court martial. Should it be 
found ncesesary in any emergency, to divert the labor of the enlisted 
men in the Ordnance Department from the occupations for which 
they are mustered, to any other branch of the public service, a 
report of the case will be promptly furnished to the chief of the 
Ordnance Department. 

14.... The chief of the Ordnance Department will, whenever the 
public interest may require it, assign to each arsenal or ordnance 
depot, a certain number of enlisted men of specified grades of 
workmen; and the officer in charge of such arsenal or ordnance 
depot, is authorized to fill by enlistment all vacancies, excepting 
master workmen, occurring therein, according to the number and 
grades prescribed in the assignment, which number shall in no case 
be increased or diminished, except by authority from the chief of the 
Ordnance Department. 

15.... No hired or enlisted man engaged in the service of the 
Ordnance Department, at any national armory, arsenal, ordnance 
depot, or with any military command, shall be employed for the 
private benefit of officers or other persons, with or without com- 
pensation; and no kind or quality of public property appertaining 
to the Ordnance Department, shall, under any pretence, be sold, 
exchanged, or used for the private benefit of any person or persons 
whatsoever. The public workshops, tools, and materials, must be 
used solely for the purposes of public benefit; and all private work 
in the public buildings, and all other application of public means 
to any other than public purposes, is expressly prohibited. It shall 
be the special duty of all officers or other agents of the Ordnance 
Department, and especially Inspectors, to see that this regulation 
be strictly observed. 

16.... Ordnance or ordnance stores shall not be issued for con- 
11 



162 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Ordnance Department. 



stfiuction in the ordnance shops, or for the current service of any 
military post, except on the written authority of the commander, or 
that of some military officer, or other responsible person acting 
under his orders, and such authority shall, in all cases, state the 
object of the issue, and be filed in the Ordnance or Adjutant's office 
of the post, that the quarterly abstract of materials expended or 
consumed at the post, (see Form No. 8 of Ordnance Regulations,) 
may be made in conformity to the orders for issue. 

17... To guard against the embezzlement of ordnance and ord- 
nance stores, they shall be distinctly and permanently marked, so 
as to identify them as being the property of the United States' 
previous to their being sent from the arsenals or ordnance depots. 

18.... When any person shall fraudulently sell or otherwise dis- 
pose of any ordnance or ordnance stores, the property of the United 
States, or convert the same to his own use, or deface their marks 
for the purpose of concealment, or wantonly waste or destroy such 
property, it shall be the duty of the military officer to whom the 
facts shall become known, either personally or on credible report, 
to communicate the circumstances to the chief of the Ordnance 
Department, who will adopt such measures in the case as the 
interest of the service may require. 

19.... One complete set of arms and accoutrements, if the state 
of the public supplies will permit, may be issued to any officer of 
the army, for his own use and no other's, at the cost price, on his 
giving triplicate receipts therefor, authorizing the amount to be 
deducted from his pay. One of the receipts will be forwarded by 
the issuing officer, at the time of the issue, direct to the Second 
Auditor of the Treasury, for settlement. 

20.... Whenever a commissioned officer shall receive from any 
arsenal or depot, or otherwise obtain, or be possessed of any swords, 
pistols, rifles, or other small arms or accoutrements, the property of 
the United States, for his personal use and service, it shall be the 
duty of the chief of the Ordnance Department to charge to such 
officer the value of the same at the contract or actual cost, and to 
transmit to the Second Auditor of the Treasury a copy of such 
charge, in order that the amount may be stopped from his pay. 



FOIt THE ARMY. 163 



Ordnance Department. 



21 Ordnance or ordnance stores in charge of any ordnance 

officer, or the commander of any regiment, company, or detachment 
or other agent of the Ordnance Department, shall, in no case, he 
issued or loaned to individuals, except as provided in paragraph 
51; nor shall any articles of such ordnance or ordnance stores be, 
under any circumstances, used for private purposes by any officer 
or other agent having charge of the same, or bo diverted from its 
legitimate use, as indicated by the laws appropriating for the service 
c?f the Ordnance Department. 

22.... In time of war, arms, ordnance, and ordnance stores, for 
arming, equipping, and supplying the troops in service, will be 
issued upon the order of any general or field officer commanding 
any army, garrison, or detachment, whose order will be transmitted 
to the Ordnance Department, by the officer or agent by whom the 
issue is made. The arming of permanent fortifications will be 
specially directed by the Secretary of War. 

23.... In time of peace, no arms, ordnance, or ordnance stores, 
will be issued for transportation from any ordnance depot, unless by 
authority of the chief of the Ordnance Department, except in cases 
of urgent necessity. Whenever issues are made under this excep- 
tion, the order therefor will be forwarded with the next quarterly 
return of property, accompanied by a statement of the necessity of 

the issue. 

24.... Service ammunition, ordnance, or other ordnance stores, 
issued on urgent occasions, as provided in the next preceding para- 
graph, shall be carefully stored at some convenient ordnance depot, 
when the urgency ceases. 

25.... Ordnance or ordnance stores shall, under no pretence what- 
ever, be issued, except to the United States' troops, to the militia 
in the service of the United States, to the militia under the Act 
of 1808, or to officers of the army as provided in paragraph 51, 
unless specially authorized by the President of the United States. 

26.... Any officer commanding a district or geographical depart- 
ment, who, in time of peace, may require authority to call, at his 
discretion, for ordnance and ordnance stores, from the arsenals and 
depots within the extent of his command, will make application 



]64 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Ordnance Department. 

for that purpose, to the Secretary of War, through the Adjutant 
General's office. 

27. •••Requisitions for ordnance and ordnance stores for the use 
of regiments, companies, detachments, or military posts or stations, 
will, in time of peace, be transmitted to the General or commander 
of the district or geographical department, within which such regi- 
ment, company, detachment, or military post or station, is situated, 
who will sanction, modify, or annul such requisition, at his discre- 
tion. If sanctioned or modified, he wil! transmit the same, through 
the Adjutant General, for the decision of the General in Chief. 
These requisitions to be made annually, and transmitted on the 
first day of January. Requisitions for arms and accoutrements for 
the recruiting service will be made through the superintendent to 
the Adjutant General direct. 

28.... In cases of urgent necessity, the requisition may be trans- 
mitted direct to the Adjutant General, for the decision [of the General 
in Chief; duplicates thereof being immediately forwarded, as pre- 
scribed in the preceding paragraph. 

29.... Ordnance or ordnance stores for the Military Academy, will 
be required, as prescribed in paragraph 27; the requisitions being 
forwarded to the Chief Engineer, whose decision in the case will 
be communicated to the chief of the Ordnance Department. 

30.... The chief of the Ordinance Department shall examine all 
requisitions for ordnance supplies, under the direction of the Secre- 
tary of War, will modify and regulate them in such manner as to 
curtail all extravagancies, to suit them to the exigencies of the 
service, to existing appropriations, and to just and proper views of 
economy; and in the performance of this part of his duty, he will 
invariably communicate with the General in Chief of the army. 

31.... It shall be the duty of the chief of the Ordnance Depart- 
ment, under the direction of the General in Chief, to see that a 
sufficient quantity of ordnance, ammunition, and ordnance stores, 
are deposited at every military post at which troops are stationed. 

32.... When orders for supplies are received at any armory or 
ordnance depot, the superintendent or senior officer will cause the 
articles ordered to be carefully packed; and will turn them over to 



FOR THE ARMY. 165 



Ordnance Department. 



the nearest Quarter Master for transportation. An invoice, according 
to Form No. 10 of the Ordnance Regulations, will he furnished the 
Quarter Master, when the requisition for transportation is made. A 
duplicate of the invoice will, at the same time, be transmitted to 
the officers to whom the stores are addressed, or for whose com- 
mand they are designed. The dates when the order was received, 
and the articles turned over for transportation, will be reported in 
the following monthly returns. 

33.... When ordnance or ordnance stores are received by any 
officer or agent of the army, such officer or agent shall, immediately 
on their reception, cause the same to be examined; and, if found to 
accord with the invoice, he shall transmit his receipts for the same 
to the forwarding officer. If, on examination, it shall appear that 
they are less than specified in the invoice, or have sustained material 
injury in the transportation, it shall be the duty of such officer or 
agent to report the amount of loss or damage sustained in transporta- 
tion, to the chief of the Ordnance Department; and also to the 
proper officer of the Quarter Master's Department. To the end, 
that if such amount has arisen from neglect of the agent of 
transportation, it may be deducted from the amount allowed him 
for that service. 

34.... When ordnance or ordnance stores are received by an 
officer or agent of the army, a report of the date of reception will 
be immediately made by the officer or agent, to the chief of the 
Ordnance Department. 

35. ...When an officer or agent of the army, who shall have 
received an invoice of ordnance or ordnance stores to be forwarded 
to him, has reason to believe that they have been lost, or have 
miscarried, or are deposited in irresponsible hands, it shall be his 
duty to acquaint the forwarding officer of such failure. And it 
shall be the duty of both officers to make diligent inquiries along 
the route of transportation, of all persons into whose hands such 
ordnance or ordnance stores might probably have passed; the result 
of which shall be reported according to Form No. 12, of the Ord- 
nance Regulations, to the chief of the Ordnance Department. Should 
it be ascertained that the stores have been lost, then the officer 



166 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Ordnance Department. 

to whom they were sent shall enclose a certificate referred to in 
Form 12, of the Ordnance Regulations, to the forwarding officer, 
who shall transmit the same, accompanied by one from himself, (see 
Form No. 13, of the Ordnance Regulations,) to the chief of the Ord- 
nance Department, to the end that he may be relieved from fur- 
ther responsibility on that account. 

36.... The commander of any permanently embodied regiment, 
(but if separated by companies or detachments, the commander of 
each company or detachment,) will be considered as having the 
immediate charge of, and will be held accountable for, all arms, 
ordnance, and ordnance stores, issued for the exclusive service of 
the troops constituting his command. And the commander of each 
separate military post will be considered as having the immediate 
charge of, and will be held accountable for, all ordnance and ord- 
nance stores at the post, which are not in the exclusive service 
of any regiment, company, or detachment, or not in charge of an 
officer or agent of the Ordnance Department. 

37.... At the decease of any officer, or other agent, chargeable 
with ordnance or ordnance stores, who, by the 130th paragraph of 
the Ordnance Regulations, was responsible for the returns therein 
required, a board of survey shall be assembled by the senior officer 
of the arsenal depot, or post, to examine said ordnance or ord- 
nan?e stores. The board will make a duplicate report in the same 
order of classification as in paragraph 164 of the Ordnance Regula- 
tions, stating the kinds, quantity, and condition, of said ordnance 
or ordnance stores; one of which will be immediately transmitted 
to the chief of the Ordnance Department; the other will be handed 
to the successor of the deceased. 

38 ... . Whenever it shall appear to any military commander, 
having charge of any ordnance or ordnance stores, that any por- 
tion thereof has been lost by unavoidable accident, or has, in like 
manner become unserviceable, it shall be his duty to assemble 
a board of survey to investigate the facts, and report to him the 
cause of such loss or damage. The proceedings of this board shall 
be submitted to the said commander for his remarks or explana- 
tions, and shall be forwarded by him, with his next quarterly 
return of property, to the chief of the Ordnance Department. 



FOR THE ARMY. 167 



Ordnance Department. 



39.. •• Whenever any officer in charge of ordnance or ordnance 
stores, shall leave his command or pest with the prospect of being 
absent for any period less than three months, it shall not be obli- 
gatory on him to take the receipts for the said ordnance or ord- 
nance stores; but he may, at his own discretion, either close his 
accounts, or place the ordnance or ordnance stores under charge 
of the officer next in command, who shall, in that case, do all 
duty in regard to said ordnance or ordnance stores, in the name 
of said absent officer, until his return to the command or post. 

40-...Tiie commander of each company shall, as far as practica- 
ble, retain and keep in store such number of small arms and sets 
of accoutrements as may be sufficient, with those in use, to equip 
the full complement of men established by law for his command 
and whenever any portion of such small arms and accoutrements 
become unserviceable for want of repairs which cannot be made 
at the post, it shall be the duty of the commander of the regiment 
or post to send them to the nearest or most convenient arsenal, 
with a requisition for immediate repair; but in no case shall such 
unserviceable small arms and accoutrements be exchanged for others, 
when they can be made serviceable by repair. It is made the duty 
of commanders of regiments, as far as practicable, to see that this 
regulation is strictly observed. 

41.... Whenever an enlisted soldier is transferred from one com- 
pany to another, his arms and accoutrements will be retained with 
the company to which he belonged, unless the urgency of the ser- 
vice shall otherwise require. 

42.... Surplus ordnance and ordnance stores shall be turned into 
store, in as good order as possible, at the most convenient ord- 
nance depot, for which the officer or agent in charge of such depot, 
shall give receipts, stating their condition. One set. of receipts shall In- 
transmitted to the chief of the Ordnance Department, with the next 
quarterly return. 

43.... Surplus ordnance and ordnance stores at any military post 
not an ordnance depot, which are considered by the commander of 
the post as unnecessary for the public service, will be transported 
to an arsenal or ordnance depot; provided the removal of such 



168 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Ordnance Depart/mint. 



ordnance and ordnance stores shall be first sanctioned by an Inspec- 
tor General, or by the commander of the department in which they 
are situated. Officers commanding posts will report all surplus 
stores to the commander of the department, or to the Inspector 
General, when present at the post on a tour of inspection, who will 
designate the place to which they shall be removed. 

44.... When ordnance or ordnance stores are sent to an arsenal, 
ordnance depot, or military post, they will be received and entered 
upon the property return of the post, arsenal, or depot; but before 
any receipts are given for such ordnance or ordnance stores, an 
accurate inventory of them will be made, and the receipts will 
express not only the number or quantity, but also the condition of 
the several articles received. 

45.... In all cases in which ordnance or ordnance stores are lost 
or damaged, by the negligence or misconduct of any officer, cadet, 
or enlisted soldier, or of any artificer or laborer of the Ordnance 
Department, the amount of said loss or damage, shall be charged to 
the delinquent, on the next muster roll, and the facts will be record- 
ed in the books of the company, detachment, military post, arsenal, 
or ordnance depot. On the next quarterly return of ordnance and 
ordnance stores, the names of the delinquents will be noted with 
the amount charged, the particular loss or damage for which the 
charge is made, and the date of the muster roll on which noted. 

4 6.... When, in compliance with the preceding paragraph, a 
charge for loss or damage to ordnance or ordnance stores is made 
against any individual, it shall be the duty of the commanding 
officer, provided it be requested by the individual charged, to 
assemble a board of examination to investigate the facts, and report 
to him the cause of such loss or damage; which report, with the 
remarks of the commanding officer thereon, shall accompany the 
next quarterly return to the chief of the Ordnance Department. 

47. ...All charges made, in conformity to paragraphs 45 and 46 
of these regulations, for* loss or damage of ordnance and ordnance 
stores, or for the same issued to the militia, shall have precedence 
of all other claims whatsoever, and be regulated by tables of cost, 
periodically published by the chief of the Ordnance Department. 

48 •••• Whenever stoppages are noted on muster rolls, for loss or 



FOR THE ARMY. 169 



Ordnance Department. 



damage of ordnance or ordnance stores, it shall be the duty of the 
Paymaster to withhold the amount charged, and that of the Paymas- 
ter General to transmit to the Second Auditor of the Treasury, in 
the month of May, annually, a statement exhibiting the total amount 
of such stoppages up to the 31st of December next preceding; to 
the end, that such amount may be refunded to the appropriation to 
which it may legally belong. 

4 9.... Whenever ordnance or ordnance stores are reported urn- 
serviceable, they will be examined by an Inspector General, or some 
other officer specially appointed by the Secretary of War for that 
purpose, who will note on the inventory such as he condemns as 
wholly unserviceable; such as he considers reparable; and such as 
he deems serviceable. He will recommend the stores condemned 
by him, either to be broken up at the arsenal, depot, or military 
post, or to be sold, as may be deemed most advantageous to the 
public service. But should it appear to the Inspector that the 
ordnance or ordnance stores condemned are of too little value to 
cover the expense of sale or breaking up, he will recommend them 
to be dropped from the return as useless. Such arms and stores 
as the Inspector may consider reparable, he will direct either to be 
repaired at the arsenal, depot, or military post, or to be transported 
to the nearest or most convenient arsenal, or depot of construction 
or repair. The inventory, (see Form No. 9,) with the remarks and 
opinion of the Inspector shall be made in duplicate; one copy to be 
left with the officer having charge of the ordnance and ordnance 
stores, and the other to be forwarded to the chief of the Ordnance 
Department, for the further action of the President of the United 
States. 

50.... All persons having the charge and custody (by the 36th 
paragraph) of ordnance and ordnance stores, will be held responsible 
for the same, and they shall make and transmit, within twenty days 
after the termination of the quarter, to the chief of the Ordnance 
Department, quarterly returns of the same, according to the forms 
referred to in paragraph 133 of the Ordnance Regulations; which 
returns, after having been duly examined, will be transmitted to 
the proper accounting officers of the Treasury. 

51.... When an officer commands at the same time a military 



170 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Ordnance Department. 

post, and also a regiment or company, he shall make returns of 
ordnance and ordnance stores belonging to the post, separate and 
distinct from those belonging to the regiment or company. 

52. ...Should officers or other agents of the Ordnance Depart- 
ment, charged by the 36th and 50th paragraphs of these Regulations, 
with ordnance and ordnance stores, fail to render the prescribed 
returns thereof, within a reasonable time after the termination of 
a quarter, a settlement will be made of their accounts at the 
Treasury, and the money value of the supplies with which they 
stand charged, shall be reported against them for collection. The 
delinquency will also furnish matter of military accusation, at the 
discretion of the proper authority. 

53.... The senior officer of the Ordnance Department, who may 
be attached to any army in the field, shall have the charge and 
direction of the main depot of ordnance and ordnance stores, for 
the supply of such army. All orders relating thereto shall be 
regularly transmitted to him through the office of the Adjutant 
Generah or the chief of the artillery acting with such army. He 
will communicate with the chief artillery officer, to ascertain the 
actual and probable wants of the army relative to his Department, 
and be prepared to furnish supplies at the shortest notice. He will 
also correspond with the chief of the Ordnance Department, and 
with the officers at the nearest arsenals and laboratories, so as to 
anticipate, if possible, and provide for all the wants of the armory 
connected with his department. 

54.... All orders received from the head quarters of the army 
relating to the movement of the troops or the discipline of the 
army, shall be circulated through and by the senior officer of the 
Ordnance Department, to every arsenal or ordnance depot. 

55.... Enlisted soldiers who may be detailed from the line of the 
army for extra service, under the direction of an officer of the 
Ordnance Department, shall be allowed, while so employed, for 
every period greater than ten days, continuously, a per diem of 
fifteen cents. 

56.... The commandant of each company in garrison shall con- 
stantly retain in store, and exhibit on his quarterly returns of pro- 
perty, the regulation arm-chests hereinafter mentioned; in which 



FOR THE ARMY. 171 



Ordnance Department. 



all arms or accoutrements not in the hands of the troops, shall be 
at all times securely packed for preservation — viz: to each company 
of infantry, and to each company of artillery armed as infantry, 
two musket arm-chests; to each company of riflemen, two rifle 
arm-chests; to each company of cavalry, one pistol arm-chest; and 
if armed with carbines or rifles, then, in addition, one rifle or 
carbine arm-chest. 

5?'.... Commanding officers of regiments, garrisons, companies, 
or detachments, shall be responsible that all surplus chests or cases 
in which arms or other ordnance stores have been conveyed to his 
command, are carefully preserved. They will be receipted for and 
entered upon the property returns as other stores, and in like man- 
ner reported to the Ordnance Department. 

58.... Every officer commanding a regiment permanently embo- 
died, company, garrison, detachment, or corps of cadets, will make 
a report every two months, as required by the 7th section of the 
law passed the 8th of February, 1815, "to the Colonel of the 
Ordnance Department," which reports shall be consolidated by the 
Colonel of Ordnance, and transmitted, with his remarks and orders 
thereon, every six months, to the superintendents of the national 
armories, and inspecting officers of the Ordnance Department. The 
object of which will be to ascertain and correct any defects which 
may exist in the manufacture of arms. 

Ordnance Sergeants. 

59. ...The act of Congress of the 5th of April, 1832, authorizes 
the selection from the Sergeants of the line of the army, who may 
have faithfully served eight years (four years of which in the grade 
of non-commissioned officer) as many Ordnance Sergeants as the 
service may require, not exceeding one to each military post. 

60- •••The duty of these Ordnance Sergeants is, to receive and 
preserve the ordnance, arms, ammunition, and other military stores, 
at the post to which they may be respectively attached, under the 
direction of the commanding officer, and according to the regula- 
tions of the Ordnance Department. 

61.... With a view to a proper selection of Ordnance Sergeants, 
the Captains, or officers commanding companies, will report to the 



172 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Ordnance Department. 



respective Colonels, such Sergeants as may, in their opinion, by 
their conduct and service, be entitled to be considered candidates 
for the ordnance, setting forth in their reports the description, length 
of service of the candidates, the portion of which he served as non- 
commissioned officer, his general character as to fidelity and sobriety, 
his qualifications as a clerk, and his fitness for the duties to be 
performed by an Ordnance Sergeant. The Colonels will forward the 
reports of the commanding officers of companies, through the Adju- 
tant General, to the General in Chief, with such remarks as to the 
qualifications of the Sergeants proposed for the ordnance duties, as 
they may judge proper to make. 

62.... When companies are detached from the head quarters of 
the regiment, the reports of the commanding officers of companies, 
in reference to this subject, will pass through the commanding 
officer of the post or detachment, to the Colonel of the regiment, 
and be accompanied by the opinion of the former, as to the fitness 
of the candidate. 

63.... Ordnance Sergeants will be assigned to posts when ap- 
pointed, and are not to be transferred to other stations, except by 
orders from the Adjutant General's office. 

64.... When serving at any post, which may be the headquarters 
of a regiment, Ordnance Sergeants shall be mustered with the non- 
commissioned staff of the regiment; and at all other posts they 
shall be mustered and reported in some company stationed at the 
post at which they serve; be paid on the muster roll, and be charged, 
with the clothing and all other supplies previously received from 
any officer, or subsequently issued to them by the commanding 
officer of the company for the time being. Whenever the company 
may be ordered from the post, the Ordnance Sergeant will be trans- 
ferred to the rolls of any remaining company, by the order of the 
commanding officer of the post; and if the post be evacuated, the 
Sergeant of Ordnance shall remain on duty at the station, under the 
direction of the chief of the Ordnance Department, in charge of the 
ordnance and ordnance stores, and of such other public property, as 
is not in charge of some officer or agent of other departments; for 
which ordnance stores and property, he will account to the chiefs of 
the proper departments, until otherwise directed, and in case of 



FOR THE ARMY. 173 



Ordnance Department. 



such evacuation of a post, he shall be furnished with his descriptive 
and muster roll, and account of clothing, authenticated by the Cap- 
tain or other proper officer, together with a statement of the period 
to which he may have drawn his pay and subsistence, accompanied 
with the remarks necessary for the transmittal of his military his- 
tory to the rolls on which he may be next mustered. 

65 -...Sergeants of Ordnance are to be considered as belonging to 
the non-commissioned staff of the post, under the orders of the 
commanding officer. They are to wear the uniform of the Ordnance 
Department, with the distinctive badges prescribed for the non-com- 
missioned staff of regiments of artillery; and they are to appear 
under arms with the troops at all reviews, and inspections, monthly 
and weekly. 

66.... At the expiration of their term of service, Ordnance Ser- 
geants may be re-enlisted, provided they shall have conducted them- 
selves in a becoming manner, and performed their duties to the 
satisfaction of the commanding officer. If the commanding officer 
shall, however, not think proper to re-enlist the Ordnance Sergeant 
of his post, he will not discharge him at the expiration of his 
service, unless it shall be the wish of the Sergeant to be discharg- 
ed; but will communicate to the Adjutant General his reasons for 
declining the re-enlistment of him, which communication will be 
laid before the General in Chief for his determination and orders 
in the case. 

67 The officers interested must be aware, from the nature of 

the duties assigned to Ordnance Sergeants, that the judicious selec- 
tion of them is of no small importance to the interests of the service; 
and that while the law contemplates, in the appointment of these 
non-commissioned officers, the better preservation of the ordnance 
and ordnance stores in deposite in the several forts, there is the 
further motive of offering a reward to those faithful and well-tried 
Sergeants, who have long served their country, and of thus giving 
encouragement to the soldier in the ranks to emulate them in 
conduct, and thereby secure substantial promotion. Colonels and 
Captains cannot, therefore, be too particular in investigating the 
characters of the candidates, and in giving their testimony as to 
their merits. 



174 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Ordnance Department. 



Issues of Arms, Ordnance, and Ordnance Stores, to 
the Militia called into the service of the United Slates, 
and the accountability therefor. 

68.. ..Whenever any regiment, battalion, company, or detach- 
ment of militia, shall be called into the service of the United 
States, they shall be mustered and inspected by an Inspector Gene- 
ral, or by some other duly authorized officer of the regular troops, 
who shall ascertain the condition of the arms, accoutrements, 
ordnance, and ordnance stores, in their possession, and if it should 
be found necessary to supply them with arms and acoutrements, or 
ordnance and ordnance stores, belonging to the United States, the 
commander thereof shall make a requisition for the articles required, 
according to Form No. 57 of the Ordnance Regulations, which, if 
sanctioned by the inspecting officer, shall be submitted to, and 
receive the approval or modification, and the orders of the com- 
mander, or senior officer of the regular troops present, or in the 
vicinity; and upon such requisition, duly signed, any officer or agent 
of the Ordnance Department may issue the articles required, taking 
duplicate receipts therefor; one of which shall be forwarded to the 
chief of the Ordnance Department, in order that the same may be 
charged to the officer who received them, on the books of the 
department. And the commander of said regiment, battalion, 
company, or detachment, shall be held responsible for the care 
and preservation of the articles thus received, and that the arms 
and acoutrements are issued to the men constituting his command, 
and that each individual is charged on the muster roll with the 
actual number of arms and acoutrements delivered to him; and 
the same shall be entered upon every successive muster roll until 
the men shall be discharged. 

69.... When any militia are about to be discharged, they shall 
be mustered for payment by an Inspector General, or some other 
duly authorized officer of the regular troops, who shall at the same 
time critically inspect the arms and acoutrements in their possession 
in order to ascertain if any loss or damage has accrued to them 
whilst in their possession, either by negligence, or carelessness, and 



FOR THE ARMY. 175 



Ordnance Department. 



if any, shall charge the amount of said loss or damage, according to 
the rates established by the Ordnance Department, to each individual 
opposite to his name on the muster roll, which amount the Pay- 
master authorized to pay them, shall deduct from the pay due each 
individual at the time of their discharge. And it shall be the duty 
of the inspecting officer at the time of muster and inspection for 
discharge, to receive the arms and accoutrements, ordnance, and 
ordnance stores, in the possession of the regiment, battalion, com- 
pany, or detachment, and to give duplicate receipts for the same to 
the commander thereof, in order that he may settle his accounts 
with the Ordnance Department. 

70. ...No payment shall be made to any militia called into the 
service of the United States, by any Paymaster, except they have 
been mustered and have delivered up their arms and accoutrements 
as set forth in the preceding paragraph, unless they were absent by 
reason of sickness or some other justifiable cause, at the time of 
the muster and inspection for discharge; and in such case they shall 
produce receipts to the Paymaster that they have deposited their 
arms and accoutrements, with some ordnance or other officer 
authorized to receive them, who shall state in the receipts the con- 
dition of the arms and accoutrements, and the amount of loss 
or damage (if any has accrued whilst the same were in their 
possession) according to the rates established by the Ordnance 
Department, which amount the Paymaster shall deduct from the 
pay due them at the time of their discharge. 

71.... In all cases when arms, accoutrements, ordnance, and 
ordnance stores, issued to any officer, non-commissioned officer, or 
soldier of the militia called into the service of the United States, 
shall have been lost by unavoidable circumstances, it shall be the 
duty of the inspecting officer, who shall muster and inspect the 
same for discharge, to require the affidavit of some officer or non- 
commissioned officer, testifying to the unavoidable circumstances of 
the loss, and such affidavit, if deemed satisfactory, shall be sufficient 
authority for the inspecting officer to relieve him from all charges 
on account of such loss, which shall be entered with the affidavit 
on the muster roll of the individual who shall have been charged 
with the loss. 



176 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Ordnance Department. 



72.... Table 


and Sate, 


of Charges for Small Arms. 








Common Rifle 








Musket. 


half or whole 


Piitol. 


Componeut Parts. 






stocked. 






Prices. 


Price?. " 


Prices. 






Dolls. Cis. Ms. 


Dolls. Cls. .Ms. 


Dolls. Cte. ftlk. 


Barrel 


. 


4 21 


5 94 5 


2 72 2 


Stock - 


- 


1 53 8 


2 14 2 


1 00 


Bayonet 


- 


1 44 3 






Ramrod 


- 


62 8 


87 2 


38 6 


Lock-plate 


- 


■2 


f 49 6 


66 


33 


Brass pan 


- 


a 


21 6 


30 5 


15 


Cock - 


. 


°e 


45 5 


61 


30 5 


Jaws - 


. 


2 -* 


14 8 


20 2 


10 1 


Batteries 


- 


1 par 

$3.0 


35 9 


52 1 


26 


Tumblers 


- 


23 9 


34 4 


17 3 


Bridles 


- 


2%< 


16 5 


25 3 


12 6 


Sears - 


. 


11 2 


13 7 


6 8 


Main-spring - 


- 




26 8 


37 9 


18 9 


Battery-spring 


- 


"o to 


17 5 


25 5 


12 7 


Flint-screw 


. 


w r; 


7 1 


8 7 


4 3 


Sear-spring 


- 


ll 


12 9 


15 8 


7 9 


Tumbler-screw 


- 


O 

s 

<< 


2 3 


2 8 


1 4 


Lock-screws — set 


- 


.. 19 


25 3 


12 6 


Breech 


- 


10 3 


12 6 


6 3 


Tang-screw 


- 


3 3 


4 7 


2 3 


Bayonet-stud - 


- 


2 






Side-screws — set 


- 


7 2 


8 8 


4 4 


Upper-band 


- 


27 3 


38 9 


19 4 


Middle-band - 


- 


14 9 


20 5 


10 1 


Lower-band 


- 


9 4 


11 5 


5 7 


Guard-plate 


- 


29 4 


41 1 


20 5 


Breech-plate - 


- 


29 


40 6 


20 3 


Side-plate 


- 


3 1 


3 8 


1 9 


Trigger 


- 


9 7 


11 9 


5 9 


Swivels and rivets 


- 


19 4 


23 8 




Brass-sights 


- 


2 8 


3 4 


1 7 


Guard-screws — set 


- 


3 1 


3 8 


1 9 


Breech-plate screws- 


—set 


2 8 


3 4 


1 7 


Band springs — set 


- 


13 3 


16 3 


8 1 


Ramrod swivel 


- 


- 


- 


25 


Cock-bolt 


- 


- 


- 


25 


Guard-bow 


- 


28 3 


39 8 


19 9 


Total amount 


13 00 


16 00 


8 00 


Screw-drivers - 


7 


7 




Wipers 


- 


13 


13 




Ball-screws 


. 


15 


15 




Spring-vices - 


- 


35 


35 




Bullet-moulds 


- 


-' 


30 


30 



FOR THE ARMY. 



177 



Ordnance Department. 



Table and Rates of Charges for Small Arms — Continued. 



Component Parts. 



Hall's Rifle. 



Prices. 



Aprons .... 

Barrel - . - - - 

Bayonet .... 

Band, upper .... 
Band, middle .... 
Band, lower, .... 
Butt-pieces .... 

Batteries .... 

Catches .... 

Catch-plates - , - - 

Chops ..... 
Chocks, (2 to a rifle) ... 
Cock - 

Guard-plates .... 
Guard bows . - . - 

Guides ..... 
Heel-plates .... 

Links - 

Apron-screws .... 
Battery axis-screws ... 

Battery spring-screws ... 
Cock-pin-screws ... 

Cock-axis screws ... 

Catch-axis-screws ... 

Catch-spring screws ... 
Chock-pin-screws, (2 to each) - 
Catch-plate-screw ... 

Guard-screw, (2 to each) 
Heel-plate-screw . . - 

Long-pin-screw ... 

Link-pin-screw - - - - 

Main-spring-screw ... 

Sear-axis-screw ... 

Sear-spring-screw ... 

Set-spring-screw ... 

Supporter-fastener-screw, (4 to each) 
Side-spring-screw, (3 to each) 
Receiver ..... 

Ramrod .... 

Supporters, (2 to each) - 
Sears - 
Staps - 
Swivels, (2 to each) . - - 

12 Carried forward 



Dolls, cts. ins. 

12 7 

4 4 4 

1 24 

32 2 

18 7 

11 4 



8 


1 


45 


8 


19 


2 


16 


2 


16 


1 


14 


4 


58 


7 


47 


1 


20 


2 


6 


3 


29 


4 


8 


7 


3 


5 


3 


1 


3 


1 


6 


3 


4 


I 


2 


8 


4 


3 


5 


7 


2 


6 


6 


8 


8 


5 


4 


6 


3 


1 


4 





4 


7 


3 





3 


3 


8 


5 


8 


9 


66 






56 
84 
28 
14 



19 6 



14 54 8 



178 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 







Ordnance Department. 




Tables and Bates of Charges for Small Arms — Continued. 






Component [parts. 


II; 


H'« Rifle. 


















I'ric?*. 








Dol 


s. cts. ms. 






Brought forward 


11 


54 8 


Main-spring 


- 


- 




20 1 


Battery-spring 


- 


- 




17 4 


Sear-spring 


- 


. 




15 2 


Catch-spring 


- 


. 




11 8 


Sight - 


- 


. 




5 2 


Stock - 




Total cost 


1 


95 5 




17 


20 


Bullet-moulds 




30 


Screw-driver 


- 


. 




6 5 


Wipers 


- 


. 




18 5 


Spring-vices 


■ 


•'."".-■ 




20 



J\ote 1st. — The cost of Hall's carbine, with its component parts, 
are not here given in detail; but when charges are made for that arm 
or its components, they will be greater than those lor Hall's rifle in 
the ratio of $21 to $17 20; the former being the price of the Hall's 
carbine. 

2d. — An armorer may be found necessary to point out some of the 
parts here alluded to. 

SWORDS. 



Component paits of Sabre, (old paltern,) iron 
varnished. 


scabbard, black, 


Prices. 


Blade 32^ inches by 1^ broad - 

Hilt I 

Guard 5 ' 

Scabbard, (iron) ... 

Scabbard rings, each 5 cents 


- 


DolU. etc. 
3 00 

65 

1 25 
10 


Total 


5 00 



FOR THE ARMY. 



179 



Ordnance Department. 



Table and Rates of Charges for Small Arms — Continued. 



Component pares of Sabre, (new pattern,) iron scabbard, brown Prices. 



Scabbard, length 

do. width, under top-piece 
do. thickness, do. - 

do. width above comb 
do. thickness, do. 

do. rings for 

Blade, length - 
do. width at hilt 
do. do. at centre - 

Thickness of back at hilt 
do. do. at centre 

Hilt, length 
do. brass work for 
do. grasp ... 
do. wire and covering 



Total 



inches. 


Dolls. 


cts. 


35.62 


2 


75 


1.43 






.66 






1.06 






.45 






. 




20 


34.25 


4 


56 


1.12 






.93 






.37 






.24 






5.40 






. 


2 


25 


. 




12 


- 




12 


- 


10 


00 



Component parts of new Artillery Sword, (straight,; leather scab- 
bard, yellow mounted. » 



Blade, (19 x l£ inches) 
Grip or hilt, brass 
Leather scabbard 
Band and button, brass - 
Socket, brass 



Total 



DoHs 


cts. 


2 


25 


1 


00 




50 




25 




25 


4 


25 



Note.— This sword will also be used by the infantry until further 
orders. 



180 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Ordnance Departmnnt. 



Rates of Charges for Accoutrements for Small Arms. 



Component parts of Infantry accoutrements. 



WIrite Leather. 

Cartridge-box, (black) eagle stamped, carrying 26 rounds 

in wooden case, and 24 rounds in tin case - 
Cartridge-box belts - 
Bayonet belts ------ 

Belt-plate, round, brass, with eagle - 

Bayonet scabbard, (black) ■• 

Brush and pick, brass - - - - - 

Gun sling, (russet) ----- 

Total cost, white leather - 

Black Leather. 

Cartridge-box, (as above) - - - - 

Cartridge-box belts - - - . . 

Bayonet-belt ------ 

Bayonet-scabbard, (as above) - - - - 

Belt-plate, (as above) ----- 

Brush and pick - - . . . 

Gun sling, (as above) - - - - - 

Total cost of black leather - 

Sword-belt for the infantry, (the same as for the new 
artillery sword) white leather ... 



Dolls, cts. 



1 10 
52 

58 
17 
45 
11 



$3 01 



1 10 
40 
44 
45 
17 
11 



$2 75 



1 25 



Component parts of Cavalry accoutrements. 



Prices. 



Sabre-belt, (white leather,) 2 inches wide, with 2 sling 
straps, £ inch wide, with brass mountings - 

Sabre-belt, (black leather,) 2 inches wide, with 2 sling 
straps, £ inch wide, with brass mountings 

Brass belt-plate, for the above - - - . 

Sabre-belt, (white webbing,) 2 inches wide, with 2 sling 
and two shoulder straps, each 1 inch wide, with brass 
mountings -.-... 

Pistol cartridge-box, carrying 12 rounds - - 

Holsters, pair, with hair seal skin or patent leather, 
carrying ten rounds ----- 

Carbine cartridge-box, carrying 30 rounds 



Dulls, cio. 
1 



75 

11 



65 



81) 



FOR THE ARMY. 



181 



Ordnance Department. 



Rates of Charges for Accoutrements for Small ..Jr/Hs— Continued. 



Component parts of Rifle accoutrements. 



Prices. 



White Leather. 

Rifle-pouch, (black) - 

Flask and pouch-belt - - - - 

Waist-belt ..... 

Plate for waist-belt - 

Plate for pouch and flask-belt - 

Copper-flask, carrying 8 ounces powder"^ 
Minimum charger, 85 grains > 

Maximum charger, 100 grains J 

Brush and pick .... 

Gun-sling, (russet) - 

Total cost for common rifle accoutrements 
Add for flail's Rife. 

Bayonet-belt .'-•--- 

Bayonet-scabbard, (black) - 

Total cost of Hall's Rifle accoutrements 
Black Leather. 

Rifle-pouch - 

Flask and pouch-belt - 

Waist-belt - 

Plate for pouch and flask-belt 

Plate for waist-belt - 

Copper-flask carry*ijj#^l ounces powder"") 
Minimum charger*85 grains > 

Maximum charger, 100 grains J 

Brush and pick - 

Gun-sling, (russet) - 

Total cost for common rifle accoutrements - 
Add for HaWs Rifle. 

Bayonet-belt - - • ~ 

Bayonet scabbard, (as above) - 

Total amount for Hall's Rifle acoutrements 



60 
35 

25 
8 
8 

1 50 

11 



3 05 



55 

45 



$4 05 



60 

27 

12 

8 

8 

1 50 

11 
8 



2 84 



40 
45 



Note— Hall's flask may be used instead of the copper 
properly made, its cost is about the same. 



$3 65 
flask; when 



182 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Ordnance Department. . . .Subsistence Department. 

73. ...The names of all ordnance stations will be officially known 
and designated as hereinafter exhibited, viz: 



Names of Ordnance Stations. 



Post Offices. 



Ordnance Office, 
Springfield Armory, 
Harper's Ferry Armory, 
Kennebeck Arsenal, 
Watertown Arsenal, 
Fort Monroe Arsenal, - 
Champlain Arsenal, 
Watervliet Arsenal, 
Rome Arsenal, - 
Allegheny Arsenal, 
Frankford Arsenal, 
Pikesville Arsenal, 
Washington Arsenal, 
Bellona Arsenal, 
Augusta Arsenal, 
Mount Vernon Arsenal, - 
Appalachicola Arsenal, - 
Baton Rouge Arsenal, - 
St. Louis Arsenal, 
Detroit Arsenal, - 
New York Depot, 
Charleston Depot, 



Washington City, D. C. 
Springfield, Massachusetts. 
Harper's Ferry, Virginia. 
Augusta, Maine. 
Watertown, Massachusetts. 
Fort Monroe, Virginia. 
Vergennes, Vermont. 
Watervliet, New York. 
Rome, New York. 
Pittsburg, Pennsylvania. 
Frankford, Pennsylvania. 
Pikesville, Maryland, 
Washington, D. C. 
Richmond, Virginia. 
Augusta, Georgia. 
Mt. Vernon, Ala. (via Mobile.) 
Chattahoochie, Florida. 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
St. Louis, Missouri. 
Detroit, Michigan Territory. 
New Vork City, New York. 
Charleston, South Carolina. 




ARTICL 



SUBSISTENCE DEPARTMENT. 



Commissary Genetal of Subsistence. 

l«...The Commissary General of Subsistence is stationed at the 
City of Washington, and has, under the direction of the Secretary 
of War, the general superintendence of the Subsistence Department. 

2.... He will make estimates of all expenditures for his depart- 
ment, regulate the transmission of funds to his assistants, receive 
their returns and accounts, and examine and adjust them for set- 
tlement at the Treasury, 



FOR THE ARMY. 1 83 



Subsistence Department. 



Assistant Commissaries of Subsistence. 

3.... Assistant Commissaries of Subsistence will, with the appro- 
bation of the General in Chief, be stationed by the Commissary 
General of Subsistence, at established posts and depots; they will 
not be removed therefrom but by order of the commanding General 
of the troops, or the Commissary General of Subsistence, except 
when posts are evacuated, in cases of arrest, or when required as 
witnesses before courts martial. 

4. .. .Assistant Commissaries and Acting Assistant Commissaries 
of Subsistence, are held strictly accountable for the safe keeping of 
all provisions intrusted to their charge, and for that purpose will 
make requisitions on the Quarter Master's Department for good 
and sufficient store houses, which will be furnished accordingly. 
It will be their duty to examine frequently into the state of the 
stores, to prevent damage and waste of every description. 

5 Assistant Commissaries and Acting Assistant Commissaries 

of Subsistence will receive and account, in the manner prescribed, 
for all subsistence stores intrusted to their charge, make out and 
transmit to the proper accounting officer, through the Commissary 
General of Subsistence, all returns and accounts; and when provi- 
sions have been inspected and delivered agreeably to the terms of 
the contract, give to the contractor a receipt therefor, together with 
one of the Inspector's certificates, stating at length the quantity 
and quality of the articles delivered; a duplicate of the receipt and 
certificate will be immediately forwarded to the Commissary Gen- 
eral of Subsistence. 

6... .When it becomes necessary for the Assistant Commtssiry 
of Subsistence to ship provisions from one post to another, he 
will require of the Quarter Master's Department the necessary 
transportation, and will make duplicate invoices, one to accompany 
his monthly return, and the other to be transmitted to the Assis- 
tant Commissary, to whom the provisions may be forwarded, which 
duplicate the receiving Assistant Commissary will trail ;mit with 
his return to the Commissary General of Subsistence, stating any 
difference he may discover between the articles state 1 in the in- 
voice and the provisions actually received. 



184 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Subsistence Department. 

7.... Should the failure of contractors, or other causes, render 
it necessary that provisions should be purchased, the Assistant 
Commissary of Subsistence will buy provisions of the best quality 
corresponding as nearly as possible with those specified by contract, 
and will forward to the Commissary General of Subsistence, a copy 
of the " Bill of Purchases," with a statement of the cause of 
purchase endorsed thereon. 

8.«..A book will be kept at each post, ruled so as to correspond 
with the monthly returns; in which kook the following entries will 
be made: all subsistence stores, stating from whom received, and 
whether they were purchased and paid for; all stores delivered 
to Assistant Commissaries of Subsistence; and at the end of each 
month, the entries of all issues to troops, to men, and others in 
hospitals, and of sales, so as to exhibit a full statement of all re- 
ceipts and issues. This book thus kept, is to be called the 
Commissary's Book, and is not to be removed from the post, but 
to remain for the benefit of the service. 

9.... No charge for printing blanks, as forms, will be allowed. 

10 In the event of the death of an Assistant Commissary of 

Subsistence, the commanding officer will take charge of, and for- 
ward to the Commissary General of Subsistence, all the papers 
relating to his transactions with the Subsistence Department; and 
all public moneys in the possession of the Assistant Commissary 
at the time of his death, will be turned over to his successor, 
and a receipt therefor forwarded to the Commissary General of 
Subsistence. 

11.... Empty barrels, boxes, &c, will be sold by the Assistant 
Commissary, and the proceeds thereof credited in his quarterly 
account. 

12.... The commanding officer of each post where an Assistant 
Commissary of Subsistence is stationed, will detail a suitable non- 
commissioned officer or soldier to assist him in the discharge of 
his commissariat duties, to be subject to such duties only as the 
Assistant Commissary of Subsistence shall require of him. 

13.... Each non-commissioned officer or soldier detailed as an 
Assistant in a subsistence store house, shall receive fifteen cents 



FOR THE ARMY. 185 



Subsistence Department. 



a day, in addition to his pay in the line. The amount will be 
paid by the Assistant Commissary of Subsistence, and introduced 
in his quarterly account current. 

14.... Should, however, the commanding officer be of opinion 
that it would prove detrimental to the service to detail a non- 
commissioned officer or soldier, as an assistant to the Assistant 
Commissary of the Subsistence, then the Assistant Commissary will 
hire a suitable person from civil life, to whom he is allowed to 
give the pay and commuted allowance of a Sergeant of infan- 
try, including the allowance of fifteen cents per diem. 

15.... At posts and stations where such an arrangement is prac- 
ticable, Assistant Commissaries of Subsistence will be stationed 
with their companies, and do duty with them. 

16.... When an Assistant Commissary of Subsistence shall be 
required to perform the duty in the Quarter Master's Department, in 
addition to his other duties, or when he shall issue to five or more 
companies, he shall be exempt from company or garrison duty. 

17-... Should there be any surplus stores at any of the Atlantic 
posts, the fact will be reported to the Commissary General, by the 
Assistant Commissary, who shall state the probable price which 
can be obtained for them, and suggest the best means as to their 
disposition. 

18.... At the western and north western posts, when there is a 
surplus of provisions on hand, the Assistant Commissary is autho- 
rized to sell them to the best advantage, but for not less than 
the contract price, unless otherwise instructed, and will forward, 
with the June return of each year, an "Estimate of Provisions," 
required at the post for the approaching contract year, commencing 
1st June, deducting the quantity that may be expected to remain 
on hand of the previous year's supply. 

Acting Assistant Commissaries of Subsistence. 
19.... When troops are detached to points where there is no 
Assistant Commissary of Subsistence, or in the event of the temporary 
absence of the regular Assistant Commissary of the post, the com- 
manding officer will appoint an officer to do the duty. Officers 



]86 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Subsistence Department. 

making such appointments will forthwith report them to the Com- 
missary General of Subsistence. 

Component Parts of the Ration. 

20.... The component parts of the rations are as follows: — three- 
fourths of a pound of pork or bacon; or one and one-fourth pounds 
of fresh or salt beef; eighteen ounces of bread or flour, or twelve 
ounces of hard bread, or one and one-fourth pounds of corn meal; 
and at the rate of four pounds of soap; one and a half pounds of 
candles; two quarts of salt; four quarts of vinegar; eight quarts of 
peas or beans, (or in lieu thereof) ten pounds of rice; four pounds 
of coffee, and eight pounds of sugar, to the hundred rations. On 
board of transports at sea and on the lakes, the ration of hard 
bread is one pound. 

21.... When a soldier is detached on command, or as a wit- 
ness on courts martial, if it be deemed by his commanding offi- 
cer impracticable to carry his provisions with him, his subsistence 
will be commuted at seventy-five cents per day, to be paid by 
the Assistant Commissary of Subsistence, where it may become 
due; or if circumstances require it, the amount may be paid in ad- 
vance by the Assistant Commissary of Subsistence. 

22.... Assistant and Acting Assistant Commissaries of Subsistence, 
and other agents of the Subsistence Department, are required 
promptly to acknowledge the receipt of all communications, ex- 
cept those letters which in themselves merely acknowledge the 
receipt of returns and accounts and the result of their examina- 
tion. 

Issues. 

23. ...Issues to the troops will be made, when practicable, on 
consolidated returns, signed by the commanding officer of the post, 
regiment, or brigade, agreeably to the prescribed form, and at the 
end of every month the Assistant Commissary of Subsistence will 
make out duplicate abstracts, which will be compared with the 
original returns, and certified by the commanding officer; one of 
which abstracts must accompany the monthly return of provisions 
received and issued. 







5 


o 

a - 
& 

en 


S3 
o 


o 

<! 
CD 


cd" 
o 

CD 
















ft 

ft- 


CD 
O 


CO 

3 


3- 

cr 

^5 


CD 


o 


3 












f** 






















0=1 


o 


^"* 


a- 


ri- 


3 


— 












§ 


Ci 


o 

CO 


cr 

co 

en' 


CD 

n 

o 


a 
2 


o 
o 














s. 


3 


3 


> 


3" 














^J 


p 


D- 


p 


i 


CD 














* 


3" 


cr 
<-< 


3 

St 
a" 
en 


<1 


10 

ST 














2 


O 
3 


CD 
c/2 


O 

3? 


P 
CO 


P 
P 














o 


o 


c 


o 


>— 


en 














!T> 






CD 


CD 
















o 


Cb 


Cf? 


•^ 


3 


p 














o 


CO 


CD 
O 


en* 


3- 

2 


*3 

cr 








IS 






cr 


a" 


3 




CO 


o 








B 






o 




O 


CT 
O 

cL 

CD 
"1 




"-»» 








► 






o' 

2 


3- 
CD 

to 


> 
c© 

in 

CO* 


3 
CD 

a 

CD 
CO 


CD 
CD 








rC 








j^ 


p 


o 


CO 

P 


3 
CD 








> 






o 
s 


D 
CB 


rt- 




*3 








»5 






.o 

«-►- 

cr 
W 

CD 


o 

p 
"1 
p 
Oq 

■1 


en 

CD 
O 

o 


CD 

GC 
CD 

o 

CD 

p" 
■-1 


3- 
P 

cr 

CD 

*». 

C«5 
SO 


CD 

en 

3 
P* 

o" 

3 

CO 

3 
3 
3. 
CD 






> 


G 

> 


B 
S3 
cX 

O 








cr 


er 


O 


ce 








PS 

B 

> 




P 


o" 
a 


J^ 


o 

CD 


•-*» 
3 








2 
W 

50 


fcu 


=— 




a 


en 


P 


•I 






> 


fa 


s 

ft 


o 

B 




a- 

1 

o 

ft. 

o 


3^ 

p - 


CD 
CO 


■8 

ft^ 


cr 

CD 

cr 




1 


cc" 

o 




2 

s 

a 


j» 




3 

a* 
p 


S" 

CD 

3- 

H 


CO 

3- 
P 

D- 
CD 

P 


CD 
P 
O- 

O 

Xfl 

3 

cr 

CO 




p— i 
i— i 

>— » 
00 
CO 


*5 
O 










s£ 


a 


a* 


•TS 


co" 
















«> 


en 


CD 


i 


1 











FOR THE ARMY. 187 



Subsistence Department. 



24 .... Issues to the hospital will be made on returns signed by 
the Surgeon, and approved by the commanding officer. If the 
complete ration be not drawn, the costs of such component parts 
as are issued will be charged to the hospital at contract or cost 
prices, and the hospital will be credited by the whole number of 
rations due through the month, at contract or cost prices: the balance 
of money found due the hospital, or such amount of it as may be 
required, will be expended by the Assistant Commissary of Sub- 
sistence in the purchase of poultry, fresh meat, vegetables, milk, 
and groceries, (excepting such articles as are furnished by the 
Medical Department,) as the Surgeon may require. 

25.... The articles purchased for the hospital will be borne on 
the monthly return, and accounted for as other stores received and 
issued. 

26.... Abstracts of issues to the hospital will be made by the 
Assistant Commissary of Subsistence, certified by the Surgeon 
in the usual form, and countersigned by the commanding officer, 
one of which will be forwarded with the monthly return of pro- 
visions received and issued. 

27... 'Issues to ~u>o?nen will be at the rate of three to a company, 
and one to a detachment or party of men. 

28... .Issues to Indians, authorized by law, will be made on re 
turns signed by the commanding officer, where there is no Indian 
agent: but where there is an agent, the returns will be signed by 
him and countersigned by the commanding officer. 

2 9.... A separate abstract of issues to Indians will be made by 
the Assistant Commissary of Subsistence, signed by the com- 
manding officer, which will be entered in, and accompany the 
monthly return of the provisions received and issued. 

30 ""Extra issues. An extra issue of fifteen pounds of can- 
dles per month may be made to the principal guard of each camp 
and garrison, on the order of the commanding officer. Extra is- 
sues of soap, candles, and vinegar, are permitted to the hospital 
when the Surgeon does not avail himself of the commutation ot 
hospital rations; salt in small quantities may be issued for public 
horses and cattle: when men are employed at work on fortifica- 



188 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Subsistence Department. 

tions, in surveys, in cutting roads, and other constant labor of not 
less than ten days, the non-commissioned officers, musicians, and 
privates, so employed, shall be allowed one gill of whiskey each, 
per day, or a commutation in money, at their option, at the rate 
of one cent per ration. 

31 Issues of fresh beef. At all places where fresh beef can 

be procured for issue, the Assistant Commissary of Subsistence will 
purchase by contract, giving, if practicable, due public notice for 
proposals; the lowest responsible bid will be accepted, and a writ- 
ten contract will be entered into for the delivery of the beef at the 
post, at such times as may be most conducive to the health and 
comfort of the troops, not exceeding thrice a week. The original 
advertisement, bids, contract, and bond, will be forwarded to the 
Commissary General of Subsistence, and correct copies retained foi 
the use of the post. 

Subsistence of Recruiting Parties. 

32.... Officers detached on the recruiting service will enter into 
written contracts, agreeably to prescribed forms, first giving sufficient 
public notice, inviting proposals for furnishing complete rations. 
The original advertisement, bids, contracts, and bonds, will be forward- 
ed to the Commissary General of Subsistence, and correct copies 
for the use of the recruiting station, will be retained by the 
officer making the contracts. 

33.... Issues will be made on provision returns for complete 
rations. The contractor will forward to the Commissary General 
of Subsistence his accounts, supported by abstracts of issues duly 
certified by the recruiting officer, either monthly or quarterly, as 
the contractor may prefer, and the amount found due will be 
promptly remitted. 

Sales to Officers. 

34. ...At all posts on Red river, Arkansas, Missouri, Upper Mis- 
sissippi, and its waters, on the upper lakes, and all other posts 
where special permission is granted, Assistant Commissaries of 
Subsistence will sell to officers provisions, in such quantities as 



FOR THE ARMY. 189 



Subsiste?ice Department. 



may be required for the subsistence of themselves and families, at 
contract prices, to which will be added the cost of transportation. 
No less quantities than even pounds or quarts will be sold. 

35.... It is to be distinctly understood that this is an accommo- 
dation which must not be abused by drawing unnecessary supplies. 

36.... As the department cannot keep individual accounts, Assis- 
tant Commissaries will be held responsible for all sales. The articles 
sold will be entered in the " monthly return," and the amount of 
sales credited in the " quarterly account current." A monthly 
abstract of sales will accompany the return of provisions received 
and issued, and a consolidated quarterly abstract of sales will be 
rendered with the account current. 

Wastage. 

37.... The wastage on issues will be ascertained quarterly, or at 
such periods when, from the small quantity of provisions on hand, 
it can be most readily ascertained; and the actual wastage thus 
found will be charged in the monthly return of provisions received 
and issued. The loss or destruction of provisions, from whatever 
cause, when it exceeds ordinary waste or loss, must be accounted 
for either by certificates of officers knowing the facts, or ©therwise 
satisfactorily explained and accounted for by the Assistant Commis- 
sary of Subsistence; and when loss or damage is sustained, while 
stores are in the hands of a transporter employed by the Quarter 
Master's Department, early information will be given to the Quar- 
ter Master of the post, and to the Quarter Master who forwarded 
them, and the loss certified by the receiving Commissary, that 
the amount may be deducted from the freight due the transporter. 

38.... Wastage of fresh beef. Wastage on issues of fresh beef 
is inadmissible, because it ought, from the nature of the contract, 
to be furnished to each company, detachment, or regiment, directly 
from the butcher. When, however, beef is on the hoof, the facts 
connected with losses which arise from a wrong estimate of weight, 
or from having been stolen or strayed, must be clearly stated by 
the Assistant Commissary, and supported by the certificate of the 
commanding officer, or of some other officer, to whom these facts 
are more particularly known. 



190 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Subsistence Department. 

Boards of Survey. 

39. .. .Should subsistence stores become damaged, or unfit for 
issue, the Assistant Commissary of Subsistence having them in 
charge will report the fact to the commanding officer, whose 
duty it will be to institute a board of survey, to be composed of not 
less than two officers, or respectable citizens may be associated with 
the officers for that purpose, who shall act under oath. All stores 
found damaged and unfit for issue, from causes other than neglect 
of the Assistant Commissary of Subsistence, shall be condemned 
and sold; the bill of sale to accompany the account current, and 
an invoice of the stores thus condemned, with the cause of damage 
certified by the board of survey, will be immediately forwarded to 
the Commissary General of Subsistence, and a copy thereof will 
accompany the monthly return. 

40. ...Should the board of survey be of the opinion that the stores 
have been damaged by the neglect of the Assistant Commissary of 
Subsistence, it will make out an invoice of the articles damaged, 
and certify and transmit the same to the Commissary General 
of Subsistence, who will have the amoimt charged to the Assistant 
Commissary of Subsistence in his account with the United States. 

Monthly Returns. 

41.... Monthly returns of all subsistence stores received and issued, 
will be made according to the prescribed form. The upper column 
of the return will exhibit the quantities received from contractors 
and Assistant Commissaries of Subsistence, of all purchases, of all 
gains which may accrue in issuing during the month, which, when 
added together, will show the " total to be accounted for." The 
lower column will exhibit the manner in which these stores have 
been disposed of; the issues made to the troops; to men in hospital; 
issues to Indians; delivered to Assistant Commissaries of Subsistence; 
sales to officers; condemned and sold; wastage, and the quantity on 
hand; which, when added together, ought to correspond with the 
" total to be accounted for." The lower column of the return must 
be supported by abstract of issues to the troops; to men in 



FOR THE ARMY. 191 



Sublstence Department. 



hospital; receipts of Assistant Commissaries of Subsistence; monthly 
abstract of sales to officers; certificates of boards of survey when 
provisions are condemned, and a certificate, on honor, as to the 
wastage which has accrued in issuing. 

Abstracts. 

42 The total number of rations will be converted into bulk, 

and placed on the lower line of the abstract. " Quantity in bulk," 
according to the following table: — 196 pounds of flour to the barrel; 
the same number of pounds of corn meal to the barrel; 200 pounds 
of pork or salt beef to the barrel; 32 gills of whiskey to the gallon; 
32 quarts of salt, peas, or beans, to the bushel; and small rations, 
at the rate of 4 pounds of soap; H pounds of candles; 2 quarts of 
salt; 4 quarts of vinegar; 8 quarts of peas or beans, or 10 pounds 
of rice; 8 pounds of sugar, and 4 pounds of coffee to the 100 
rations. When issues are made to different corps or detachments, 
the column of remarks in the abstract must explain to what corps 
or detachment the issue was made. 

Accounts Current. 

43 Accounts current will be forwarded by Assistant Commis- 
saries of Subsistence, to the office of the Commissary General of 
Subsistence, at the expiration of each quarter, ending 31st March, 
30th June, 30th September, and 31st December. The debit side 
will exhibit all moneys expended in the purchase of provisions, and 
all other authorized expenditures. Two abstracts are required, one 
for all purchases made of provisions; the other for all contingent 
expenditures, supported by bills properly receipted, folded in uni- 
form size, and endorsed, numbered, and entered on the abstract 
according to number, and the amount of each abstract will be 
charged in the account for the quarter. 

44.... The credit side of the account current will exhibit all 
moneys received from government or its agents, and all sums accru- 
ing from sales to officers, sales of damaged provisions, empty casks, 
etc. An estimate of funds required to meet the expenditures of 
the approaching quarter, will accompany each account current, 



192 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Pay Department. 

except at distant posts, from whence they are to be rendered in 
time to enable the department to make prompt remittances. 

ARTICLE XLVIII. 

PAY DEPARTMENT. 

1 . . . . The Paymaster General is stationed at the seat of govern- 
ment, and, under the direction of the Secretary of War, is charged 
with the administration of the affairs of his department, and the 
control of the officers connected therewith. 

2.... The troops are to be paid in such manner as that the ar- 
rears shall, at no time, exceed two months, unless the circumstances 
of the case shall render it unavoidable. 

3. ...The commanding officers of regiments, corps, and posts, are 
to furnish the Paymasters of their respective districts, on the last 
day of every month, abstracts, showing the number, rank, and dis- 
position of the troops, in each command, on which to found 
estimates. 

4.... The Paymaster General will give immediate notice to the 
commanding officers of departments, regiments, or posts, of all funds 
advanced to Paymasters for the payment of their commands. 

5.... Funds for the payment of the troops will not be diverted 
from their legitimate object by the order of any officer whatever. 

6. ...When the Comptroller of the Treasury directs stoppages to 
be made from the pay of officers or soldiers, on account of balances 
found to be due the United States, on the books of the Treasury, 
the Paymaster General will transmit copies of the statement to the 
Paymaster in whose district the officers and soldiers may be serving. 
In all cases the deductions must be made before payment, unless 
written evidence is produced from the accounting officers of the 
Treasury, that the balances debited to the officers or soldiers have 
been accounted for. Deductions thus made shall not debar them 
from credits to which they may thereafter show themselves justly 
entitled. 

7.... Officers reported to the Paymaster General, by the Adju- 
tant General, as "absent without leave," are not to be paid until 



FOR THE ARMY. 193 



Pay Department. 



such absence be satisfactorily accounted for, and so reported by the 
Adjutant General. 

8 Officers, on retiring from the service, •will, previous to re- 
ceiving their pay, furnish the Paymaster with the certificates of the 
Second and Third Auditors, or with their own affidavits, taken be- 
fore the proper civil authority, that they have no unsettled accounts 
with, and are not indebted to the United States. Such certificates 
or affidavits must also designate the date of acceptance of resignation 
or removal from office. 

9.... When an officer is dismissed from the service, he shall not 
be entitled to pay beyond the day on which the order announcing 
his dismissal is received at the post where he may be stationed, 
unless a particular day beyond the time is mentioned in the order. 

10.... All officers of the army are required, as far as practicable, 
to draw their pay from the Paymaster of the district in which they 
may be on duty. 

1 1 .... Officers shall not pass away or transfer their pay accounts 
for any amount not actually due at the time. When an officer 
transfers his accounts for pay which is due, he will immediately 
communicate the fact to the Paymaster General, and to the Pay- 
master by whom such accounts are expected to be paid, otherwise 
Paymasters are prohibited paying them. No graduate of the Military 
Academy shall transfer his accounts, even for pay due, the first year 
after he shall have graduated. 

Allowance of additional Bations. 
12. ...There will be allowed to the following officers, double 
rations: 

To the General commanding the army. 

To the Generals commanding the Eastern and Western Depart- 
ments. 
To the officers in charge of the military bureaus at the City of 

Washington, including the Inspectors General. 
To the commandants of military posts and arsenals. 
To the officers of the corps of engineers, and of the topogra- 
13 



194 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Pay Department. 

phical engineers, charged with the superintendence of fortifica- 
tions and other public works, and having separate commands. 
The requisite authority for the allowance of additional rations, 
to the Engineers and Topographical Engineers, will be the order 
of the Secretary of War to the Paymaster General, commu- 
nicated through the Adjutant General. 
To the superintendent of the Military Academy, triple rations. 
To the commandant of the corps of cadets at West Point, double 

rations. 
The particular posts and arsenals at which the commanding 
officers will be entitled to double rations, will be announced in 
orders. No additional rations will be allowed at any other posts 
or arsenals until an order is issued authorizing the same; which 
order is not to have a retrospective effect. 

Brevet Pay. 

13 ••••Officers who have brevet commissions shall be entitled to 
receive their brevet pay and emoluments, when on duty, under 
the following circumstances : 

A brevet Captain, when commanding a company. 

A brevet Major, when commanding two companies, or when 
acting as Major of the regiment. 

A brevet Lieutenant Colonel when commanding at least four com- 
panies, or when acting as Lieutenant Colonel of the regiment. 

A brevet Colonel, when commanding nine companies of artillery 
or ten of infantry or dragoons, or a mixed corps of ten com- 
panies, or when commanding a regiment. 

A brevet Brigadier General, when commanding a brigade of not 
less than two regiments, or twenty companies. 

A brevet Major General, when commanding a division of four 
regiments, or at least forty companies. 

A brevet officer, when assigned by the special order of the 
Secretary of War to a particular duty and command, according 
to his brevet rank, although such command be not in the line, 
provided his brevet allowances are recognised in the order of 
assignment 

14.... To entitle officers to brevet allowances while acting a* 



FOR THE ARMY. 195 



Pay Department. 



field officers of regiments according to their brevets, they must 
be recognised at general head quarters as being on such duty, and 
the fact announced accordingly in general orders. 

15.... Officers entitled to double rations, to brevet pay, and 
emoluments, or to ten dollars a month for commanding companies, 
will not forfeit such allowances when temporarily absent from their 
stations and commands, provided the absence does not exceed one 
month, or thirty days. 

16.... The aides-de-camp of brevet Generals are to be paid 
according to the lineal rank of such Generals. 

17 Brevet Generals are entitled to no more aides-de-camp 

than are attached to their rank in the line according to law. 

18.... A brevet General, whose rank in the line is below that of 
a Brigadier General, is not entitled by law to an aid-de-camp. 

19...iNo officer shall receive pay for two staff appointments at 
the same time. 



196 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Pay Department. 



^ 



05 


•a 








S 


<* IP> IN 


mcin i i e* I e« c* I I I e»' ' 


-1 


o 






P» 


"5 






w 
CD 


6 








*3 n -d 


N«K5»iO 


loe^w in l ^"CM l 1 •* i 


«! 


n V 






PBS 


o«S 






o 


fc S.3 






Ph 


JS 






H . 


« t; 






2 " 


u a. . 


i» i-i e* i co 


©N^ 1 1 •* I © t* 1 1 I'*'* 


ee W 


w >, 








O 01 « 

o o 






OQ 


z - 








jd 


I I I I I 


1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 




o 

s 






© <* ■* o o 


© 
©■*©© © © © © , ° S 






© N © Si OS 


OlOCW 1 lO | OS CO C* *-> |©-^< 

,_ © 






* 


•^ 









' ' ' ' s ' i 








3 3 








c a 








C (3 








eS cS 






... 

3S 


. > . . i. 1 v» . > > < ■ ' ' 






as as 






_C 


<=*< ^ « 






© '— 


© © s 






c a; 


© © S3 






. — . •$ 


. . . . "*. . °- i . ' as , . , 






as _ 


e* co X 






■5 -S 


«^ *& *• 






.S £ 


.5 >> 






I >> . 1 


. ■ .as - rt _ , . 






ei « 


lin 

he 1 
to p 
Infi 






e- 3 






.2 o 

^3 ** 


in the 

ay in t 
dition 
tain of 






on to 
dition 


w 




>> Pits' a. 


Q 










n add 
1, in 


, , , 2 a ■-<*. . . 

_ o - o 


O 




P. •-• as . 
© as ."S as 






._ n 
as 

. "«3 . S . 


dditi 

ases 
tenc< 

add 
ister 
f, & 

rieer 






< >- ■ as > 

S CD 


n a 

rcli 

bsis 

, in 

ubs 
pa; 

ngii 






rGe 

idier 


3 3 ? JiCO-fl rj 
-! 2 v-«- § § © as £"£ 






to Majo 

ral 

to Brig: 

ral 


ueral 

ter Geners 

ter 

arter Mas 

eneral 

General o 
General o 
of Subsist 
of Subsist 
mmissary 
not to ex 
al Engine: 
pographic 






"3 *S gng 






s so §00^^ o>~ M b b b bo g_;s E-* 






Major G 
Aide-de- 
Brigadie 
Aide-de- 
Adjutan' 


o u u P M m -2 .2 .2 .2 S S 2 c 

«D3»iai«5'OOOOw20« 






FOR THE ARMY/ 1 97 



Pay Department. 



N«rtH«N-i«rff)rtS)HH C*C4S4 |i-im 



c<:co«*iT*«<<c;i«>i«<:ieoi 1 us ** -^ 1 co e* 



«'*K'ji'!?inT(iTC'#'<*^'<ji^^ to V5 ■<# |t**t(< 



I I I I I I I I I I I I 



be 



o B 
1 • to a> ■ ■ ■ • ■ 

O s 
br.-B ~ 

■~ W" <u 

b * ■ S -c a S "SIS. 

S- "i a o- . B a>*3 

£. r a i. 5 ^- °- « ' 2 ' hW 

.5 3 « 4 o ^ 3 "S -B . 

5 'a; - :- u, -3 Z .i ^ s u h a O ~ 

, tsSffliS Sik'S"' .2.S.S. 

♦«,*<_ <~S_0£ o So»'- 1 bc C ^ « 

§ s e - - 5 e £ o •- o o | -g g 3 S « 

s g s g> p° «£ 3 s o ^ 3 -b £ p • .? 1 a ' c° § £ 



= 



a *2 



§§§IJJ1f IJiJiJi i'i J J-al ass® 1 



198 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



G 



«6, 

O 



y> 



JPaif Department. 



www i — ~* -* I 



25 5° 



<f»n« i i i i 



ffiiO^i I -tf Tf r* W 





1 1 l 1 


I I I I I i I I I I i I 








a 






o 






E 








OfllOOS 


10©©©©©10«0<X><0«510 






N(OU}HTJ((l)NHHHHH 




as 





o 






- s 3 s 



02 .2 



w 



C 3 a '£ 



? <u . a ■= .a a> ^ * « .:? 

e"3o=~,J'~'S&'„~ i - 

C .3 * "3 eS *? «< r> 3 T" 



5 *• 






^ i~ 



FOR THE ARMY. 



199 



Pay Department. 



irt C* 00 O <C <S tOfflffl Mffl 



g "O t3 ~0 "3 



as 2 



^ 5 



O «? 



o t. 



gpS^S 



Sfc 



n 




-* 






o 


~ 


ad 

£ 








H 


Ml 




)-> 







03 


u 

83 





C 










< 


BO«<J 



200 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Jtfedical Department. 

ARTICLE XLIX. 

MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. 

Surgeon General. 

l....The Surgeon General is stationed at the city of Washington, 
and is, under the direction of the Secretary of War, charged with 
the superintendence and administrative details of the Medical De- 
partment. He will issue all orders and instructions relating to the 
professional duties of the officers of the medical staff; and all 
communications from them, which may require the action of the 
Secretary of War, or of the General commanding the army, will be 
made direct to him. All claims for medical services rendered, or 
medical supplies furnished to the army, and all disbursements 
made on account of the Medical Department, will be submitted to 
him for examination and approval. 



Medical Director. 

2.... The Medical Director will inspect the hospitals under his 
charge; ascertain the manner in which each officer performs his 
duties; see that the necessary supplies are received for the sick; 
that they are of good quality, and properly expended; enforce the 
rules and regulations given for the government and direction of 
the Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons; and examine, and if he 
approve, countersign, all extra requisitions for medical supplies. 

Medical Purveyors. 

3.... The Medical Purveyors will, under the direction of the 
Surgeon General, cause suitable medicine-chests to be constructed 
and furnished to the several hospitals, regiments, posts, and garri- 
sons, and purchase all medicines, hospital stores, bedding, surgical 
and other instruments, books, stationary, and dressings, required for 
the Medical Department of tie army, which will be carefully pack- 
ed under their direction, and delivered either to the Surgeons, or 
to a military storekeeper, or to a Quarter Master, for transportstion 
to the places of their destination and use; and all packages will 



FOR THE ARMY. 201 



^Medical Department. 



be legibly marked with the name of the place to which they are 
to be sent, or of the regiment or corps for which they are intended, 
and accompanied with an invoice of the articles contained in them. 

Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons. 

4.. ..Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons and private physicians 
acting as such, will attend all officers, non-commissioned officers, 
musicians, privates, and enlisted artificers and laborers in the service 
of the United States, who may be on duty at the post or place 
at which they are stationed or employed, and the private servants 
to which each officer is entitled by law. They will issue hospital 
stores only to them, and medicines only to them and their families, i 

5.... They will be particularly attentive in the examination of 
recruits, and will cause each recruit to be stripped of all his clothes, 
and to move about and exercise his limbs in his presence, in 
erder to ascertain whether he has the free use of them; that his 
hearing and vision are perfect; that he has no tumors, ulcerated 
legs, rupture, or chronic cutaneous affections, or other infirmity or 
disorder which may render him unfit for the active duties of a 
soldier, or be the means of introducing disease into the army; and 
they will ascertain, as far as practicable, whether the recruit is an 
habitual drunkard, or subject to convulsions of any kind, or has 
received any contusions or wounds in the head, which may produce 
occasional insanity. With any of these defects, the man will be 
rejected as unfit for service. 

6.... Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons may be employed as 
judge advocates, whenever it is found necessary; but will not 
be detailed as members of general, regimental, or garrison courts 
martial. In the selection of quarters, Surgeons will have choice 
with Majors; Assistant Surgeons who shall have served five years, 
will have choice with Captains; and those who shall have served 
less than five years, with First Lieutenants; the commanding officer 
of the post, or detachment, always having precedence of those under 
his command. 

7.... The assignment of Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons to regi- 
ments and posts, will be made by the Secretary of War. When 



202 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

.Medical Department. 

the circumstances of the service will permit, those who shall have 
served three years in their respective grades, will have choice of 
regiments and stations agreeably to rank, on written application 
through the Surgeon General, stating the reasons therefor, and the 
posts they may select, in the order of preference; but no one will 
be transferred from the regiment or post to which he may have 
been assigned, for the purpose of making room for another. When 
attached to an army in the field, they will be assigned to duty by 
the commanding General. 

8.... No Surgeon, or Assistant Surgeon, will be absent from his 
regiment, post, or station, for a period exceeding seven days, without 
having previously obtained the sanction of the Secretary of War, 
through the Surgeon General, to whom the reasons for the appli- 
cation will be reported; nor until he shall have been relieved by 
a medical officer, or a private physician, shall have been em- 
ployed in conformity with paragraph 20. 

9. ...Every Surgeon, and Assistant Surgeon, having charge of 
an hospital, will, with the approbation of his immediate command- 
ing officer, appoint his own steward, ward-master, cooks, nurses, 
and matrons. They will be permanently attached to the hospital, 
and unless required by the commanding officer to attend weeklv 
inspections, or the regular musters for payment, they will be ex- 
clusively under the orders of the Surgeon and Assistant Surgeon, 
and will not be removed except for misdemeanor, and at the re- 
quest of the Surgeon, unless in cases of urgent necessity; and then 
only by the order of the commanding officer of the troops, district, 
department, regiment, post, or garrison, to which they belong; who 
will report to the Adjutant General the circumstances which ren- 
dered such removal necessary. When a suitable hospital steward 
cannot be obtained from the command, the Surgeon, or Assistant 
Surgeon, is authorized to enlist a man for the purpose, who will 
be permanently attached to the hospital, and will be mustered with 
the other hospital attendants. 

10.... The following will be the allowance of attendants in an 
hospital in ordinary cases: — To a general hospital, one non-eoiu- 
missioned officer as steward, and one as ward-master, one nurse to 



FOR THE ARMY. 203 



Medical Department. 



every ten, one matron to every twenty, and one cook to every 
thirty, patients. To an hospital where the command exceeds five 
companies, one non-commissioned officer as steward and ward- 
master, one cook, two matrons, and four nurses. To a post or 
garrison with one company, one private, as steward and ward- 
master, one nurse, and one matron; for every two additional com- 
panies, one nurse. The cooks and nurses to be taken from the 
privates of the army. 

11.... Medical supplies will not be' detained or diverted from 
their destination, except by commanding Generals, and command- 
ing officers of departments, in cases of absolute necessity; who will 
promptly report the circumstances to the Adjutant General, that 
orders may be given for supplying the deficiency. 

12 Requisitions for extra supplies of medicines, hospital stores, 

&c, and for cooking utensils, and hospital furniture, will be made 
by the senior Surgeon, and approved by the commanding officer; 
and if they cannot conveniently be obtained from a Medical Pur- 
veyor, or the Commissary of Purchases, they may be purchased 
by the Surgeon, or an officer of the Quarter Master's Department. 
13.... Requisitions on officers of the Quarter Master's Depart- 
mentt, for hospitals, and the necessary fixtures, for hospital tents, 
fuel, and wagons for transportation of the sick, medicines, hospital 
stores, &c, will be made by the senior Surgeon, and approved by 
the commanding officer. Requisitions for hospitals will state the 
number and dimensions Of the rooms required; the use to which 
they are severally to be applied; and the strength of the 
command for which they are estimated; duplicates of which will 
be transmitted to the burgeon General. 

14. ...The senior medical officer «f each regiment, post, garrison, 
or camp, will, with the approbation of the commanding officer, 
select a suitable site for the erection of an hospital, or of hospital 
tents. 

15 Hospitals are under the immediate direction of their respect- 
ive Surgeons. The responsibility for their order, regularity, and 
cleanliness; for the diet and care of the patients; and for the gene- 
ra) conduct and economy of the whole establishment, rests entirely 



204 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



JMedicul Department. 



with them. Commanding officers are enjoined to furnish such 
military assistance as may be necessary for the attainment of 
these objects; and all non-commissioned officers and others placed 
in the hospital in aid of the Surgeon, are commanded to yield the 
most implicit obedience to the instructions they may receive from 
him, and to enforce, in every instance, the most minute observ- 
ance of the hospital regulations. 

16.... Officers commanding brigades are enjoined frequently to 
visit the hospitals of the regiments composing their brigades, and 
minutely to investigate the economy and order therein established; 
to inquire into the state of the patients, their diet, and attendance 
of every kind, and to enforce the strictest observance of the hos- 
pital regulations. These attentions are required still more in de- 
tail from commanding officers of regiments and posts, who, 
from personal observation, have opportunities of checking every 
abuse, and whose duty it is to extend to the hospitals the same 
system of order, regularity, and discipline, which should prevail in 
their regiments and commands. Every species of gaming is strictly 
forbidden. Any patient convicted of swearing, disorderly behaviour, 
insolent and provoking conduct towards the attendants, or of any 
deviation from the hospital regulations, must be severely punished. 

17. ...When a soldier is sent into an hospital, his arms and ac- 
coutrements will, if possible, be left with his company, and in no 
instance will he take his ammunition with him. When sent to a 
general hospital, the officer or Surgeon sending him, will furnish 
a certified copy of his descriptive list to the Surgeon taking charge 
of him; who will on the return of the soldier to duty, transmit it 
to the officer under whose command he is placed, with a statement 
of any payments made, or clothing issued to him while in hos- 
pital. Should he leave the hospital on furlough, he will be fur- 
nished with a certified copy of his descriptive list; should he de- 
sert, the Surgeon will advertise him in the usual manner; and in 
case of his death, his descriptive list will be preserved in the hos- 
pital, for the benefit of his friends and heirs, and on it will be 
stated the amount of clothing, money, &c, left by him; and the 
Surgeon will, in all these cases, forthwith report to the command- 



FOR THE ARMY. 205 



.Medical Department. 



ing officer of his company or regiment, if practicable, and if not, 
will report to the Adjutant General the facts and attending cir- 
cumstances — the time to which those who die were last paid — 
and the money and effects in their possession at the time of their 
decease. 

18.... Patients will not he removed from an hospital until re- 
ported by the Surgeon for duty, except in cases of emergency; 
and then only by order of the commanding officer of the post, 
regiment, or army; and they should for a certain time be employed 
on duties where they are not liable to be too much exposed to the 
weather or to fatigue. 

Private Physicians. 

19 When medical or surgical aid is required, if no Surgeon or 

Assistant Surgeon of the army be at or near the place, the senior 
officer will employ a private physician by special agreement in 
writing, a duplicate of which ivill be immediately transmittted to 
the Surgeon General for approval. All such agreements shall be 
made for a specific sum per month, without any allowance or 
emoluments whatsoever: and will be accompanied with a certificate 
of the officer, stating the number of persons entitled to medical at- 
tendence, agreeably to paragraph 4, of these Regulations, and that 
no competent physician could be obtained at a lower rate. At 
permanent recruiting rendezvous and posts, where it is not con- 
venient to station a Surgeon or an Assistant Surgeon, private phy- 
sicians will be selected by the War Department. Until, however, 
such selections are made, they will be employed by the officers 
as above stated. 

20.... Private physicians will he employed to accompany troops or 
detachments on a march or in transports, only on orders from thp 
War Department: or, in special cases, by order of the officer di- 
eting the movement, when the contract will be accompanied 
with a particular statement of the circumstances which rendered 
the employment of a private physician necessary. The contracts 
will state the service to be rendered, and will be for a speci- 
fic sum, without any emoluments or allowances, except transpor- 



206 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



JVIedical Department. 

tation when furnished in kind by the Quarter Master's Depart] 
ment. 

21.... Private physicians will be allowed the following rates of 
compensation: For attending a post, garrison, or detachment of 
one hundred and upwards, forty dollars per month; of from fifty 
to one hundred, thirty dollars per month; and for attending any 
number under fifty, twenty dollars per month — exclusive of medicine. 
When they furnish their own medicine, they will be allowed an addi- 
tion of from twenty-five to fifty per cent, upon their pay, the pro- 
portion to be determined by the Surgeon General. They will be 
required to make reports, requisitions, and returns, in the form 
and manner directed for the Surgeons of the army, or as often as 
the Surgeon General may direct. Their accounts will be trans- 
mitted to the Surgeon General for payment, accompanied with a 
certificate of the commanding officer, that they are correct and 
agreeably to contract. 

22.... Recruiting officers will, if necesary, employ private physi- 
cians, agreeably to these Regulations. The rate of compensation 
will be determined by the average number present during the 
month; their accounts and those for medical supplies will be paid 
by the recruiting officers. When there is more than one recruiting 
party, in a place, the senior officer will engage a Surgeon to attend 
the whole. 

23... .Accounts for medical attendance and medicines furnished 
to officers, non-commissioned officers, musicians, privates, and en- 
listed artificers and laborers on duty at places where medical aid 
is not furnished by the United States, and to the private servants 
of 6uch officers, will state the charge for each visit, and for medi- 
cine when furnished. Accounts for officers and their servants will 
be, paid by the officers themselves, to whom the amount will be 
refunded on presenting them in the form above stated, with a 
certificate of the physician that they are the usual and customary 
charges of the place, and one from the officer, that the attendance 
was given and the medicine furnished to himself or to his private 
servants authorized and kept in service agreeably to law; that he 
was on duty at the post or station at the time, and that medical 



FOR THE ARMY. 207 



Medical Department. 



attendance was not furnished by the United States. Accounts for 
enlisted men will be accompanied with the affidavit of the physi- 
cian, that the attendance was given and the medicine furnished as 
charged, and that they are the usual and customary charges of the 
place, and with the certificate of a commissioned officer or the 
affidavit of the soldier, stating particularly the circumstances under 
which the attendance was given. Accounts for attendance on 
officers or soldiers deceased, will require the deposition of the 
physician that the services were rendered as charged — that they 
are the customary charges of the place — and that he has received 
no part thereof, and no security or satisfaction for the same. 

At places where medical attendance is furnished by the United 
States, the account will be accompanied by a certificate of the 
Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon, or private physician, stating the reasons 
why the service was not rendered by him; and if such reasons are 
deemed insufficient, the amount will be charged to such Surgeon, 
Assistant Surgeon, or private physician. 

No account will be paid for medical attendance or medicine fur- 
nished to officers or soldiers on leave of absence, or on furlough, 
nor unless the services were rendered at the post or place where 
the officer is required to perform his duty. 

Form of a contract with a private Physician. 

This contract, entered into this day of , 18—, between 

of the U. S. Army, and Dr. , of , in the State of , vritnesseth, 

that for the consideration hereinafter mentioned, the said Dr. promises and 

agrees to perform the duties of an Assistant Surgeon, agreeably to the Army Reg- 
ulations, at , (and to furnish the necessary mediciues.) And the said 

promises and agrees, in behalf of the United States, to pay or cause to be 

paid, to the said Dr. the sum of dollars for each and every month he 

shall continue to perform the services above stated, which shall be his full compen- 
sation, and in lieu of all allowances and emoluments whatsoever, (except that for 

medicines furnished, which shall be at the rate of per centum on his monthly 

pay, agreeably to p-iragruph 21 of these Regulations.) This contract to continue 
in force during the pleasure of the parties. 

(Seal.) 

Signed, sealed, and delivered ) . 

in presence of - $ (.beat.) 

J certify that the number of persons entitled to medical attendance at 

(agreeably to paragraph 4) is , and that no competent physician can be 

obtained at a lower rate. ' -_ 

Commanding Officer. 



208 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Purchasing- Department . . . . Clothing Bureau. 

ARTICLE L. 

PURCHASING DEPARTMENT. 

I... The Commissary General of Purchases will, under the direc- 
tion of the Secretary of War, purchase all clothing, dragoon saddles 
and bridles, tents, tent-poles, camp kettles, mess pans, bed sacks, 
and all other articles required for the army, excepting only such as 
are ordered to be purchased by the Quarter Master's, Subsistence, 
Ordnance, Engineer, and Medical Departments. 

ARTICLE LI. 

CLOTHING BUREAU. 

l....The officer at the head of the Clothing Bureau is charged 
with the correspondence of the War Department, upon all subjects 
connected with the clothing of the army, with the appropriations 
and requisitions. He receives all estimates for clothing and equipage, 
and prepares the annual estimates of those articles to be provided 
by the Purchasing Department; also, the detailed estimates of issues. 

2.... Colonels or commanders of regiments, will transmit to the 
Clothing Bureau, in each year, estimates of the clothing and equipage, 
which will be required for their respective commands, for the 
ensuing year, commencing with the month of November. The 
estimates from the regiments on the upper Mississippi, Missouri, 
Red, and Arkansas rivers, will be forwarded so as to be received by 
the first of February; all others by the first of May. 

3.... Special estimates are prohibited, except in cases of absolute 
necessity, which necessity will be clearly set forth in the estimate. 



FOR THE ARMY. 



209 



Clot/due- Bureau. 





c 

a 
o 

o 
S 
< 


•Aijirejuj 


u 




-1C1 

00 

OS 


00 






< 


q 


co 
■4 


O 
CO 


i> 


Oi 






•£ianmv 


u 








*** 
OS 

0B 






B 




CO 


J>. 


CO 
C5 






•aoireupiQ 


d 


CO 


1* 

•^ 


-*1 

78 




- 


00 

a. 


= 




CO 

ft 


C* 


00 
00 




•SU00Sl3i(J 


u 


to 


-PI 

05 

CO 


a- 

OS 


CD 




^ 


= 


CO 


OS 




O 




s 


•HJIBd 'Si3A\Bi(J 


0* 


1 


- H 


CO 




Sl 


•sjjDOig iaqreaq; 


■* | | 


- 1 






'SJB0Q }B9if) 


— 1 1 


rt 




■§ 




•sdBQ aSBioj 


1-H 1 1 


rt 




5p 


•S}35(UBig 


rH 


rt 


1 


c» 




•sared 'sSujjjooig 


co 


eo 


CO 


OJ 




•sired 's^oog 


CO 


CO 


CO 


O) 




o 


•SJiiqg pUUBJ^ 


<J* 


in 


N 


<o 




o 


•sjiiqg uojioq 


*« 


ft 


N 


CO 




V- 




•S}35pi3f UOMOQ 


rt 


*"* 


1-1 


eo 






© ■£ 
t> '- 


•XilUBJUJ pire £o{|i)iy 


- 


~ 


1 


*t 




s 


•aauBupjo P UB uooSBifj 


- 


- 


- 


CO 




<*3 




•SilBd 'S||Bi3A0 UO}}OQ 


CO 


CO 


CO 


OS 




• 




•sired 's[jT!iaAO l°o^ 


« 


0* 


e* 


1 «D 




■«*" 


"3 
o 

O 


•axjubjuj pire £sd\\niv 


- 


~ 


1 


ft 






•aouBupiQ puB uoo3cj(j 




1 


1 


- 








•ai3|diuo^ sdBQ 


1 ~ 


1 


pH 


rH 








© 

5 

E- 

o 


1 ' 
1 

w 

>-. 

8 

1 £ 


g 
o 
o 
o 


1-. 
« 
>> 

T 3 


"5 






14 



210 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Ctotfdng fittrrrut. 

5 Ordnance Sergeants to be supplied with the uniform pre- 
scribed for the rion-commissioned sjaff, as to fashion and badges, 
conforming to the dress prescribed for the officers of ordnance, as 
to eolor, turnbacks, &c. 

6 Knapsacks, haversacks, and sashes, will be furnished by the 

Government. They are to last at least tbc full term of one enlist- 
ment, and they will be supplied only on the wearing out of those 
already issued. If carelessly injured or destroyed, the deficiences 
are to be made good by the soldier in whose use and charge they 
may be at the time; and the amount of injury will be stated in 
dollars and cents on the muster rolls, to be deducted from the pay 
of the soldier at the lirst payment of the company. 

?'.... Aisfuillettes to lust one enlistment. 



Statement of the Cost of Clothixg for the Army op the 
United States, ron the Year 1834. 






Dragoon cap - 

metal front equipments 
brass grenade 

band ... 

plume (horse hair) 
Artillery cap 

tulip '■'...' 

eagle - ' - 

cross cannon 

number ... 

plume or pompon, ecarlet 
Infantry cap - 

tulip ... 

eagle - 

bugle - 

number ... 

plurae, or pompon, white, 
Pompon or plume for non-commissioned staff 
Forage cap, dragoon - 

artillery and infantry 
Epaulettes for non-commissioned stall", pairs ■ 
Sergeants 
Corporals 
Shoulder knots for privates, &c. 
Aiguillettes • 



$?. 50 

"28 
18 
60 

- 75 

- 2 37} 

- 12} 

5 

12 

5 

- 23 

- 2 37} 

- 12} 



20 



31 



95 



2 


92 


- 


37i 


- 


87} 


- 


75 


2 


37} 


1 


30 


1 


10 


. 


60 


1 


40 



FOR THE ARMY. 



211 



fUothhiq- Bureau. 



Sashes - - - 

Woollen overalls, sky blue, Sergeants - - - 

privates - - . - 

Drilling overalls, Sergeants - 
privates - 

Drilling jackets, infantry Sergeants, - 

privates ... 
Drilling jackets, artillery Sergeants - 

privates ' - 

Cloth jackets, sky blue, artillery ... 

infantry - 
Cotton shirts, Sergeants - 

privates .... 

Flannel shirts ------ 

Canton flannel drawers, pairs - 

Bootees, pairs - 

Stockings, jmirs - 

Blankets ------ 

Great coats, artillery and infantry - 

Leather stocks - 

Knapsacks ------ 

Haversacks ------ 

Dragoon cloth jackets! . - - - 

Dragoon coats, Serg't Major, and Quarter Master Serg't 
Chief Musicians - 

Sergeants - 

Corporals -'--.- 

musicians - 

privates - 

Artillery coats, Serg't Maj., Quarter Ma- S t° r Sergeant 
and Ordnance Sergeant, 
Sergeants - - - - 

Corporals and privates (ordnance) 
musicians - 

Infantry coats, Serg't Maj. and Quarter Master Sergeant 
Chief Musicians - 

Sergeants - - - - 

Corporals and privates 
musicians, - 

Dragoons, Sergeant's woollen overalls - 
private's do. 

Sergeant's drilling overalls - 
private's do. 

great coats - 
brass shoulder knots 
drilling jackets, Sergeants - 
do. privates 



a ! 


25 


3 1 


n 


•z 


754 


- 


84^ 


- ] 


61 i 


1 1 


1 


- 


75 


1 


6 


- 


80 


3 


m 


3 


7A 


- 


G4£ 


- 


51 


1 1 


29 


- 


60 


1 


50 




35£ 


7 


93| 


. 


15 


1 


60 


" i 


25£ 


4 1 


99 


8 


44 


8 


81 


7 


31 


7 


27* 


7 


80 


7 


12 


9 


51 


7 


20 


7 


20 


8 


13 


8 


68 


9 


61 


7 


4 


7 


A 


7 


80 


4 


20 


4 


3 


1 


40 


1 


11 


'J 


44 


. 


97 


1 


13i 


- 


i 85 



212 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Clothing Bureau^" Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



Allowance of Camp and Garrison Equipage. 



GRADES, &c. 


■r. 
V 

a 

i- 
3 

1 


JO 

S 
93 

"3 

1 
8 

1 

1 


■/ 

Z 

a 



£ 
5 



O 

1 


aa 

o 

s 

4 


a5 

o 

1 

1 

1 
1 

6 


i 

i) 

a 

1 
1 

1 
1 

1 


H 

O 

w 

a 

3 
3 

1 


EB 
C 

M 

^ ; 

2 


General officers, each 

Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Majors, Sur-} 
geons, and staff officers having rank assi- > 
milatcd to those grades, each j 

Captains, Assistant Surgeons, Assist-"] 
ant Quarter Masters, Assistant Com- I 
missaries, Aids-de-Camp, and inilitary f 
storekeepers, each J 

Subalterns to every two - 

To each company - 

To every six non-commissioned officers,"] 
musicians, and privates, including the ! 
authorized number of washerwomen and [ 
servants J 



In lieu of kettles, iron pots may be furnished to troops in gar- 
rison. 



ARTICLE LI I. 



uiciFoior, on dress of the army. 

t. — A Major General Commanding in Chief. 



Coat — dark blue, double-breasted; two rows of buttons, nine in each 
row, at equal distances: the distance between the rows, four 
inches at top, and three at bottom; stand up collar, to meet and 
hook in front, and no higher than the chin; cuffs 2^ inches 
deep, to go round the sleeve, parallel with the lower edge, and 
to button with three small buttons at the under seam; pointed 
cross flaps to the skirts, with four buttons equally distributed; 
the skirts to reach to the bend of the knee, with buff kersimere 
turnbacks; the bottom of the skirts, not less than three and ;i 



FOR THE ARMY. 213 



Uniform, or Dress of the Jrmy. 



half nor more than five inches broad, with a gold embroidered 
star on buff cloth three and a half inches diameter by three 
inches, the longest point perpendicular at the connecting point 
of the buff on each skirt; two hip buttons, to range with the 
lower buttons on the breast; collar, cuffs, and facings, of buff 
cloth or kersimerc; lining, buff. 

Epaulettes — gold, with solid crescent; device, three silver embroi- 
dered stars, one H inch in diameter, one 1£ inch, and one 
l£ inch, placed on the strap, in a row longitudinally, and 
equi-distant; dead and bright gold bullion. 

Buttons — gilt, convex, with spread eagle and stars, and plate border. 

Hat — cocked, without binding; fan or back part not more than 
eleven inches, nor less than nine inches; the front or cock, 
not more than nine inches, nor less than eight inches; each 
corner, six inches; black ribbons on the two front sides. 

J.oop and cockade — black silk cockade; loop, gold, eleven inches 
long, ornamented with a silver spread eagle; gold rays einanat- 
ing from the eagle 2^ inches, computing from the centre, 
terminating in 24 silver stars, plain or set with brilliants. 

Tassels — gold, with worked hangers. 

Plume — yellow swan feathers, drooping from an upright stem, 
feathered to the length of eight inches. 

Cravat or stock — black silk. 

Trousers — from the 1st of October to the 30th of April, dark blue 
cloth, with a buff stripe down the outer seam, one and a half 
inch wide and welted at the edges; from the 1st of May to 
the 30th of September, plain white linen or cotton. 

Boots — ankle or Jefferson. 

Spurs — yellow metal or gilt. 

Sword and Scabbard— straight sword, gilt hilt, silver grip, brass or 
steel scabbard. 

Sword-knot — gold cord with acorn end. 

Sword-belt— Russian leather, with three stripes of gold embroidery; 
the carriages to be embroidered on both sides; the belt to be 
worn over the coat. 

Plate — gilt, having the letters 5J|. <£. and a s P"g of ,aurel on eacn 
side in silver. 



214 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Uniform, or Dress of the Arnnj. 

Sash — buff, silk net, with silk bullion fringe ends; sash to go twice 

around the waist and to tie on the left hip. 
Gloves — buff or white. 



Coat — Citizen's coat, dark blue, standing collar, buttons same as 

full d:css, with two in the ce lire and one at the termination 

of each fold. 

Kpaulelti's x 

Buttons \ 

Hat 

Loop and Cockade 

Tassels 

Plume 

Cravat or stock 

Boots ^>The same as in Dress Uniform. 

Spurs 

Stvord and Scabbard 

Sword-knot 

Belt (black patent leatber) 

J' late 

Sash 

Gloves 

Trousers — the same as in dress uniform, but without the stripe. 

2.— All other Major Generals. 

DRESS AMI UNDRESS. 

The same as for a Major General commanding in chief, except- 
ing that the buttons on the breast of the coat are to be placed by 
threes. 
Epaulettes — the same, excepting that there shall be two stars on the 

straps, instead of three. 
Plume — the same shape and materials, except that it will be black 

and white, equally divided, the black tip half the length. 

3. — A Brigadier Genera/. 

DRESS AND l'.\]!K,;-is. 

The same as for a Major General, excepting that the coat is 
to have ten buttons placed on the breast, in pairs. 
Epaulettes— the same, excepting that there shall be one star on. 
the straps, instead of two. 



FOR THE ARMY. 215 



Tjniform, or Dress of the Jirmy. 



Plume — the same, as to materials and form, excepting that the 
colors will be red and white, the white tip half the length. 

Frock coat for General Officer* — blue cloth, two rows of buttons, 
placed according to rank, as on (lie dress coat; stand up collar 
of dark blue velvet; cuffs, also of blue velvet; lining, black silk 
or blue cloth; pockets in the folds of the skirt, with one but- 
ton at the hip and one at tbe end of each pocket, making 
only four buttons on the back and skirts of the coat. 

4. — Officers of the General Staff. 



Officers of the general staff, with the exception of the Engineers. 
Topographical Engineers, and ordnance, having rank as such, and 
below the. rank of generals, will wear a uniform coat corresponding 
with that of the, generals, excepting that it will be single breasted, 
with a row of nine buttons, placed at equal distances; the collar to 
be part buff; the buff* to extend four inches on each side from the 
front; the rest of the collar blue; the cull's also blue. 
Epaulettes — according to rank, as hereafter described. 
Buttons — gilt, convex, same as general officers. 
/fat — cocked, the same as that for general officers. 
Loop and Cockade — same as that for generals, excepting the rays 

and stars. The eagle to be gilt instead of silver. 
Tassels — gold. 
plume — swan feathers, the same as the general officers, with the 

distinction of colors to designate the departments of the staff, 

as below. 
Sword-knots — gold lace strap, with gold bullion tassel. 

Cravat or stock N 

jr rousers J 

Hoots f 

Spur* 

Sword and steel Scabbard ^>The same as for general officers. 
Plate 
Gloves 

Sash (red silk net work, silk 
bullion fringe ends) 



216 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



Sword-belt — Russia leather, with two stripes of gold embroidery; 
carriages embroidered on one side only. 



Coat — as prescribed for dress, but without the buff. 
Trousers — as prescribed for dress, but without the stripe. 

Epaulettes 

Buttons 

Hat 

Loop and Cockade 

Tasssels 

Plume 

Cravat or stock ^ The same ag ^ ^.^ Uniferm. 

Boots 

Spurs 

Sword and Scabbard 

Sword-knot 

Belt (black patent leather) 

Plate 

Gloves 

Frock coat for staff officers under the rank of general officers — dark 
blue cloth, single breasted, with stand up cloth collar; cloth 
cuffs; regulation button; one row of nine buttons on the breast; 
lining and buttons on skirt same as general officers. 

Cloak for general and general staff officers — blue cloth, lined with 
buff. 

Plumes for the different departments of the staff; the Adjutant 
General, Inspector General, Aides-de-Camp, and officers at- 
tached to the General in Chief — yellow plume, like that 
prescribed for a JMajor General commanding an army. 

Aides-de-Camp and officers attached to a Major General — 

the same plume as for a JMajor General. 

Aides-de-Camp and officers attached to a Brigadier Gen- 
eral — the same plume as for a Brigadier General. 

j officers of the Quarter .Waster's Department, including the 



Quarter Master General — a light blue plume, of the same 
materials and form as that prescribed for general officers. 
Officers of the Subsistence Department, including the Commissary 
General of Subsistence — a plume of the same form and ma- 



FOlt THE ARMY. 217 



Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



terials as that of the Quarter Master's Department; half blue 
and half white; tip, white, half the length. 

5. — Pay Department. 

Coat — dark blue cloth, double breasted; two rows of buttons, ten 
buttons in each row; the rows to commence at the collar, and 
to run in right lines to the bottoms of the lapels; lour 
inches apart at the top, and two and a half inches at the 
bottom; the buttons in each row to be equi-distant; standing 
collar of blue cloth; skirts to be made after the fashion of 
the citizen's coat, and lined with blue cloth, with a button at 
each hip; one at the end of each fold, and one intermediate 
in each fold; the Paymaster General to have two gold em- 
broidered button holes on each end of the collar; Paymasters 
one on each end. 

Buttons — same as for other officers of the general staff". 

Hat — cocked, plain, of the same form and dimensions as prescribed 
for general officers; black button and black silk gimp loop, like 
that of the geileral officers; no tassel or other ornament, except 
the cockade and gilt eagle. 

Sword — small sword, gilt hilt and mountings; black scabbard and 
helt; plate same as for general staff. 

Sword-knot — gold. 

Stock or cravat — black silk. 

Gloves — white. 

Spurs — gilt. 

Trousers — from the first of October to the 30th of April, dark 
blue cloth; from the 1st of May to the 30th September, white 
linen or cotton. 

Boots — ankle or Jefferson. 

Frock coat and cloak — same as for other officers of the general 
staff, except the lining of the cloak, which will be blue. 

6. — Medical Department. 

Coat — same as for the Pay Department, except that the collar will 
be of black velvet. Surgeon General to have two gold em- 



218 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



>■ Same as for the Pay Department. 



broidered button holes on each side of the collar; Surgeons, 

one on each end; the collar of the Assistant Surgeons to be 

without ornament. 

Buttons ^ 

Hal 

Sword, belt and plate 

Sword-knot 

Stock or cravat 

Gloves 

S [ntra 

JBoots 

Frock coal and cloak J 

1'roitsers — from the 1st of October to the 30th of April, dark blue 

cloth, with a black stripe down the outer seam, one and a half 

inches wide; from the 1st of May to the 30tb of September, 

white linen or cotton, plain. 

7. — Corps of Engineers. 

Coat — dark blue, single breasted, one row of nine buttons placed 
at equal distances; stand up collar of black velvet, gold em- 
broidered wreath on each side, near the front, of laurel and 
palm, crossing each other at the bottom, encircling a star of 
gold embroidery; cuffs of black velvet, indented as now worn; 
three small buttons at the vent of the cuff; the skirt plain; one 
button at each hip; one at the end of the skirt, and one inter- 
mediate, between the hip and skirt buttons. 

Epaulettes — gold, according to rank as hereafter described. 

Buit'ins — the same as now established. 

Hat — the same as that described for the general officers. 

Loop and cockade — same as for general staff. 

Tassels — gold. 

Plume — three black ostrich feathers. 

Cravat or stock — black silk. 

Trousers — from the 1st of October to the 30th of April, dark blue, 
with a black velvet stripe, down the outer seam one and a half 
inch wide; from the 1st of May to the 30th of September, 
white linen or cotton, plain. 



FOR THE ARMY. 219 



Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



Bo ota "^ 

r. . « , y Same as for officers of the general staff. 

Sword-knot , 5 

Sword-belt J 

Sword — gill hill, black scabbard with gilt mountings. 

Plate — gilt, eliptical, two inches in the shortest diameter, bearing 
the device of the button. 

Prbfesfors, teachers, and their assistants, not in the line of the 
armif, including the sword master. Citizen's dress, with but- 
tons of the corps of engineers, and round hat and black coek- 
ade, with gold eagle. Chaplain — black, button of the corps, 
round hat and cockade and eagle. 

Frock coat and cloak — the same a.s for the genera/ staff, except- 
ing the button, which will be that of the corps; the cloak 
lined with blue. 

8. — Cadets of the Military Academy. 

Coatee — gray cloth, single breasted, three rows of eight gilt bullet 
buttons in front, and button holes of black silk cord in the 
herring-bone form, with a festoon turned at the back end; a 
standing collar, trimmed with black silk lace, to fit the neck, 
and hook in front; the cuffs four inches wide, the bottom of the 
breast and the hip buttons to range; on the collar one blind 
button hole of cord, formed like that of the breast, four inches 
long, with a button on each side, cord holes in the like form, 
to proceed from three buttons placed lengthwise on the skirts, 
with three buttons down the plaits; the cuffs to be indented 
with three buttons, and cord holes likewise on each sleeve, 
corresponding with the indentation of the cuff, in the centre of 
which is to be inserted the lower button. 

Sin-tout — of gray cloth, single breasted, to reach to within four inches 
of the ankle joint, with a stand and fall collar rising to the tip 
of the ear, and hooked in front. Buttons gilt, cupped, three- 
quarters of an inch in diameter, and stamped across the face 
with the word " Cadet;" one button oh each side of the collar, 
with a blind button hole of black silk braid, four inches long, 
fivtj buttons down the front, and three in each plait behind. 



220 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Uniform, or Dress of the .Army. 

A cape of the same material as the coat, to descend two-thirds 
of the length of the waist. The coat to have cross (laps at 
the hips two and a half inches wide. 
y es t — of gray cloth for winter, single breasted, gilt buttons, trimmed 
with black silk lace. White vests for summer. 

Trousers — of gray cloth for winter, with black velvet stripe down 
the outer seam — of Russia drilling for summer, without the 
stripe; the form same as for winter. 

Fatigue dress — of unbleached Russia drilling. The pantaloons to 
be cut full and to be without trimmings. Tl.c jacket to be 
made single breasted, with a stand and fall collar; one gilt 
button half an inch in diameter on each side of the collar, and 
ten buttons of the same pattern down the breast. 

Dress caps — according to pattern deposited with the storekeeper. 

Forage cap — according to a pattern deposited with the storekeeper. 

Stock — black. 

Shoes — ankle boots. 

Gloves — of white leather. 

9. — Topographical Engineers. 

Coat — dark blue cloth, single breasted, with one row of ten but- 
tons; stand up collar united in front at the lower edge, and 
so high that the chin may pass freely over it; cuffs oblique, 
three and a half inches wide on the upper, and two inches on 
the lower seam of the sleeve; the skirt to come to the bend 
of the knee; outer edge of the skirt faced with cloth of the 
same color as the coat; one button at the top, and one within 
an inch and a half of the bottom of each plait, which will be 
composed of a single fold; the collar, cuffs, turnbacks, and the 
top of the plaits, between the hip buttons, ornamented with 
oak leaf and acorn embroidery in gold. 

Epaulettes — according to rank, as hereafter described. 

Buttons — gilt, seven-eighths of an inch diameter, slightly convex: 
device the shield of the United States, occupying one half 
of the diameter: the letters 5T. 3B. in Old English characters, 
occupying the other half; small buttons, one half inch diame- 
ter: device the same. 



FOR THE ARMY. 221 



Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



Hat ~\ 

Loop and Cockade 

Tassels 

Cravat or stock Y Same as for officers of the general staff. 

Sword-knot 

Boots 

Spurs J 

Trousers — the same as the engineers, except the black stripe. 

Pl ume — black, of the form and materials for the general staff. 

Sword — small sword, three cornered; gilt hilt and mountings; black 

scabbard. 
Sword-belt — black waist belt, two inches wide, worn under the 

coat, with a sliding frog. 
Plate — gilt, eliptical, two inches in the shortest diameter, bearing 

the device of the button. 
Frock coat and cloak — same as for the general staff, except the 

button, which will be as above described: cloak lining, blue. 

10 — Artillery. 

Coat — dark blue cloth, double breasted, two rows of buttons, ten in 
each row, at equal distances: the distance between the rows 
four inches at top, and two inches at bottom, measuring from 
the centres or eyes of the buttons; standing collar, to meet, 
in front with hooks and eyes, and rise no higher than to per- 
mit the free turning of the chin over it; two loops, four and 
a half inches long, on each side of the collar, with one small 
uniform button, at the end of each loop; the collar edged all 
round with red; plain round cuff, three inches deep; slashed 
flap on the sleeve, six and a half inches long, and two and 
two eighths of an inch wide at the points, and two inches 
wide at the narrowest part of the curve; four loops and four 
small buttons on the slashed flap on the sleeve, for field 
officers; for Captains, a sleeve of the same fashion, but the 
slash only four and a half inches long, with three loops 
and three small buttons; and for subalterns, a slash sleeve 
of three and a half inches long, with two loops and two 
small buttons; loops to be placed at equal distances; slashed 



222 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Uniform, or Srew of the Jtrmy. 

flap on the skirt, with four loops and large buttons; the slashed 
flaps on the sleeves and skirts to be edged with red on the 
ends and indented edge; two large buttons at the waist; skirt 
to extend to within three and a half inches of the bend of 
the knee; red kerseymere turnbacks and skirt linings; irold em- 
broidered shell and flame at the bottom of the skirt; loops on 
the collar and flaps to be of gold lace, half an inch wide, and 
the entire loop not to exceed one and a quarter inches in 
breadth, the coat to be lined with red. 

Epaulettes — according to rank and pattern, as hereafter described. 

Button — gilt, convex, seven-eighths of an inch diameter; device, a 
spread eagle with shield. 

Caps — black beaver, seven and a half inches deep, with lackered 
sunk tip seven and a half inches diameter, with a band of 
black patent leather to encircle the bottom of the cap; black 
patent leather peak, gilt eagle, and cross cannons and number 
of regiment; a strap of black patent leather, fastened to each 
side of the cap, to be worn under the chin. 

Plume — red cock-feathers, falling from an upright stem, eight 
inches long, with a gilt socket. 

Trousers — from the 1st of October to the 30th of April, white and 
light blue mixture cloth, producing the effect of a sky-blue, 
to come well down over the boots, and made perfectly plain, 
except a red stripe down the outer seam, one and a half 
inches wide, and welted at the edges; from the 1st of May to 
the 30th of September, white linen or cotton, without the stripe. 

Boots — ankle or Jefferson. 

Sword and scabbard — according to pattern furnished by the Ord- 
nance Department. 

Waist-belt — white leather, two inches wide, with sliding frog, to be 
worn over the coat, and clasped in front with a round clasp, 
according to pattern to be furnished by the Ordnance Depart- 
ment. 

<S'a*/i— crimson silk net, with silk bullion fringe ends; sash to go 
twice round the waist and to be tied on the left hip: the 
pendent part to be uniformly one foot in length from the tie. 



FOR THE ARMY. 223 



Uniform, or Dress of the J]\my. 

Stock — black silk. 

Gloves — white. 

Frock- coal — dark blue cloth, single breasted, with ten large regi- 
mental buttons down the front at equal distances, and two 
small regimental buttons at the fastening of the cuff; plain 
stand up collar; two large buttons at each pocket in the skirt, 
one of which at the hip, and the other at the bottom of the 
fold of the pocket, making four] buttons behind; lining of the 
coat, blue. 

Cloak — blue, lined with scarlet shalloon; walking length; clasp orna- 
ments at bottom of collar, gilt eagle, with chain. 

Forage cap — according to pattern. 

Spurs for mounted officers — yellow metal or gilt. 

Sword-knot — crimson and gold, with bullion tassel. 

11. — Ordnance Department. 

Coat of the same pattern as the artillery; to be of dark blue cloth 

throughout; no red; button convex, plain border, cross cannon 
'and bomb-shell; lace, the same as the artillery. 

Epaidettes — according to rank and pattern, as hereafter described. 

jlat — cocked, the same as the general staff. 

Plume — the same as the artillery. 

Trousers— ihe same as the artillery, except that the stripe on the 
cloth trousers will be dark blue instead of red. 

Boots 1 

Sword and Scabbard 
Waist-belt 
Plate 

Sword-knot Same as for the artillery except 

Sash y that the waist-belt is of black 

Stock P at(!llt leather. 

Gloves 
Frock coat 
Cloak 
Spurs for mounted officers J 

Ordnance. Sergeants to wear the uniform of the non-commissioned 
staff of the artillery, with red plume. 



-224 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



12. — Infantry. 

Coat— the same pattern as that of the artillery;— to be of dark blue 
cloth, lined with white serge; edged with white kerseymere 
where the artillery coat is edged with red; turnbacks and skirt 
lining of white kerseymere; skirt ornament, silver embroidered 
bugle; the lace to be silver; buttons, silver plated, of the same 
device, size, and shape, as those for the artillery. 

Epaulettes— according to rank and pattern, as hereafter described. 

Cap— same as the artillery, except the ornaments, which are a 
silver bugle, number of regiment, surmounted by a gilt eagle. 

Plume— .white cock-feathers, falling from an upright stem, eight 
inches long, with a gilt socket. 

Trousers— the same as the artillery, except that the stripe on the 
mixture trousers to be of white kerseymere. 

Boots ~\ 

Sword and Scabbard 

Waist-belt and plate 

Sword-knot v game as for the arti n erv . 

Sash 

Stock 

Gloves I 

Spurs for mounted officers J 

Frock Coat — same as for the artillery, except the button, which 

will be the regimental button. 
Cloak — same as for the artillery, except the lining, which will hr. 

white shalloon. 
Forage cap — according to pattern. 

13. — Dragoons. 

Coat — dark blue cloth, double breasted, two rows of buttons, ten 
in each row, at equal distances, after the fashion of the coat 
described for the infantry, except that the buttons are to be 
gilt, the lace gold, the collar, cuffs, and turnbacks, yellow, the 
skirt to be ornamented with a star, instead of a bugle, and the 
length of the skirt to be what is called three-quarters. The 
slash flap on the skirt and sleeve to correspond with that of 
the infantry; the slash on the sleeve to designate rank in the 



FOR THE ARMY. 225 



Uniform, or Dress of the «irmy. 



same manner; the collar to be framed with lace, two loops 
on each side of the collar, with small uniform buttons at the 
back end of the loops. 
Epaulettes — according to the established rule, where the button is 
yellow, and according to rank; the strap to have no number 
on it. 
Button — gilt, convex; device, a spread eagle, with the letter D on 

the shield. 
Trousers — for the company officers, blue grey mixture, of the same 
color as that for the infantry, with two stripes of yellow cloth, 
three-fourths of an inch wide, up each outward seam, leaving 
a light between. 

Field officers and Adjutant, dark blue cloth, with two stripes 
of gold lace up each outward seam, three-fourths of an inch 
wide, leaving a light between. For the summer, all officers 
to wear plain white drilling. 
Cap — of the same material as that for the infantry, but according 
to a pattern furnished; to be ornamented with a gilt star, 
silver eagle, and gold cord; the star to be worn in front, with 
a drooping white horse-hair pompon; the field officers to have 
a small strip of red hair, to show in front of their pompons. 
.iiguillette—&i twisted gold cord, with gilt tags, to be worn under 
the epaulette of the right shoulder, will distinguish the field 
officers and commissioned staff. 
Boots — ankle. 
Spurs — yellow metal. 

Sabre— steel scabbard, half basket hilt, gilt with two fluted bars 
on the outside, fish skin gripe, bound with silver wire, and 
of the pattern deposited with the Ordnance Department. 
Xnot — gold cord with acorn end. 

Sash— silk net, deep orange color, and like that of the infantry, 
as to shape and size; to be tied on the right hip; to be worn 
only when in full dress, or when directed by the commanding 
officer. 
Waist-belt— black patent leather, one and a half inch wide, with 
slings, hooks, and plate, like those of the general staff, omitting 
15 



226 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 

on the plate the letters U. S. and inserting the letter D within 

the wreath. 
Stock — black silk. 
Gloves — white. 

UNDRESS. 

Coat — dark blue cloth, cut after the fashion of citizen's coat, with 
nine buttons on each breast, one on each side of the collar, four 
on the cuffs, four along the flaps, two on the hips, one on the 
bottom of each skirt, and two, one and a half inches apart, 
about midway of each skirt. Epaulette strap on each shoulder. 
This coat will habitually be worn when not in full dress, and 
may be worn (with or without epaulettes, according to orders) 
upon all duty done by detail, where the officer is not required 
to be in full uniform, and upon all drills where the troops are 
not in full dress. Officers upon ordinary stable duty, marches, 
or active service, will be permitted to wear a shell or stable 
jacket, corresponding with that of the men. 

Great coat — blue grey mixture, like that furnished the men, double 
breasted with sleeves, stand up collar, cape to meet, and button 
all the way in front, and reach down to the upper edge of the 
cuff of the coat. 

Trousers — same as the full dress, with the exception of the stripes. 

Forage cap — black leather, same as those furnished to the men. 

Horse Furniture. 

Housing — blue eloth, with gold lace border, for the field officers 
and commissioned staff, one and a half inches wide, and yellow 
cloth border of the same width, for company officers. 

Bridle — black leather. 

Mountings — all metallic mountings, stirrups, bits, &c, of saddle 
and bridle, to be of yellow metal. 

Non-commissioned Officers, Buglers, and Privates of 
Dragoon*. 

Coat — dark blue cloth short coat, double breasted, with yellow 
collar, cuffs, turnbacks, and brass shoulder knots, of the exact 



FOR THE ARMY. 227 



Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



cut and fashion of the one furnished the Clothing Bureau. 
Sergeants to wear chevrons of three bars, points towards the 
cuff, on each sleeve, above the elbow; Corporals, two bars. 
The collar of the Chief Musician's and Sergeant's coats to be 
trimmed with yellow worsted binding, after the style of the 
officers. Musicians' coats to be of red cloth, yellow turnbacks 
and cuffs. 

Trousers — same material as for other corps, but cut and made after 
the style and fashion of a pair furnished the Clothing Bureau. 
Sergeants to have two yellow stripes three fourths of an inch 
wide, up each outward seam, leaving a light between. Cor- 
porals and privates, one yellow stripe up each outward seam. 
The stripes to be in advance of the seam. 

Jacket — blue cloth for winter, white cotton for summer; stand up 
collar; trimmed with yellow worsted binding, like Sergeant's 
coat; single breasted, one row of buttens in front. These 
jackets are to be made of cloth of the quality used for the 
old uniform coats. 

Cap — same materials as for other corps, but the pattern, ornaments, 
and trimming, like the one furnished the Clothing Bureau. 
Drooping white horse hair pompon. 

Great coat — same materials as for other corps. Stand up collar, 
double breasted, cape to reach down to the cuff of the coat, and 
to button all the way up. 

Boots — ankle. 

The non-commissioned staff to wear aiguillettes on the left 
shoulder, like those for the artillery. Non-commissioned staff 
and First Sergeants of companies wear yellow worsted sashes. 

Forage cap— black leather, like pattern furnished Clothing Bureau. 

14. — Badges to Distinguish Rank. 

EPAULETTES. 

Of general officers — as above described. 

Of a Colonel— -bright bullion, half an inch diameter, three inches 
and a half long; plain lace strap, ornamented with as embroider- 



228 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 

ed spread eagle; the number of the regiment to be embroidered 
within the crescent; crescent solid; eagle and number to be silver 
where the bullion is gold, and gold where the bullion is silver. 

Of a Lieutenant Colonel — the same as the Colonel, omitting the 
eagle. 

Of a Major — the same as a Lieutenant Colonel as to shape and 
size; the strap to be of silver lace where the bullion is gold f 
and of gold lace where the bullion is silver; the number on 
the strap to correspond in color with the bullion; the border 
of the strap the same color of the bullion. 

Of a Captain — plain lace straps and solid crescent bullion one- 
fourth inch diameter and two and a half inches deep; regimental 
number on the strap to be gold embroidered where the bul- 
lion is silver, and to be silver embroidered where the bullion 
is gold. 

Of a Lieutenant — the same as for a Captain, except that the 
bullion is one-eighth inch in diameter. 
The bullion of all epaulettes to correspond in color with the 

button of the coat. 

All officers having military rank, to wear one epaulette on each 

(shoulder. 

The number on the epaulette being intended to denote the re- 
giment, it will be worn by regimental officers only. 
Epaulettes may be worn either with pads or boxes. 

1 5. — Jiiguillett.es. 

Staff officers, general, as well as regimental, except the Engi- 
neers, Topographical Engineers, and ordnance, will be distinguished 
by aiguillettes. 

Aiguillettes of general staff officers — twisted gold cord, with gilt 
engraved tags, worn on the right shoulder, under the epaulette. 
The officers of the general staff', to be distinguished by aiguil- 
lettes, are — 

The Adjutant General, 
The Inspectors General, 
The Aides-de-Camp, 



FOR THB ARMY. 229 



Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



The officers of the Quarter Master's Department, 
The officers of the Subsistence Department, 
The officers of the Pay Department, 
The officers of the Medical Department, 
The Commissary General of Purchases. 
Mguillettes of regimental staff officers — twisted gold and silver cord, 
with gilt tags, worn under the epaulette of the right shoulder. 

The dress uniform of Generals, and general staff officers, is 
to be worn at dress reviews, and on extraordinary occasions. 

The undress is for general use, and may be worn on all occa- 
sions not specified above. 

The blue frock coat may be worn by General officers on com- 
mon occasions off parade, and when the troops are ordered to 
wear their great coats upon a march. 

Officers of the staff may wear, under the same circumstances, 
the blue frock coat prescribed for them. 

The sword-belt to be worn over the frock coat. 

The sash to be worn by general and staff officers, when in full 
dress, and on all occasions when serving with the troops, whether 
in undress or frock coat. 

Colonels of regiments or corps, having the brevet rank of Gene- 
rals, may, at their option, wear the uniform of their respective 
regiments or corps, or that of general officers according to their 
brevet rank, with the exception of the plume, which is to be worn 
only when commanding, according to their brevets. They will 
wear the plume of their respective regiments or corps. 

All other brevet officers will wear the epaulettes distinctive ®f 
their highest rank according to their arm. 

Officers of regiments and posts will be provided with shell 
jackets, to be worn in summer, during the extreme heat of the 
season; the shell jacket to be of the following pattern:— white cot- 
ton or linen, with standing collar; cuffs three inches deep round 
the wrist, to open at the lower seam, where they will be buttoned 
with two small uniform buttons. A row of ten small uniform 
buttons down the front at equal distance; the front and rear of 
the jacket to come down in a peak. 



230 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 

The commanding officer will determine in orders, when the 
jacket is to be worn by the officers and men, according to the 
state of the weather. On duty, the sash will be worn with the 

shell jacket. 

16. — Shoulder Straps to be worn on the Frock Coat to 
designate rank. 

A Major General commanding in chief — strap of blue cloth, 
one inch in breadth, and not less than three and a half inches 
nor more than four inches in length; bordered with an em-» 
broidery of gold a quarter of an inch wide; three silver 
embroidered stars of five rays, the points of which shall be 
in the circumference of a circle, whose radius is three-tenths 
of an inch; one star on the centre of the strap, and one on 
each side, equi-distant between the centre and outer edge of 
the strap; where these stars would come in contact with the 
embroidery of the strap, there must be described an arc of a 
circle, (having the centre of the star for its centre, and the 
radius of the star for its radius,) taking out a sufficient quan- 
tity of the embroidery to admit them. 

A Major General — the same as a Major General commanding in 
chief, except that there will be two stars instead of three; the 
centre of each star to be one inch from the outer edge of the 
gold embroidery on the ends of the strap. 

A Colonel — Strap of the same size as above; the embroidery on, 
the border to be one half the width (i. e. one eighth of an 
inch;) an embroidered spread eagle on the centre of the strap 
two inches between the tips of the wings, having in the right 
talon an olive branch, and in the left a bundle of arrows; an 
escutcheon on the breast as represented in the arms of the 
United States; the embroidery of the eagle to be of silver 
where the border is gold, and of gold where the border is 
silver. 

A Lieutenant Colonel — the same as for a Colonel, omitting the 
eagle, and introducing a leaf at each end, each leaf extending 
seven eighths of an inch from the end border of the strap; 
the embroidered leaf of the same color with the border. 



FOR THE ARMY. 231 



Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



A Major — the same as that for a Lieutenant Colonel, except that 
the leaves will be of silver where the border is of gold, and 
of gold where the border is of silver. 

.2 Captain — the same as that for a Major, except that two em- 
broidered bars will be substituted for each leaf, of the same 
width and color as the border; to be placed parallel to the 
ends of the strap; the distance between them and from the 
border equal to the width of the border. 

A First Lieutenant — The same as for a Captain, excepting that 
there will be one bar at each end instead of two. 

A Second Lieutenant— the same as for a First Lieutenant, omitr 
ting the bars. 
Note.— The embroidery of the borders of the straps is, in every 

instance, to correspond in color to the button of the coat. 

17 _ Officers of Regiments of Artillery and Infantry. 
The sash is to be worn on all occasions where the officer is m 

full dress. 

The frock coat, as here established, may be worn as a common 
morning dress in quarters, and on certain duties off parade; to wit: 
inspections of barracks and hospitals— courts of inquiry and boards- 
inspections of articles and necessaries— working parties and fatigue 
duties — and upon the march. 

The waist belt is to be worn over the frock coat, and when the 
officer is engaged on duty of any description, the sash is to be worn. 

The swords of mounted officers will be suspended from the belt, 
by slings of the same materials as the belt, with a hook attached 
to the belt, to suspend the sword more conveniently when on foot 

18.— Horse. Furniture for General and Staff Officers. 

Housing for General Officers-ot dark blue cloth, trimmed with 
two rows of gold lace, the outer row one inch and five-eighths 
wide, the inner row two inches and a quarter; to be worn over 
the saddle; made full, so as to cover the horse's haunches and 
fore-hands, and to bear certain embroidered ornaments, to denote 
the rank of the officer. 



232 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 

The housing of a Major General commanding in chief to 
be denoted by a gold embroidered spread eagle and three stars. 
of all other Majors General, by a gold em- 
broidered spread eagle and two stars. 

of a Brigadier General, by a gold embroi- 
dered spread eagle and one star. 
Surcingle — of blue web, to be attached to the housing. 

The same as the above for all staff officers holding the rank 
of general officers, according to their grade; if under that rank, 
they are to use the saddle-cloth prescribed for staff officers, 
to wit: 
Saddle-cloth for staff officers — dark blue, two feet ten inches in 
length, and one foot ten inches in depth, with an edging of 
gold lace; the width of the lace one inch; to be worn under 
the saddle. 
Bridle — of black leather; bent branch bit, with gilt bosses; the front 

and roses yellow. 
Collar — yellow. 
Holsters— covered with leopard skin, or leather painted to resemble 

it; the leather suiting the warmer climates best. 
Stirrups — gilt. 

Officers of engineers and topographical engineers, the same 
as above, according to rank. 

19. — Horse Furniture for Mounted Officers of Jlrtillery, 
Ordnance and Infantry. 

Saddle-cloth — dark blue, two feet ten inches in length, and one 
foot ten inches in depth, with lace five-eighths of an inch in 
width: for the artillery and ordnance, gold lace; scarlet edging 
for the artillery, black for the ordnance; for the infantry, silver 
lace and white edging. 

Bridle — of black leather, gilt hits, stirrups, and mountings, for the 
artillery and ordnance, and plated for the infantry; front and 
roses for the artillery, red; for the ordnance, blue; for the 
infantry, white. 

Collar — for the artillery, red; for the ordnance, blue; for the infantry, 
white. 



FOR THE ARMY. 233 



Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



Holsters — to be covered with black beai-skin, or black leather. 

20. — General Remarks. 

The hair to be short, or what is generally termed cropped; the 
whiskers not to extend below the lower tip of the ear. and in a 
line thence with the curve of the mouth. 

Vests are not described, as they form no part of the military 
dress. When worn, however, by general or general staff officers, 
they may be of buff, blue, or white, to suit season and climate, 
with the small uniform button; for regimental officers, the same, 
with the exception of the buff. 

The forage cap may be worn off duty, with the frock coat and 
with the shell jacket— in winter, the forage cap, in cold climates 
will have a temporary band of black fur, two and a half inches 
wide, attached to the bottom, to unite in front by a tie of black 
ribbon. 

Regimental officers not serving with their regiments, nor doing 
duty in the line, may wear cocked hats of the same description as 
those prescribed for general staff officers, except that the loop will 
be of black silk: the eagle yellow, the tassels to conform to the 
color of the button. 

Cocked hats may be either open or formed so as to shut like 
the hat which has heretofore been designated chapeau de bras. 

All officers are permitted to wear a citizen's blue coat, with ths 
button designating their respective corps or stations, without any 
other mark on them; such a coat, however, is not to be considered 
as a dress for any military purpose whatever. 

21. — Uniform of the Non- Commissioned Officers, Musi- 
cians, Artificers, and Privates, of the Artillery. 

Sergeant Major— the same as that established for the field officers, 
excepting that binding will be substituted for gold lace; the 
epaulettes to be of the same pattern as that of the subalterns, 
excepting that worsted bullion will be substituted for gold 
bullion; plume, red upright hackle, twelve inches long; aigml- 
lette on the left shoulder, of yellow worsted, with gilt tags. 



234 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Uniform, or Dress of the Army. 



Quarter Master Sergeant — the same as the Sergeant Major, ex- 
cepting that the plume will be of light blue. 

Chief Musician — the same as Quarter Master Sergeant, except- 
ing the coat to be of red cloth, with white linings and 
turnbacks; plume white. 

Sergeants — coat to be dark blue, single breasted, with one row of 
nine buttons, placed at equal distances; the skirts to extend 
within seven inches of the bend of the knee; the coat to con- 
form to the pattern of the officers' coats in other respects, 
excepting that the curl' shall have three buttons and loops on 
the slash sleeve, to conform to that designed for a Captain; 
the lace to be of worsted; two worsted epaulettes corresponding 
in pattern with those of a Captain; First Sergeant of compa- 
nies to wear a red worsted sash; all Sergeants to wear the 
red stripe on the blue mixture trousers, as designated for 
officers; same for the non-commissioned staff. 

Corporals — Same as Sergeants, excepting that there will be but two 
buttons on the slash sleeve, conforming to the pattern of the 
sleeve for the subalterns; trousers same as Sergeants, -without 
the stripe; two epaulettes of the pattern for the subalterns, of 
the same materials as those of the Sergeants. 
J J rivates-^the same as the Corporals, excepting that instead of 
epaulettes, a strap will be worn on each shoulder, composed 
of the same materials and form of the epaulettes of the. Cor- 
porals, with pad, and half fringe. 
^Musicians — the same as the privates, excepting that the coat be 
of red cloth, lined with white, turnbacks white; white plume, 
upright hackle, ten inches long. 

The cap of the non-commissioned officers, musicians, and privates, 
to be of the same pattern as that designated for the officers. 

The plumes of the Sergeants, Corporals, and privates, red worsted, 
right inches long. 

Uniform of the non-cornmissioned officers, musicians, and privates 
of the infantry — the same as that for the artillery, excepting 



FOR THE ARMY. 235 



Flags, Colors, Guidons, Drums. 



the facings and trimmings, which* will be -white; plume white — 
Quarter Master Sergeant, light blue plume. 

Non-commissioned officers and privates, as well as musicians, 
who shall have served faithfully for the term of five years, shall 
be permitted, as a mark of distinction, to wear a chevron on the 
sleeves of their coats, above the elbow, points up; and an additional 
chevron on each arm for every additional five years of faithful 
service. And those who served in the war, shall have the addition 
of a red stripe on each side of the chevron. 

ARTICLE LIII. 

FLAGS, COLORS, GUIDONS, DRUMS. 

Garrison Flag. 

The garrison flag is the national flag. It is to be made of bunt- 
ing, net to exceed forty feet fly, and twenty feet hoist. To be 
composed of thirteen horizontal stripes of equal breadth, alternately 
red and white, beginning with the red. In the upper quarter, near 
the staff, will be the Union, composed of a number of white stars, 
equal to the number of States, distributed over a blue field, one- 
third the length of the flag, and to run down to the lower edge 
of the fourth red stripe from the top. 

Colors of Regiments of Artillery. 
Each regiment of artillery shall have two silken colors. The 
first, or the national color, of stars and stripes, as described for 
the garrison flag. The number and name of the regiment to be 
embroidered with gold on the centre stripe. The second, or regi- 
mental color, to be yellow, of the same dimensions as the first, 
bearing in the centre two cannon crossing, with the letters U. S. 
above, and the number of the regiment below, fringe, yellow. Each 
color to be 'six feet six inches fly, and six feet deep on the pike. 
The pike, including the spear and ferule, to be nine feet ten inches 
in length. Cords and tassels, red and yellow silk, intermixed. 



236 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Flags, Colors, Guidons, Drums. 

Colors of Regiments of Infantry. 

Each regiment of infantry shall have one silken color, to be blue, 
with the arms of the United States embroidered in silk on the 
centre. The name of the regiment in a scroll, underneath the 
eagle. The size of each color to be six feet six inches fly, and 
six feet deep on the pike. The length of the pike, including the 
spear and ferule, to be nine feet ten inches. The fringe yellow; 
cords and tassels, blue and white silk intermixed. 

Camp Colors. 

The camp colors to be of bunting, eighteen inches square; white 
for infantry, and red for artillery, with the number of the regi- 
ment on them. The pole eight feet long. 

Standards and Guidons of the Cavalry. 

Each regiment will have a silken standard, and each company a 
silken guidon. The standard to bear the arms of the United States, 
embroidered in silk, on a blue ground, with the number and name 
of the regiment, in a scroll underneath the eagle. The flag of 
the standard to be two feet five inches wide, and two feet three 
inches on the lance, and to be edged with yellow silk fringe. 

The flag of the guidon to be made swallow-tailed, three feet 
five inches from the lance to the end of the slit of the swallow- 
tail; fifteen inches to the fork of the swallow-tail, and two feet 
three inches on the lance. To be half red and half white, dividing 
at the fork, the red above — on the red, the letters U. S. in white, 
and on the white the letter of the company in red. The lance 
of the standards and guidons to be nine feet long, including sr»ear 
and ferule. 

Drums. 

The front of the drums to be painted with the arms of the 
United States, on a blue field for the infantry, and on a red 
field for the artillery. The number of the regiment under the 
arms, in a scroll. 



FOR THE ARMY. 237 



Jtrms of the United State*. 



Knapsacks. 
All knapsacks to be painted black. Those for the artillery and 
ordnance to be marked on the cover, in yellow paint, with two 
cannon crossing, the number of the regiment above the cannon, 
and the letter of the company below. Those for the infantry to be 
marked in white paint, with a bugle, suspended by a cord, the 
number of the regiment within the cord, and the letter of the com- 
pany below the bugle. The cannon to be seven and a half inches 
long; the bugle to be six inches from point to point, and six inches 
from the knot of the cord to the curve of the bugle. The figures 
and letters to be one inch and a half long. These devices t© re- 
semble those on the caps. 

ARTICLE LIV. 

ARMS OF THE USITED STATES, AS ESTABLISHED BY AS ACT OF CONGRESS. 

firm Paleways of thirteen pieces, argent and gules; a chief, 

azure; the escutcheon on the breast of the American eagle displayed, 
proper, holding in his dexter talon an olive branch, and in hie 
sinister-, a bundle of thirteen arrows, all proper, and in his beak a 
scroll inscribed with this motto, " e pluribus ukcm." 

For the crest: over the head of the eagle, which appears above 
the escutcheon, a glory, or breaking through a cloud, proper, and 
surrounding thirteen stars, forming a constellation, argent, and on 
an azure field. 




238 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Allowances, etc. 
ARTICLE LV. 

EXTRA AND INCIDENTAL ALLOWANCES. 

1 To the second teacher of French at the Military Academy, 

the same pay and emoluments as allowed to the first teacher. 

2 To the master of the sword at the Military Academy, 46j dol- 
lars a month, and two rations a day. 

3. ...To cadets acting assistant professors at the Military Academy, 
$\0 a month. 

4.... To the librarian of the Military Academy, ten dollars a month. 

5... .To treasurer's clerk at the Military Academy, §25 a month. 

6.... To teacher of music at the Military Academy, $50 a month. 

7. ...To the Sergeants acting as clerks in the different military 
bureaus at Washington, $25 a month, with commutation of clothing 
at $2 50 a month; fuel and quarters at $6 a month, and rations at 
15 cents a day, and the commutation of one gill of whiskey a day. 

8.... To the Sergeants acting as clerks in the Quarter Master 
General's office, $500 a year extra, with commutation as above. 

To the Sergeants employed as messengers or orderlies in the 
military bureaus at Washington, 15 cents and commutation for 
one gill of whiskey a day extra, with a commutation of clothing, 
fuel, quarters, and rations, as above. 

ARTICLE LVI. 

RESTRICTIONS AS TO EXTRA ALLOWANCES. 

In all cases where an officer of the army is required, by the 
direction of the War Department, to perform duties or to make 
disbursements, for which compensation is not especially provided 
by law, and where the instructions directing 6uch duties to be 
done, or such disbursements to be made, make no provision for 
any additional compensation, no allowance therefor will be made 
to such officer. It will then be considered, that in the opinion of 
the War Department, the services so required are within the proper 
sphere of his duty, as an officer of the army. 



FOR THE ARMY. 23$ 



Miscellaneous. 



ARTICLE LVII. 

INDIVIDUALS EMPLOYED LN STAFF DEPARTMENTS. 

Officers having the charge and direction of persons hired, or 
employed in any of the staff departments, who are not subject to be 
tried by courts martial, will be held responsible, that all such per- 
sons, while within any fort or military post, observe decorum and 
respect the standing rules of the service. 

ARTICLE LVIII. 

DISBURSING OFFICERS. 

Officers charged with the disbursement of public money, are 
required by law to render their accounts quarterly; in failure 
whereof, they are liable to be dismissed the service. 

ARTICLE LIX. 

Officers of the army must provide themselves, at their own 
expense, with a copy of this book of General Regulations, and with 
copies of the books containing the instructions for their respective 
arms. 



^XESEOILIi© ©W WAlBo 



A* ACT FOR r.STillUSHINO RULES AND ARTICLES FOR THE GOVERN- 
MENT OF THE ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES. 

Section. 1. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Represen- 
tatives of the United States of America in Co7igress assembled, That, 
from and after the passing of this act, the following shall be the Rules 
and Articles by which the armies of the United States shall be 
governed: 

Article. 1.... Every officer, now in the army of the United States, 
shall, in six months from the passing of this act, and every officer 
who shall hereafter be appointed, shall, before he enters on the duties 
of his office, subscribe these rules and regulations. 

Art. 2. — .It is earnestly recommended to all officers and soldiers 
diligently to attend Divine Service; and all officers who shall behave 
indecently or irreverently, at any place of Divine Worship, shall, if 
commissioned officers, be brought before a general court martial, 
there to be publicly and severely reprimanded by the President; if 
non-commissioned officers or soldiers, every person so offending, 
shall, for his first offence, forfeit one sixth of a dollar, to be deducted 
out of his next pay; for the second offence, he shall not only forfeit 
a like sum, but be confined twenty-four hours; and for every like 
offence, shall suffer and pay in like manner; which money so forfeited, 
shall be applied by the Captain or senior officer of the troop or 
company, to the use of the sick soldiers of the company or troop to 
which the offender belongs. 

Art. 3.... Any non-commissioned officer or soldier who shall use 
any profane oath or execration, shall incur the penalties expressed 
in the foregoing article; and a commissioned officer shall forfeit and 
pay for each and every such office, one dollar, to be applied as 
in the preceding article. 
16 



242 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Articles of War. 



Art. 4.... Every Chaplain commissioned in the army or armies 
of the United States, who shall absent himself from the duties 
assigned him, (excepting in cases of sickness or leave of absence,) 
shall, on conviction thereof before a court martial, be fined not 
exceeding one month's pay, besides the loss of his pay during his 
absence; or be discharged, as the said court martial shall judge 
proper. 

Anx. 5... .Any officer or soldier who shall use contemptuous or 
disrespectful^ words against the President of the United States, 
against the Vice President thereof, against the Congress of the 
United States, or against the Chief Magistrate or Legislature of any 
of the United States, in which he may be quartered, if a commissioned 
officer, shall be cashiered, or otherwise punished, as a court martial 
shall direct; if a non-commissioned officer or soldier, he shall suffer 
such punishment as shall be inflicted on him by the sentence of a 
court martial. 

Art. 6. ...Any officer or soldier who shall behave himself with 
contempt or disrespect towards his commanding officer, shall be 
punished according to the nature of his offence, by the judgment 
of a court martial. 

Art. 7.... Any officer or soldier who shall begin, excite, cause, 
or join, in any mutiny, or sedition, in any troop or company in 
the service of the United States, or in any party, post, detachment, 
or guard, shall suffer death, or such other punishment as by a court 
martial shall be inflicted. 

Art. 8 ••••Any officer, non-commissioned officer, or soldier, who, 
being present at any mutiny or sedition, does not use his utmost 
endeavor to suppress the same, or coming to the knowledge of any 
intended mutiny, does not without delay, give information thereof 
to his commanding officer, shall be punished by the sentence of a 
court martial with death, or otherwise, according to the nature of 
his offence. 

Art. 9.... Any officer or soldier who shall strike his superior 
officer, or draw or lift up any weapon, or offer any violence against 
him, being in the execution of his office, on any pretence whatsoever, 
or shall disobey any lawful command of his superior officer, shall 



FOR THE ARMY. 243 



Articles of War. 

suffer death, or such other punishment as shall, according- to the 
nature of his offence, be inflicted upon him by the sentence of a 
court martial. 

Art. 10. ...Every non-commissioned officer or soldier, who shall 
enlist himself in the service of the United States, shall, at the time 
of his enlisting, or within six days afterwards, have the Articles 
for the government of the armies of the United States, read to him, 
and shall, by the officer who enlisted him, or by the commanding 
officer of the troop or company into which he was enlisted, be taken 
before the next justice of the peace, or chief magistrate of any city 
or town corporate, not being an officer of the army, or where 
recourse cannot be had to the civil magistrate, before the judge 
advocate, and in his presence, shall take the following oath or affir- 
mation: "I, A B, do solemnly swear or affirm, (as the case may 
be,) that I will bear true allegiance to the United States of America, 
and that I will serve them honestly and faithfully against all their 
enemies or opposers whatsoever; and observe and obey the orders 
of the President of the United States, and the orders of the officers 
appointed over me, according to the Rules and Articles for the govern- 
ment of the armies of the United States." Which justice, magistrate, 
or judge advocate, is to give the officer a certificate, signifying 
that the man enlisted, did take the said oath or affirmation. 

Art. 11.... After a non-commissioned officer or soldier, shall 
have been duly enlisted and sworn, he shall not be dismissed the 
service, without a discharge in writing; and no discharge granted 
to him shall be sufficient, which is not signed by a field officer of 
the regiment to which lie belongs, or commanding officer, where 
no field officer of the regiment is present; and no discharge shall be 
given to a non-commissioned officer or soldier, before his term of 
service has expired, but by order of the President, the Secretary of 
War, the commanding officer of a department, or the sentence of a 
general court martial; nor shall a commissioned officer be discharged 
the service, but by order of the President of the United States, or by 
sentence of a general court martial. 

Art. 12.... Every Colonel or other officer commanding a regiment, 
troop, or company, and actually quartered with it, may give furloughs 



244 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Articles of War. 



to non-commissioned officers or soldiers, in such numbers, and for 
so long a time, as he shall judge to be most consistent with the 
good of the service; and a Captain, or other inferior officer, command- 
ing a troop or company, or in any garrison, fort, or barrack, of the 
United States, (his field officer being absent,) may give furloughs 
to non-commissioned officers or soldiers, for a time not exceeding 
tweuty days in six months, but not to more than two persons to 
be absent at the same time, excepting some extraordinary occasion 
should require it. 

Art. 13.... At every muster, the commanding officer of each 
regiment, troop, or company, there present, shall give to the Com- 
missary of Musters, or other officer who musters the said regiment, 
troop, or company, certificates signed by himself, signifying how 
long such officers as shall not appear at the said muster, have been 
absent, and the reason of their absence. In like manner, the com- 
manding officer of every troop or company, shall give certificates, sig- 
nifying the reasons of the absence of the non-commissioned officers and 
private soldiers; which reasons, and time of absence, shall be inserted 
in the muster rolls, opposite the names of the respective absent 
officers and soldiers. The certificates shall, together with the muster 
rolls, be remitted by the Commissary of Musters, or other officer 
mustering, to the Department of War, as speedily as the distance 
of the place will admit. 

Akt. 14. ...Every officer who shall be convicted before a general 
court martial, of having signed a false certificate, relating to the 
absence of either officer or private soldier, or relative to his or their 
pay, shall be cashiered. 

Art. 15.... Every officer who shall knowingly make a false muster 
of man or horse, and every officer or Commissary of Musters, who 
shall willingly sign, direct or allow the signing of muster rolls, 
wherein such false muster is contained, shall, upon proof made thereof, 
by two witnesses before a general court martial, be cashiered, and 
shall be thereby utterly disabled to have or hold any office or employ- 
ment in the service of the United States. 

g- Art. 16.... Any Commissary ef Musters, or other officer, who 
shall bo convicted of having taken money, or other thing, by way of 



TOR THE ARMY. 245 



Articlets of War. 



gratification, on mustering any regiment, troop, or company, or on 
signing muster rolls, shall be displaced from his office, and shall 
be thereby utterly disabled to have or hold any office or employment 
in the service of the United States. 

Art. 17.... Any officer who shall presume to muster a person as 
a soldier, who is not a soldier, shall be deemed guilty of having 
made a false muster, and shall suffer accordingly. 

Art. 18. ...Every officer who shall knowingly make a false return 
to the Department of War, or to any of his superior officers, authorized 
to call for such returns, of the state of the regiment, troop, or 
company, or garrison, under his command, or of the arms, ammuni- 
tion, clothing, or other stores thereunto belonging, shall, on conviction 
thereof before a court martial, be cashiered. 

Art. 19.... The commanding officer of every regiment, troop, or 
independent company, or garrison, of the United States, shall, in 
the beginning of every month, remit, through the proper channels, 
to the Department of "War, an exact return of the regiment, troop, 
independent company, or garrison, under his command, specifying 
the names of the officers then absent from their posts, with the 
reasons for and the time of their absence. And any officer who 
shall be convicted of having, through neglect or design, omitted 
sending such returns, shall be punished according to the nature of 
his crime, by the judgment of a general court martial. 

Art. 20.... All officers and soldiers who have received pay, or 
have been duly enlisted in the service of the United States, and 
shall be convicted of having deserted the same, shall suffer death, 
or such other punishment as by sentence of a court martial, shall 

be inflicted. 

Art. 21.... Any non-commissioned officer or soldier who shall, 
without leave from his commanding officer, absent himself from his 
troop, company, or detachment, shall, upon being convicted thereof, 
be punished according to the nature of his offence, at the discretion 
of a court martial. 

Art. 22.... No non-commissioned officer or soldier shall enlist 
himself in any other regiment, troop, or company, without a regular 
discharge from the regiment, troop, or company, in which he last 



GENERAL REGULATIONS 



Articles of War. 



served, on the penalty of being reputed a deserter, and suffering 
accordingly. And in case any officer shall knowingly receive and 
entertain such non-commissioned officer or soldier, or shall not, 
after his being discovered to be a deserter, immediately confine him, 
and give notice thereof to the corps in which he last served, the 
said officer shall, by a court martial, be cashiered. 

Art. 23 Any officer or soldier who shall be convicted of hav- 
ing advised or persuaded any other officer or soldier to desert the 
service of the United States, shall suffer death or such other pun- 
ishment as shall be inflicted upon him by the sentence of a court 
martial. 

Aht. 24.... No officer or soldier shall use any reproachful or 
provoking speeches or gestures to another, upon pain, if an officer, 
of being put in arrest; if a soldier, confined, and of asking pardon 
of the party offended, in the presence of his commanding officer. 

Art. 25.... No officer or soldier shall send a challenge to ano- 
ther officer or soldier, to fight a duel, or accept a challenge if sent, 
upon pain, if a commissioned officer, of being cashiered; if a non- 
commissioned officer or soldier, of suffering corporeal punishment, 
at the discretion of a court martial. 

Art. 26.... If any commissioned or non-commissioned officer 
commanding a guard, shall knowingly or willingly suffer any person 
whatsoever to go forth to fight a duel, he shall be punished as a 
challenger; and all seconds, promoters, and carriers of challenges, 
in order to duels, shall be deemed principals, and punished accor- 
dingly. And it shall be the duty of every officer commanding an 
army, regiment, company, post, or detachment, who is knowing to 
a challenge being given or accepted by any officer, non-commissioned 
officer or soldier, under his command, or has reason to believe the 
same to be the case, immediately to arrest and bring to trial such 
offenders. 

Art. 27.... All officers, of what condition soever, have pewer to 
part and quell all quarrels, frays, and disorders, though the persons 
concerned should belong to another regiment, troop, or company; 
and either to order officers into arrest, or non-commissioned officers 
or soldiers into confinement, until their proper superior officers shall 



FOR THE ARMY. 247 



Articles of J I 'at-. 



be acquainted therewith; and whosoever shall refuse to obey such 
officer, (though of an inferior rank,) or shall draw his sword upon 
him, shall be punished at the discretion of a general court martial. 

Art. 28. . . .Any officer or soldier who shall upbraid another for 
refusing a challenge, shall himself be punished as a challenger; 
and all officers and soldiers are hereby discharged from any disgrace 
or opinion of disadvantage which might arise from their having 
refused to accept of challenges, as they will only have acted in 
obedience to the laws, and done their duty as good soldiers who 
subject themselves to discipline. 

Art. 29.... No sutler shall be permitted to sell any kind of liquors 
or victuals, or to keep their houses or shops open for the entertain- 
ment of soldiers, after nine at night, or before the beating of the 
reveilles, or upon Sundays, during Divine service or sermon, on the 
penalty of being dismissed from all future suttling. 

Art. 30 ....All officers commanding in the field, forts, barracks, 
or garrisons, of the United States, are hereby required to see that 
the persons permitted to suttle shall supply the soldiers with good 
and wholesome provisions, or other articles, at a reasonable price, 
as they shall be answerable for their neglect. 

Art. 31....No officer commanding in any of the garrisons, forts, 
or barracks, of the United States, shall exact exorbitant prices for 
houses or stalls, let out to sutlers, or connive at the like exactions 
in others; nor by his own authority, and for his private advantage, 
lay any duty or imposition upon, or be interested in, the sale of 
any victuals, liquors, or other necessaries of life brought into the 
garrison, fort, or barracks, for the use of the soldiers, on the penalty 
of being discharged from the service. 

Art. 32.... Every officer commanding in quarters, garrisons, or 
on the march, shall keep good order, and, to the utmost of his 
power, redress all abuses or disorders which may be committed by 
any officer or soldier under his command; if, upon complaint made 
to him of officers or soldiers beating or otherwise ill treating any 
person, of disturbing fairs or markets, or of committing any kinds 
of riots, to the disquieting of the citizens of the United States, 
he, the said commander, who shall refuse or omit to see justice done 



248 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Articles of War. 

to the offender or offenders, and reparation made to the party or 
parties injured, as far as part of the offender's pay shall enable him 
or (hem, shall, upon proof thereof, be cashiered, or otherwise pun- 
ished, as a general court martial shall direct. 

Aut. 33.. ..When any commissioned officer or soldier shall be 
accused of a capital crime, or of having used violence, or committed 
any offence against the person or property of any citizen of any 
of the United States, such as is punishable by the known laws of 
the land, the commanding officer and officers of every regiment, 
troop, or company to which the person or persons so accused shall 
belong, are hereby required, upon application duly made by, or in behalf 
of the party or parties injured, to use their utmost endeavors to 
deliver over such accused person or persons to the civil magistrate, 
and likewise to be aiding and assisting to the officers of justice in 
apprehending and securing the person or persons so accused, in 
order to bring him or them to trial. If any commanding officer or 
officers shall wilfully neglect or shall refuse, upon the application 
aforesaid, to deliver over such accused person or persons to the 
civil magistrates, or to be aiding and assisting to the officers of 
justice in apprehending such person or persons, the officer or officers 
so offending shall be cashiered. 

Art. 34.... If any officer shall think himself wronged by his 
Colonel, or the commanding officer of the regiment, and shall, upon 
due application being made to him, be refused redress, he may complain 
to the general commanding in the State or Territory where such 
•regiment shall be stationed, in order to obtain justice; who is here- 
by required to examine into the said complaint, and take proper 
measures for redressing the wrong complained of, and transmit, as 
soon as possible, to the Department of War, a true state of such 
complaint, with the proceedings had thereon. 

Art. 35.... If any inferior officer or soldier, shall think himself 
wronged by his Captain, or other officer, he is to complain thereof 
to the commanding officer of the regiment, who is hereby required 
to summon a regimental court martial, for the doing justice to the 
complainant; from which regimental court martial either party may, 
if he thinks himself still aggrieved, appeal to a general court mar- 



FOR THE ARMY. 249 



Articles of War. 



tial. But if, upon a second hearing, the appeal shall appear vexa- 
tious and groundless, the person so appealing, shall be punished at 
the discretion of the said court martial. 

Art. 36.... Any commissioned officer, storekeeper, or commis- 
sary, who shall be convicted at a general court martial, of having 
sold, without a proper order for that purpose, emblezzed, misapplied, 
or wilfully, or through neglect, suffered any of the proisvions, 
forage, arms, clothing, ammunition, or other military stores, belong- 
ing to the United States, to be spoiled or damaged, shall, at his 
own expense, make good the loss or damages, and shall, moreover, 
forfeit all his pay, and be dismissed from the service. 

Art. 37.... Any non-commissioned officer or soldier, who shall 
be convicted at a regimental court martial, of having sold, or de- 
signedly, or through neglect, wasted the ammunition delivered out 
to him, to be employed in the service of the United States, shall 
be punished at the discretion of such court. 

Art. 38. ...Every non-commissioned officer or soldier who shall 
be convicted before a court martial, of having sold, lost, or spoiled, 
through neglect, his horse, arms, clothes, or accoutrements, shall 
undergo such weekly stoppages (not exceeding the half of his pay,) 
as such court martial shall judge sufficient, for repairing the loss 
or damage; and shall suffer confinement, or such other corporeal pun- 
ishment as his crime shall deserve. 

Art. 39... .Every officer who shall be convicted before a court 
martial, of having embezzled, or misapplied, any money with which 
he may have been entrusted, for the payment of the men under his 
command, or for enlisting men into the service, or for other pur- 
poses, if a commissioned officer, shall be cashiered, and compelled 
to refund the money; if a non-commissioned officer, shall be reduced 
to the ranks, be put under stoppages, until the money be made 
good, and suffer such corporeal punishment as such court martial 
shall direct. 

Art. 40.... Every Captain of a troop, or company, is charged 
with the arms, accoutrements, ammunition, clothing, or other war- 
like stores, belonging to the troop or company under his command, 
which he is to be accountable for to his Colonel, in case of their 



250 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

.Irticles of War. 

being lost, spoiled, or damaged, not by unavoidable accidents, or on 
actual service. 

Art. 41. •••All non-commissioned officers and soldiers who shall 
be found one mile from the camp, without leave in writing, from 
their commanding officer, shall surfer such punishment as shall be 
inflicted upon them by the sentence of a court martial. 

Art. 42.... No officer or soldier shall lie out of his quarters, 
garrison, or camp, without leave from his superior officer, upon 
penalty of being punished according to the nature of his offence, 
by the sentence of a court martial. 

Art. 43. ...Every non-commissioned officer and soldier shall re- 
tire to his quarters or tent, at the beating of the retreat; in default 
of which he shall be punished according to the nature of his offence. 

Art. 44.... No offieer, non-commissioned officer, or soldier, shall 
fail in repairing, at the time fixed, to the place of parade, of ex- 
ercise, or other rendezvous, appointed by his commanding officer, if 
not prevented by sickness, or some other evident necessity; or shall 
go from the said place of rendezvous, without leave from his com- 
manding officer, before he shall be regularly dismissed or relieved 
on the penalty of being punished according to the nature of his 
offence, by the sentence of a court martial. 

Art. 45.... Any commissioned officer who shall be found drunk 
on his guard, party, or other duty, shall be cashiered. Any non- 
commissioned officer or soldier so offending, shall suffer such cor- 
poreal punishment as shall be inflicted by the sentence of a court 
martial. 

Art. 46.... Any sentinel who shall be found sleeping upon his 
post, or shall leave it before he shall be regularly relieved, shall 
suffer death, or such other punishment as shall be inflicted by the 
sentence of a court martial. 

Art. 47.... No soldier belonging to any regiment, troop, or com- 
pany, shall hire another to do his duty for him, or be excused from 
duty, but in case of sickness, disability, or leave of absence; and 
every such soldier found guilty of hiring his duty, as also the party 
so hired to do another's duty, shall be punished at the discretion of 
a regimental court martial. 



FOR THE ARMY. 251 



Articles of War. 



Art. 48.. . .And every non-commissioned officer conniving at such 
hiring of duty aforesaid, shall be reduced; and every commissioned 
officer, knowing and allowing such ill practices in the service, shall 
be punished by the judgment of a. general court martial. 

Art. 49.... Any officer belonging to the service of the United 
Suites, who, by discharging of fire arms, drawing of swords, beating 
of drums, or by any other means whatsoever, shall occasion false 
alarms, in camp, garrison, or quarters, shall suffer death, or such 
other punishment as shall be ordered by the sentence of a general 
court martial. 

Art. 50.. ..Any officer or soldier, who shall, without urgent ne- 
cessity, or without the leave of his superior officer, quit his guard, 
platoon, or division, shall be punished according to the nature of 
his offence, by the sentence of a court martial. 

Art. 51.... No officer or soldier shall do violence to any person 
who brings provisions or other necessaries to the camp, garrison, or 
quarters, of the forces of the United States, employed in any parts 
out of the said States, upon pain of death, or such other punish- 
ment as a court martial shall direct. 

Art. 52.... Any officer or soldier who shall misbehave himself 
before the enemy, run away, or shamefully abandon any fort, post, 
or guard, which he or they may be commanded to defend, or speak 
words inducing others to do the like; or shall cast away his arms 
and ammunition, or who shall quit his post or colors to plunder 
and pillage; every such offender, being duly convicted thereof, shall 
suffer death, or such other punishment as shall be ordered by the 
sentence of a general court martial. 

Art. 53.... Any person belonging to the armies of the United 
States, who shall make known the watchword to any person who 
is not entitled to receive it according to the rules and discipline 
of war, or shall presume to give a parole or watch-word different 
from what he received, shall suffer death, or such other punishment 
as shall be ordered by the sentence of a general court martial. 

Art. 54.... All officers and soldiers are to behave themselves 
orderly in quarters and on their march; and whosoever shall commit 
any waste or spoil, either in walks of trees, parks, warrens, fish 



252 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



.Irticles of War. 



ponds, houses, or gardens, cornfields, enclosures of meadows, or shall 
maliciously destroy any property whatsoever belonging to the inhab- 
itants of the United States, unless by order of the then commander 
in chief of the armies of the said States, shall, (besides such pen- 
alties as they are liable to by law,) be punished according to the 
nature and degree of the offence, by the judgment of a regimental 
or general court martial. 

Anr. 55.... Whosoever, belonging to the armies of the United 
States employed in foreign parts, shall force a safe guard, shall suffer 
death. 

Art. 56.... Whosoever shall relieve the enemy with money, vict- 
uals, or ammunition, or shall knowingly harbor or protect an enenry, 
shall suffer death, or such other punishment as shall be ordered by 
the sentence of a court martial. 

Art. 57 •••• Whosoever shall be convicted of holding correspon- 
dence with, or giving intelligence to the enemy, either directly or 
indirectly, shall suffer death, or such other punishment as shall be 
ordered by the sentence of a court martial. 

Art. 58.... All public stores taken in the enemy's camp, towns, 
forts, or magazines, whether of artillery, ammunition, clothing, forage, 
or provisions, shall be secured for the service of the United States; 
for the neglect of which the commanding officer is to be answerable. 

AnT. 59.... If any commander of any garrison, fortress, or post, 
shall be compelled by the officers and soldiers under his command, 
to give up to the enemy, or to abandon it, the commissioned officers, 
non-commissioned officers, or soldiers, who shall be convicted of 
having so offended, shall suffer death, or such other punishment as 
shall be inflicted upon them by the sentence of a court martial. 

Art. 60.. ..All sutlers or retainers to the camp, and all persons 
whatsoever, serving with the armies of the United States in the field, 
thomgh not enlisted soldiers, arc to be subject to orders, according 
to the rules and discipline of war. 

Art. 6 1 .... Officers having brevets, or commissions of a prior 
date to those of the regiment in which they serve, may take place 
in courts martial and on detachments, when composed of different 
corps, according to the ranks given them in their brevets er dates 



FOR THE ARMY. 253 



Articles of War. 



of their former commissions; but in the regiment, troop, or company, 
to which such officers belong, they shall do duty and take rank both 
in courts martial and on detachments which shall be composed only 
of their own corps, according to the commissions by which they 
are mustered in the said corps. 

Aiit. 62.... If, upon marches, guards, or in quarters, different 
oorps of the army shall happen to join, or do duty together, the 
officer highest in rank of the line of the army, marine corps, of 
militia, by commission, there on duty or in quarters, shall command 
the whole, and give orders for what is needful to the service, unless 
otherwise specially directed by the President of the United States, 
according to the nature of the case. 

Abt. 63 The functions of the engineers being generally con- 
fined to the most elevated branch of military science, they are not 
to assume, nor are they subject to be ordered on any duty beyond 
the line of their immediate profession, except by the special order 
of the President of the United States; but they are to receive every 
mark of respect to which their rank in the army may entitle them 
respectively, and are liable to be transferred at the discretion of 
the President, from one corps to another, regard being paid to rank. 
Art. 64.... General courts martial may consist of any number of 
commissioned officers, from five to thirteen, inclusively; but they 
shall not consist of less than thirteen, where that number can be 
convened without manifest injury to the service. 

Art. 65.... Any general officer commanding an army, or Colonel 
commanding a separate department, may appoint general courts 
martial whenever necessary. But no sentence of a court martial 
shall be carried into execution until after the whole proceedings shall 
have been laid before the officer ordering the same, or the officer 
commanding the troops for the time being, neither shall any sen- 
tence of a general court martial, in time of peace, extending to the 
loss of life, or the dismission of a commissioned officer, or which 
shall, either in time of peace or war, respect a general officer, be 
carried into execution, until after the whole proceedings shall have 
been transmitted to the Secretary of War, to be laid before the 
President of the United States, for his confirmation or disapproval, 



254 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Articles of War. 

and orders in the case. All other sentences may be confirmed and 
executed by the officer ordering the court to assemble, or the 
commanding officer for the time being, as the case may be. 

AnT. 66.. ..Every officer commanding a regiment or corps, may 
appoint, for his own regiment or corps, courts martial, to consist of 
three commissioned officers, for the trial and punishment of offences 
not capital, and decide upon their sentences. For the same purpose, 
all officers commanding any of the garrisons, forts, barracks, or 
other places where the troops consist of different corps, may assem- 
ble courts martial, to consist of three commissioned officers, and 
decide upon their sentences. 

Art. 67. ...No garrison or regimental court martial shall have 
the power to try capital cases, or commissioned officers, neither shall 
they inflict a fine exceeding one month's pay, nor imprison, nor 
put to hard labor, any non-commissioned officer or solider, for a 
longer time than one month. 

Art. 68.... Whenever it may be found convenient and necessary 
to the pbulic service, the officers of the marines shall lie associated 
with the officers of the land forces, for the purpose of holding 
courts martial and trying offenders belonging to either; and in such 
cases, the orders of the senior officer of either corps, who may be 
present, and duly authorized, shall be received and obeyed. 

Art. 69.... The judge advocate, or some person deputed by him 
or by the general, or officer commanding the army, detachment, or 
garrison, shall prosecute in the name of the United States, but shall 
so far consider himself as counsel for the prisoner, after the said 
prisoner shall have made his plea, as to object to any leading ques- 
tion to any of the witnesses, or any question to the prisoner, the 
answer to which might tend to criminate himself; and administer to 
each member of the court, before they proceed upon any trial, the 
following oath, which shall also be taken by all members of the re- 
gimental and garrison courts martial: 

"You, A B, do swear, that ycu will well and truly try and de- 
termine, according to evidence, the matter now before you, between 
the United States of America and the prisoner to be tried, and that 
you will duly administer justice, according to the provisions of 



FOR THE ARMY. 255 



Articles of War. 



< An act establishing Rules and Articles for the government of the 
armies of the United States,' without partiality, favor, or affection; 
and if any doubt shall arise, not explained by said Articles, ac- 
cording to your conscience, the best of your understanding, and 
the custom of war in like cases; and you do further swear, that you 
will not divulge the sentence of the court until it shall be published 
10 proper authority; neither will you disclose or discover the 
vote or opinion of any particular member of the court martial, un- 
less required to give evidence thereof, as a witness, by a court of 
justice, in a due course of law. So help you God." 

And as soon as the said oath shall have been administered to the 
respective members, the president of the court shall administer to the 
judge advocate, or person officiating as such, an oath in the follow- 
ing words: 

"You, A B, do swear, that you will not disclose or discover the 
vote or opinion of any particular member of the court martial, un- 
less required to give evidence thereof, as a witness, by a court of 
justice, in due course of law; nor divulge the sentence of the court 
to any but the proper authority, until it shall be duly disclosed by 
the same. So help you God." 

Aht. 70 When a prisoner, arraigned before a general court 

martial, shall, from obstinacy and deliberate design, stand mute, or 
answer foreign to the purpose, the court may proceed to trial and 
judgment, as if the prisoner had regularly pleaded not guilty. 

Art. 71.... When a member shall be challenged by a prisoner, 
he must state his cause of challenge, of which the court shall, after 
due deliberation, determine the relevancy or validity, and decide ac- 
cordingly; and no challenge to more than one member at a time, 
shall be received by the court. 

Aht. 72.... All the members of a court martial are to behave 
with decency and calmness; and in giving their votes, are to begin 
with the youngest in commission. 

Art. 73.... All persons who give evidence before a court martial, 
are to be examined on oath or affirmation, in the following form: 

« You swear, or affirm, (as the case may be,) the evidence you 
shall give in the cause now in hearing, shall be the truth, the 
whole truth, and nothing but the truth. So help you God." 



256 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Articles of War. 

Art. 74.... On the trials of cases not capital, before courts mar- 
tial, the deposition of witnesses, not in the line or staff of the 
army, may be taken before some justice of the peace, and read in 
evidence; provided the prosecutor and person accused are present at 
the taking the same, or are duly notified thereof. 

Art. 75... .No officer shall be tried but by a general court mar- 
tial, nor by officers of an inferior rank, if it can be avoided. Nor 
shall any proceedings or trials be carried on, excepting between the 
hours of eight in the morning, and three in the afternoon, excepting 
in cases which, in the opinion of the officer appointing the court 
martial, require immediate example. 

Art. 76.... No person whatsoever shall use any menacing words, 
signs, or gestures, in presence of a court martial, or shall cause 
any disorder or riot, or disturb their proceedings, on the penalty 
of being punished, at the discretion of the said court martial. 

Art. 77.... Whenever any officer shall be charged with a crime, 
he shall be arrested and confined in his barracks, quarters, or tent 
and deprived of his sword, by the commanding officer. And any 
officer who shall leave his confinement before he shall be set at 
liberty by his commanding officer, or by a superior officer, shall 
be cashiered. 

Art. 78.... Non-commissioned officers and soldiers, charged with 
crimes, shall be confined until tried by a court martial, or released 
by proper authority. 

Art. 79.. ..No officer or soldier who shall be put in arrest, 
shall continue in confinement more than eight days, or until such 
time as a court martial can be assembled. 

Art. 80.... No officer commanding a guard, or provost mar- 
shal, shall refuse to receive or keep any prisoner committed to his 
charge by an officer belonging to the forces of the United States; 
provided the officer committing shall, at the same time, deliver an 
account in writing, signed by himself, of the crime with which the 
said prisoner is charged. 

Art. 81. ...No officer commanding a guard, or provost marshal, 
shall presume to release any person committed to his charge, with- 
o»t proper authority for so doing, nor shall he suffer any person 



FOR THE ARMY. 257' 



.Jrticles of War. 



to escape, on the penalty of being punished for it by the sentence 
of a court martial. 

Art. 82-... Every officer or provost marshal, to whose charge 
prisoners shall be committed, shall, within twenty-four hours after 
such commitment, or as soon as he shall be relieved from his 
guard, make report in writing, to the commanding officer, of their 
names, their crimes, and the names of the officers who committed 
them, on the penalty of being punished for disobedience or neglect, 
at the discretion of a court martial. & 

Art. 83.. ..Any commissioned officer, convicted before a general 
court martial of conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman, 
shall be dismissed the service. 

Art. 84.... In cases where a court martial may think it proper 
to sentence a commissioned officer to be suspended from command, 
they shall have power also to suspend his pay and emoluments for 
the same time, according to the nature and heinous-jess of the 
offence. 

Art. 85. ...In all cases where a commissioned officer is cashiered 
lor cowardice or fraud, it shall be added in the sentence, that the 
crime, name, and place of abode, and punishment of the delinquent, 
be published in the newspapers, in and about the camp, and of the 
particular State from which the offender came, or where he usually 
resides, after which it shall be deemed scandalous for an officer to 
associate with him. 

Art. 86.... The commanding officer of any post or detachment,' 
jn which there shall not be a number of officers adequate to form 
a general court martial, shall, in cases which require the cognizance 
of such a court, report to the commanding efficer of the department, 
who shall order a court to be assembled at the nearest post or detach- 
ment and the party accused, with necessary witnesses, to be 
transported to the place where the said court shall be assembled. 

Art. 87.. ..No person shall be sentencel to suffer death, but 

by the concurrence of two thirds of the members of a general court 

martial, nor except in the cases herein expressly, mentioned; nor 

9 ha.l more than fifty lashe* be inflicted on any offtv.d-r, at the 

17 



258 GENERAL REGULATIONS 



.Articles of Jf'ar, 



discretion of a court martial;* and no officer, non-commissioned 
officer, soldier, or follower of the army, shall be tried a second time 
for the same offence. 

Art. 88.... No person shall be liable to be tried and punished 
by a general court martial for any cffence which shall appear to have 
been committed more than two years before the issuing of the order 
for such trial, unless the person, by reason of having absented 
himself, or some other manifest impediment, shall not have b<*pn 
amenable to justice within that period. 

Art. 89. ...Every officer authorized to order a general court 
martial, shall have power to pardon or mitigate any punishment ordered 
by such couit, except the sentence of death, or of cashiering an 
officer; which, in the cases where he has authority (by Article 6F>) 
to cam' them into execution, he may suspend, until the pleasure 
of the President of the United States can be known; which suspen- 
sion, together with copies of the proceedings of the court martial, 
the said officer shall immediately transmit to the President for his 
determination. And the Colonel or commanding officer of the 
regiment or garrison, where any regimental or garrison court martial 
shall be held, may pardon or mitigate any punishment ordered by 
such court to be inflicted. 

Art. 90.. ..Every judge advocate, or person officiating as such, 
at any general court martial, shall transmit, with as much expedition 
as the opportunity of time and distance of place can admit, the 
original proceedings and sentence of such court martial, to the 
Secretary of War; which said original proceedings and sentence 
shall be carefully kept and preserved in the office of said Secretary, 
to the end that the persons entitled thereto may be enabled, upon 
application to the said office, to obtain copies thereof. 

The party tried by any general court martial, shall, upon demand 
thereof, made by himself, or by any person or persons in his behalf, 
be entitled to a copy of the sentence and proceedings of such 
court martial. 

Art. 91.... In eases where the General or commanding officer 
may order a court of inquiry to examine into the nature of any 

* Punishment by stripes or lashes abolished. See paragraph 3, page 2(55. 



FOR THE ARMY. 259 



.irticles of War. 



transaction, accusation, or imputation, against any officer or soldier, 
the said court shall consist of one or more officers, not exceeding 
three, and a judge advocate, or other suitable person, as a recorder, 
to reduce the proceedings and evidence to writing, all of whom shall 
be sworn to the faithful performance of their duty. This court shall 
have the same power to summon witnesses as a court martial, and 
to examine them on oath. But they shall not give their opinion 
on the merits of the case, excepting they shall be thereto specially 
required. The parties accused shall also be permitted to cross- 
examine and interrogate the witnesses, so as to investigate fully 
the circumstances in the question. 

Art. 92.... The proceedings of a court of inquiry, must be au- 
thenticated by the signature of the recorder and the president, and 
delivered to the commanding officer, and the said proceedings may 
be admitted as evidence by a court martial, in cases not capital, or 
extending to the dismission of an officer, provided that the circum- 
stances are such, that oral testimony cannot be obtained. But as 
courts of inquiry may be perverted to dishonorable purposes, and 
may be considered as engines of destruction to military merit, in 
the hands of weak and envious commandants, they are hereby prohi- 
bited, unless directed by the President of the. United States, or de- 
manded by the accused. 

Aht. 93.... The judge advocate, or recorder, shall administer to 
the members the following oath: 

" You shall well and truly examine and inquire, according to your 
evidence, into the matter now before you, without partiality, favor, 
affection, prejudice, or hope of reward. So help you God." 

After which the President shall administer to the judge advocate, 
or recorder, the following oath: 

"You, A B, do swear, that you will, according to your best 
abilities,' accurately and impartially record the proceedings of the 
court, and the evidence to be given in the case in hearing. So help 

you God." 

The witnesses shall take the same oath as witnesses sworn before 

» court martial. 

Art. 94.... When* any commissioned officer shall die or be killed 



260 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Articles of War, 

in the service of the United States, the Major of the regiment, or 
the officer doing the Major's duty in his absence, or in any post 
or garrison, the second officer in command, or the Assistant Military 
Agent, shall immediately secure all his effects or equipage, then in 
camp or quarters, and shall make an inventory thereof, and forthwith 
transmit the same to the office of the Department of War, to the 
end, that his executors or administrators may receive the same. 

Art. 95.... When any non-commissioned officer or soldier shall 
die or be killed in the service of the United States, the then com- 
manding officer of the troop or company, shall, in the presence of 
two other commissioned officers, take an account of what effects be 
died possessed of, above his arms and accoutrements, and transmit 
the same to the office of the Department of War; which said effects 
are to be accounted for, and paid to the representatives of such 
deceased non-commissioned officer or soldier. And in case any of the 
officers, so authorized to take care of the effects of deceased officers 
and soldiers, should, before they have accounted to their represen- 
tatives for the same, have occasion to leave the regiment or post, 
by preferment, or otherwise, they shall, before they be permitted 
to quit the same, deposite in the hands of the commanding officer, 
or of the Assistant Military Agent, all the effects of such deceased 
non-commissioned officers and soldiers, in order that the same may 
be secured for, and paid to their respective representative*. 

An-r. 96....A11 officers, conducters, gunners, mattrosses, drivers, 
or other persons whatsoever, receiving pay or lure in the service of 
the artillery or corps of engineers of the United States, shall be 
governed by the aforesaid Rules and Articles, and shall be subject 
to be tried by courts martial, in like manner with the officers and 
soldiers of the other troops in the service of the United States. 

Art. 97.... The officers and soldiers of any troops, whether 
militia or others, bein mustered and in pay of the United States, 
shall, at all times and in all places, when joined or acting in con- 
junction with the regular forces of the United States, be governed 
by these Rules and Articles of War, and shall be subject to bo 
tried by courts martial, in like manner with the officers and soldiers 
in the regular forces; save only that such courts martial shall bo 
composed entirely of militia officers. 



FOR THE ARMY. 261 



Articles of War. 



Art. 98.. ..All officers serving by commission from the authority 
of any particular State, shall, on all detachments, courts martial, 
or other duty wherein they may be employed in conjunction with 
the regular forces of the United States, take rank next after all 
officers of the like grade in said regular forces, notwithstanding the 
commissions of such militia or State officers may be elder than the 
commissions of the officers of the regular forces of the United States. 
Aht. 99.... All crimes not capital, and all disorders and neglects, 
which officers and soldiers may be guilty of, to the prejudice of 
good order and military discipline, though not mentioned in the 
foregoing Articles of War, are to be taken cognizance of by a 
general or regimental court martial, according to the nature and 
degree of the offence, and be punished at their discretion. 

Atit. 100.... The President of the United States shall have 
power to prescribe the uniform of the army. 

Aht. 10 1.... The foregoing articles arc to b3 read and published 
once in every six months, to every garrison, regiment, troop, or 
company, mustered or to be mustered in the service of the United 
States, and are to be duly observed and obeyed by all officers and 
soldiers who are, or shall be, in said service. 

Sec 2. And be it further enacted, That in time of war, all 
persons not citizens of or owing allegiance to the United States of 
America, who shall be found lurking as spies, in or about the for- 
tifications or encampments of the armies of the United States, or 
any of them, shall suffer death, according to the law and usage of 
nations, by sentence of a general court martial. 

Sec 3. And be it further enacted, That the Rules and Regu- 
lations by which the armies of the United States have heretofore 
been governed, and the resolves of Congress thereunto annexed, 
and respecting the same, shall henceforth be void and of no effect, 
except so far as may relate to any transactions under them, prior to 
the promulgation of this act, at the several posts and garrisons 
respectively, occupied by any part of the army of the United States. 

Approved, April 10, 1806. 



262 GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Articles of War. 

EXTRACTS FHOM ACTS OP COXGRISS HAVIXO REFERENCE TO TBI 
ARTICLES OF WAR. 

1 .... If any non-commissioned officer, musician, or private, shall 
desert the service of the United States, he shall, in addition to the 
penalties mentioned in the Rules and Articles of War, be liable to 
serve for and during such a period as shall, with the time he may have 
served previous to his desertion, amount to the full term of his en- 
listment; and such soldier shall and may be tried by a court martial 
and punished, although the term of his enlistment may have elapsed 
previous to his being apprehended or tried. — Act IQth March, 1802, 
Sec. 18. 

2.... No officer or soldier in the army of the United States shall 
be subject to the punishment of death for desertion in time of peace. 
— .let 29th May, 1830. 

3.... So much of the "act for establishing Rules and Articles for 
the government of the armies of the United States," as authorizes the 
infliction of corporeal punishment by stripes or lashes, shall be, and 
the same is hereby, repealed. — Act ^Gth Mat', 1812, Sec. 7. 

4.... The seventh section of the act entitled "an act making further 
provision for the army of the United States," passed on the sixteenth 
of May, one thousand eight hundred and twelve, shall be, and the 
same is hereby, repealed, so far as it applies to any enlisted soldier 
who shall be convicted by a general court martial of the crime of 
desertion.— Act 2d March, 1833, Sec. 7. 

5.... Whenever a general officer commanding an army, or a Colo- 
nel commanding a separate department, shall be the accuser or prose- 
cutor of any officer in the army of the United States, under his 
command, the general court martial for the trial of such officer shall, 
be appointed by the President of the United States. — . let 29th May 
1830, Sec. 1. 

6.... The proceedings and sentence of the said court shall be sent 
directly to the Secretary of War, to be by him laid before the Pre- 
sident, for his confirmation or approval, or orders in the case. — 
Act 29th May, 1830, Sec. 2. 

7.... So much of the sixty-fifth article of the first section of "an act 



FOR THE ARMY. 263 



Articles of War, 



for establishing Rules and Articles for the government of the armies 
of the United States," passed on the tenth of April, eighteen hun- 
dred and six, as is repugnant hereto shall be, and the same is hereby, 
repealed.— Act 29</t May, 1830, Sec. 3. 

8.... Whenever a general court martial shall be ordered, the Presi- 
dent of the United States may appoint some fit person to act as judge 
advocate, and in cases where the President shall not have made 
such appointment, the Brigadier General or the president of the 
court may make the same.— Act 16tfi March, 1802. Sec. 21. 



T»t e * ;j. 



7 



/, 



J // s ////;/ s/// /'/, ^///a ////// 






V 



n 



n m 



c »« bb , 


■ BH 


u 


uy 


uira 


L. 


we 




b 


UB 


ds 


s 


ee 


u 


as 


■ * 



BH 
BG 
B.B. 
hB,» 
EiH 
BB 



H« 



[3 



HBJ 

BB BB 

BB 



Q 1 

E LID BB BE BE 
D E B 



U . Q BB 

B t B BB 

C : B BB 

- = B BB 

B = B BB 



El! 



'"" B B T """ 



BH 

yy 

BB 

BB 
BB 

BB 



as 

ya 

BB 
BB BB 

BE 

BB 



mm 
BB 

BB 

BB 
BB 
BB 



J^ I a - 

BE ED BB EB 



B B 

a □ a 



'/r,f/, 



'/,,/ 



1 



i|. Guard 

ID 



4 
I 



M; 
B: 

B. 

¥\ 
M 

m 
m 



a 

a 
a 
B 
B 
B 
B 

U 



> V 



^ 



. r.niu.uny (T| 

U '" "B Company B U 

Kiri.1 uid surf 

n n cr 



□ om.-.- 



"D fl" 

r r 



|1, , Kil.-.„„« 

n m'"~«szz "B u 

"if""""'!]"" 1 if e ; 

r t„„. b ] 



Office™ 8\nk» 



44 



