U. S. NAVY 

MANUAL OF 
THE MEDICAL 
DEPARTMENT 

REPRINT OF APRIL 1972 
(With Changes thru 74.) 



NAVMED P-117 



I 

Change 72 



DEPARTMENT OB THE NAVY 

Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 

Washington, D.C. 20390 
17 December 1971 



The Manual of the Medical Department is issued ^accordance ™J Unit ^ 
States Navy Regulations. It concerns matters over which the Chief, Bureau or 
Medicine and Surgery, exercises command, control, or supervision. 




G. M. DAVIS 

Chief, Bureau of Medicine and 
Surgery 



For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20402 - Price U 
Stock Number 0845-0013 



II 

Change 72 



RECORD OF PAGE CHANGES 
MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT 



Page change 


Date of change 


Date entered 


Signature 


1 


27 Aueust 1952 


Included in reprint 


Included in reprint 


2 


21 August 1953 


do- 


Do. 


J 




— --— — 


Do. 




97 Am*il 1 <5?6 


_ _ _ do - - - - - 




< 


18 January 19*57 




Do. 


6 


5 November 1957 


... do - - - - - 


Do. 


7 


27 February 1959 




Do. 


8 


1 1 Jami^rv 1 QAfi 




do* 


9 


20 Anril I960 




Do. 


in 


97 TTesVimiaYTr 1 OAl 




Tin 


XX 


Ai.-AprXj.. J.20J. _ 




Tin 


12 


IK Mav 1 OA? 




Tin 
DO . 


13 


22 Aoril 1963 


---do----- 


Tin 


14. 


\"\ December 1961 


_-_do----- 


Tin 




3 March 1964 


- - - do - - - 


Do. 


.*o 

17 


£W..AprXJ!^.JL7Wf4. 






8 June 196k 




n<-i 

DO 9 


18 

J- V 


17 August 1961i 


— m — dO — — — — 


Tin . 


19 


14 October 1964 




Do. 


20 


23 November 196U 


-»-do----- 


Tift 
DO 3 


PI 


12 February 196? 




n« 


22 


Ii Mav 196? 


. H/\ - 


Tlrt 


23 


3 June 1965 


-do- - 


Do 

*ftj . 


?)i 


23 Jnlv 196? 


- do - - - - - 


Tlr> ^ 


2? 


5 Novenfcer 1965 




Do. 


26 


11 January 1966 


do - - 


Do. 


27 


11 April 1966 


do 


Do. 


28 


3 May 1966 




Do, 




9 June 1966 




Do. 


30 


20 June 1966 


— — — do — - — — — 


Do. 


31 


9 August 1966 




Do, 


32 


4 October 1966 


- - - dO. 


Do.. 


33 


17 November 1966 


do 


Do. 


34 


13 January 1967 


---do -1 Do. 


35 


3 February 1967 \ — - do --! Do. 




7 March 1967 ! - - - do - f Do. 



IS 
Change 2 



RECORD OF PAGE CHANGES— Continued 
MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT 



Page change 


Data of change 


Date entered 


Signature 


0*7 

37 


2h April 1967 1 Included in reprint 


lira luded . in .reprint . 


: M 


8 June 1967 


— - - - do — - - - 


Do. 


22. 


us&is&r 


-..-.-..-..do. -. 


Do.. 


ho 


8 September 1967 


— — — - do — — — — 


Bo* 


hi 


13 October 1967 


-.-.-.-.. d .?..-.-..r...r... 


Do, 




25 January 1968 


— — — — do — — — — 


Do. 




31 January 1968 


- - - - do — — — — 


Do. 




29 April 1968 


- - - - do - - - - 


Do. 


45 


13 May 1968 


do 


PP,. 


46 


16 July 1968 


do 


Do. 


47 


.22.J&e&cmkfu:JL96a 


-..-...-..-..do..-...-.-..-. ... 


Do^ 


48 


19 December 1968 


. - - - do - 


Do. 


49 


17 February 1969 


- - - - do 


Do. 


DU 


30 April 1969 


- - - - do - - - - 


Do. 


51 


24 July 1969 


do 


Do. 


52 


12 August 1969 


----do---- 


Do. 


53 


30 October 1969 


do 


Do.. 


54 


2 December 1969 


do 


Do.. 


55 


3 February 1970 


do 


P.Q.. 


56 


17 March 1970 


do 


.P.O., 


5.7. 


lJnl7.19.7Q 


.■T...-..-.-..do.-..-...-..-.... 


DDj 




20.Jul7.19.7-Q 


-^-.-...-.dja.-.-.-.-... 


DO* 


27 August 1970 


.-..-.-..-.. d .?. 


Do. 


£.r\ 
60 


15 October 1970 


-..-..-...-...do..-..-..-...-... 


Do. 


ox 


8 December 1970 


-.-..-..-..do - 


Po., 


62 

03 


2-7.Jaj3u.ary.19.71 


-.-..-..-..do..-..-.- ...... 


.Do.. 


1 March 1971 




Do. 


6U 


1 April 1971 




Do. 


65 


7 May 1971 




Do. 


66 


.2l.May.im 


-. -..do. - 


Uo* 


67 


7 June 1971 


do — - - 


Do. 


68 


18 August 1971 




Do. 


69 


23 September 1971 


do 


Do. 


70 


21 October 1971 


do 


Do. 


71 


27 December 1971 




Do. 











RECORD OF CHANGES - continued 
MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



CHANGE 


ENTERED 


CHANGE 


ENTERED 


N O 


OAT E 


INITIAL 


DATE 


NO. 


DATE 


INITIAL 


DATE 


72 


17 Dec 1971 


Indue 


ed in reprlrr 


101 








73 


22 Feb 1972 


Includ 
Incluc 


e.d in.reprin 
ed in reprin 


1 02 








74 


lk Mar 1972 


1 03 








75 








104 








76 








105 








77 








106 








78 








107 
















108 








on 








1 09 








81 








110 








82 








111 








83 


c /// /?'r' 


Tffl 


........... 


112 








84 


c/// h< 

>[/ 0 f fy 


Jr y 




113 








85 








114 








86 








115 








87 








1 16 








88 








117 








89 








118 








90 








119 








91 








120 








92 








121 








93 








122 








94 








123 








95 








124 








96 








125 








97 








126 








98 








127 








99 








128 








100 








129 









V 

Change 72 



RECORD OF CHANGES - continued 
MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



CHANGE 


ENTERED 


CHANGE 


ENTERED 


NO. 


□ ATE 


INITIAL 


DATE 


NO. 


DATE 


INITIAL 


DATE 


1 in 
















I o t 








1 firt 
I DU 








132 






* 

* 


161 








133 








162 








134 








163 








135 








164 








136 








165 








137 








166 








138 









1.67 








139 








168 








140 








169 








141 








170 








142 








171 








143 








172 








144 








1 73 








i/ie 
4 








1 ~3A. 

i t*\ 








1 AtZ 
















1J.7 
















1 .rtfl 
I4p 








1 "7 "7 








149 








178 








150 








179 








151 








180 








152 








181 








153 








182 








154 








183 








155 








184 








156 








185 








157 








186 








158 








187 









VI 

Change 72 



CONTENTS 



Medical Department 1 

Medical Corps 2 

Dental Corps 6 

Medical Service Corps 7 

Nurse Corps 8 

Hospital Corps 9 

Civilians 10 

Hospitals 11 

Special Treatment Facilities 12 

Medical Centers 13 

Special Activities 14 

Physical Examinations 15 

Health Record 16 

Deaths 17 

Medical Disposition 18 

Fleet Marine Force _ 19 

Research and Development 20 

Controlled Substances, Alcohol, Alcoholic Beverages, and Other 

Dangerous Drug and Chemicals 21 

Preventive Medicine 22 

Reports, Forms, and Records 23 

Property Management 25 

Health Program for Civil Service Employees 26 

Index 1 



10 Feb 75 



VII 

Change 83 



« 



o 



c 



f 



( 



Chapter 1 

MEDICAL DEPARTMENT 



Sections 

Articles 

I, Medical Department of the Navy 1_ i tnru i_ 7 

II. Nomenclature and Definitions 1_10 thru 1-15 

III. General i_ 2 q thru 1-25 



Section I. MEDICAL DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY 

Article 

Definition 1_1 

Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 1_2 

BUMED Organization T-3 

Commanding Officers of Medical Department Activities 1-4 

Heads of Medical Departments and Dental Departments of Ships and Stations „ 1-5 

Personnel l_g 

District Medical Officers and Directors of Dental Activities or District Dental Officers 1-7 



1—1. Definition 

( 1 ) The Medical Department of the Navy is 
composed of commands and facilities devoted to 
providing medical and dental services. It includes 
the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery (BUMED), 
activities under the command and/or support of 
BUMED, and medical departments and dental 
departments of ships and stations under the com- 
mand and/or support of other bureaus and offices. 

1-2. Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 

{ 1 ) The following is quoted from OPNAV 
Instruction 5450.178A: 

Mission: The Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 
(who is also the Surgeon General of the Navy), under 
the command of the Chief of Naval Operations, com- 
mands the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery and shore 
activities as assigned by the Chief of Naval Operations. 
He shall provide all professional and technical assistance 
requisite to safeguarding and promoting the health of 
the Navy and Marine Corps personnel, and he shall pro- 
vide professional and technical guidance in the care and 
treatment of sick and injured Navy and Marine Corps 
personnel and their dependents, and other personnel as 
authorized by law. 



Functions: To accomplish this mission, the Chief, Bureau 
of Medicine and Surgery shall: 

1. Provide medical and dental care and services as auth- 
orized by law or regulation in medical and dental ac- 
tivities under the command of the Bureau of Medicine 
and Surgery for Navy and Marine Corps personnel, 
other uniformed services personnel, their dependents, 
retired members and their dependents, eligible survivors 
of deceased members, Federal civilian employees, and 
other categories of persons authorized by law or regula- 
tion. 

2. Provide for medical and dental care in non-naval 
facilities of Navy and Marine Corps personnel, other 
uniformed services personnel, their dependents, retired 
members and their dependents, eligible survivors of 
deceased members, Federal civilian employees, and other 
categories of persons authorized by law or regulation. 

3. Accomplish matters pertaining to Marine Corps per- 
sonnel in coordination with the Commandant of the 
Marine Corps. 

4. Plan and program the health care resources provided 
by the Bureau through all medical and dental activities 
under its command, and support for other activities as 
may be assigned by the Chief of Naval Operations. 

5. Act as the chief of the Medical Department of the 
Navy in the professional and technical supervision of 
medical and dental matters throughout the Department 
of the Navy. 

6. Issue and maintain manuals and directives to promul- 



31 Oct 73 



1-1 

Change 80 



1-3 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



1-3 



gate Medical Department or Bureau policies and proce- 
dures on medical and dental professional, technical, and 
administrative matters. 

7. Conduct medical and dental inspections of activities 
commanded by the Bureau and assist other immediate 
superiors in command in performing command inspec- 
tions of medical and dental facilities and health related 
activities throughout the Navy and Marine Corps. 

8. Provide professional and technical advice and assist- 
ance to the Chief of Naval Materia], systems commands, 
Bureau of Naval Personnel, fleet commands, and other 
offices, commands, or agencies in the utilization of medi- 
cal and dental manpower, facilities, equipment, and mat- 
erial requisite to full health care support for the Depart- 
ment of the Navy. 

9- Provide professional and technical guidance over de- 
sign, construction, and equipping of medical and dental 
facilities ashore and afloat in coordination with the Chief 
of Naval Material, the Commander, Naval Facilities En- 
gineering Command, the Commander, Naval Ship Sys- 
tems Command, and, when appropriate, the Comman- 
dant of the Marine Corps. 

1 0. Provide professional and technical guidance over per- 
formance requirements, procurement, and utilization of 
medical, dental, and mortuary supplies and equipment by 
preparing and maintaining medical and dental allowance 
lists, by liaison with the Defense Supply Agency and the 
Naval Material Command, by providing representation on 
the Defense Medical Material Board, and by advising and 
assisting the Chief of Naval Operations and the Comman- 
dant of the Marine Corps in these matters. 
1 L Initiate and conduct research, development, test, and 
evaluation efforts in biological and medical sciences, be- 
havioral and social sciences, life sciences, technology, 
health education and training, health manpower produc- 
tivity, and operational medical support systems in re- 
sponse to approved Navy and Marine Corps RDT&E re- 
quirements. 

12. Provide professional and technical guidance and 
assistance to the Navy and Marine Corps in the planning 
and conduct of research, development, test, and evalua- 
tion of weapons, aircraft, and support systems. 

13. Evaluate the health aspects of the total shipboard, 
aircraft, and shore environment in coordination and coop- 
eration with those responsible for design, specifications, 
and standards of spaces and equipment, and with the 
Board of Inspection and Survey and other appropriate 
officials. 

14 Provide professional and technical guidance and 
assistance to the Navy and Marine Corps in establishing 
standards of environmental sanitation, industrial hygiene, 
and other measures for the prevention of illness or injury 
within the Department of the Navy; and provide pre- 
ventive medicine and industrial hygiene programs neces- 
sary to safeguard and promote the health of members of 
the Department of the Navy and others for whom the Navy 
has responsibility. 

15. Formulate and promulgate, in conjunction with the 
Commandant of the Marine Corps as to matters pertaining 
to Marine Corps members, policies, standards, proce- 
dures, and training material for the Decedent Affairs 
Program of the Department of the Navy. 

16. Develop and recommend physical standards and ex- 
aminations of persons for entrance and retention in naval 
service and for specialized duties. 



17. Develop, amend, and make recommendations upon 
entrance qualifications of all applicants for the Medical, 
Dental, Medical Service, Nurse, and Hospital Corps, and 
dental technicians. 

1 8. Plan for and supervise the professional education and 
training of officer and enlisted members of the Medical, 
Dental, Medical Service, Nurse, and Hospital Corps, and 
dental technicians; furnish professional and technical as- 
sistance to the Chief of Naval Personnel in matters relative 
to advancement in rating of enlisted hospital corpsmen 
and dental technicians; and provide for continuing ap- 
praisal of, and appropriate response to, changes in training 
requirements and advances in educational methodology. 

19. Establish professional standards for clinical methods 
and procedures in medical and dental care, treatment, and 
services in the Department of the Navy, and in support of 
these standards, perform visits to commands. 

20. Provide specialized programs and scientific and tech- 
nical assistance in the medical allied sciences. 

21. Furnish to higher authority information and budget 
estimates relating to research projects and programs, and 
assume such responsibilities as may be delegated by higher 
authority in connection with research and development 
programs. 

22. Maintain the highest professional, technical, man- 
agement, and military competence among the officer 
corps, enlisted corps, and civilian employees which it 
sponsors. 

23. Maintain liaison with Government and civilian health 
organizations on matters of related interest. 

24. Manage the Navy Blood Program as a component of 
the Military Blood Program. 

25. Cooperate with and assist the other armed services in 
the delivery of health care to eligible beneficiaries as di- 
rected by higher authority. 

26. Perform such other tasks as appropriate to the mis- 
sion, or as may be assigned by the Chief of Naval Opera- 
tions. 



1-3. BUM ED Organization 

(1) Chart. — The Bureau organization is depicted 
on the following chart. 

(2) The Surgeon General of the NavylCbief of the 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, to accomplish his 
mission and functions, is assisted and advised by the 
organizational entities shown on the chart whose 
responsibilities are briefed in the following organi- 
zation statements. 

(3) The Deputy and Assistant Chief for Headquar- 
ters Operations of the Bureau ranks next to the Chief 
of the Bureau (Surgeon General) in authority in 
BUMED and the Medical Department. He has such 
authority and duties as the Chief of the Bureau may 
delegate to or prescribe for him, and he acts with full 
responsibility and authority for the Chief of the 
Bureau in his absence. 

(a) The Headquarters Support Division 
provides headquarters support functions in the areas 
of military and civilian personnel administration, 



1-2 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



in 



POLICY council 



SUDSET ADVISORY COUNCIL 



SUMMON GENERAL OF THE NAVY 
AND 

if OF IUIEAU OF MEDICINE AND SUEOftY 

00 



executive assistant 001 



DEPUTY AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FOE 
HEADQUARTERS OPERATIONS 



DIRECTOR OF PROGRAM PLANNING A ANALYSTS 
A SPEC AUT TO THE VCNO FOR MEDICAL AFFAIRS 
IOF-MM1 a 



Oil PLANNING AND PROGRAMMING DIVISION 
HI MANAORMtNT INFORMATION DIVISION 
«l IHTCMI ENGINEERING DIVISION 





ASSISTANT CHIEF FOR 




F 


HUMAN RESOURCES AND 


J 


11 






II 


NURSING DtVISTOH 




n 


PHYSICAL STANDARDS AND 
SPECIAL REVIEW DIVISION 




M 


HOSPITAL CORPS DIVISION 




M 


NAVA1 RESERVE DIVISION 




IP 


MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 





ASSISTANT CHIEF FOR 



SI FACILITIES DIVISION 

43 MEDICAL MATERIEL DIVISION 

it COMPTROLLER DIVISION 



SPECIAL ASSISTANTS 



MEDICOLEGAL AFFAIRS 003 

CIVILIAN P1RSONNIL SERVICES 00* 

FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 005 
MASTER CHIEF PETTY OFFICER OF THE COMMAND 006 

INSPECTOR GENERAL. MEDICAL 007 

EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROGRAMS DOR 

AUTOMATED DATA PROCESSING 009 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION AND 

PROFESSIONAL PURUCATIONS 0010 

MEDICAL DEPT EDUCATION AND TRAINING 0°" 

MEDICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 00IJ 



HEADQUARTERS SUPPORT 

DIVISION 



CORPS DIRECTORATE 



ASSISTANT CHEF FOR HUMAN RESOURCES 
AND PROFESSIONAL OPERATIONS 

EE FOR DfHUSIRI 



DIRECTOR NAVY HU 
DIRECTOR HOSPITAL CORPS DIVISION 





ASSISTANT CHIEF FOR 


OPERATIONAL MEDICAL SUPPORT , 


11 


AEROSPACE MEDICINE DIVISION 


}S 


SURFACE MEDICINE DIVISION 


39 


UNDERSEA MEDICINE DIVISION 


H 


FLEET MARINE FORCE DIVISION 


JJ 


PREVENTIVE MEDICINE DIVISION 


M 


OCCUPATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL 
HEALTH DIVISION 



ASSISTANT CHIEF FOR 



II DENTAL DIVISION 

41A INSPECTOR GENERAL, DENTAL 

Ell PROFESSIONAL RflANCH 

612 PLANNING AND LOGISTICS 
S RANCH 

SIS PERSONNEL R RANCH 

III RESEARCH SRAHCH 





ASSISTANT CHIEF FOR 




IEGF0NAL HEALTH CARE 




ADMINISTRATION 7 


PI 


MEDICAL SERVICE CORPS 
DIVISION 


ft 


HEALTH CARE ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 


73 


HEALTH REHEFITS DIVISION 


71 


HEALTH RECORDS DIVISION 



1-3 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



1-3 



travel, communications, security, supply, mainte- 
nance, printing, and initiation of reviews and im- 
provements pertaining to administrative practices 
and procedures within BUMED. 

(4) The Special Assistant for Medico-Legal Affairs 
serves as legal consultant and advisor to the Chief of 
the Bureau, the Deputy and Assistant Chief for 
Headquarters Operations, other Bureau officials, 
boards and offices, and commanding officers of 
Medical Department activities, and carries out spe- 
cial assignments given by the Chief of the Bureau 
and the Deputy and Assistant Chief for Headquar- 
ters Operations. 

(5) The Special Assistant for Civilian Personnel 
Services serves as advisor and consultant to the 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery on commandwide 
civilian personnel management policies, operations, 
and programs. Provides command liaison with the 
Office of Civilian Manpower Management in the 
formulation of personnel policies and programs af- 
fecting the Bureau and its field activities. 

(6) The Special Assistant for Financial Manage- 
ment acts as special advisor and consultant to the 
Chief of the Bureau in all areas of financial manage- 
ment. 

(7) The Master Chief Petty Officer of the Command 
serves as advisor to the Chief of the Bureau and the 
Deputy and Assistant Chief for Headquarters Opera- 
tions in matters related to members of the enlisted 
community (hospital corpsmen Group X and dental 
technicians Group XI). 

(8) The Inspector General, Medical, conducts the 
BUMED (less dental) portion of the Naval Command 
Inspection Program and inquires into and reports on 
professional, technical, and administrative matters 
affecting the efficient operation of the Medical De- 
partment. Specifically the Inspector General, Medi- 
cal: 

(a) Schedules, coordinates, conducts, and re- 
ports on command inspections of each Navy medical 
activity under the command of BUMED in accord- 
ance with OPNAVINST 5040.7 and BUMEDINST 
5040. 1. 

(b) Schedules, conducts, and reports on 
professional/technical visits to medical department 
activities in the U. S. and overseas with concurrence 
of immediate superiors in command. 

(c) Coordinates assistance to the Navy Inspec- 
tor General and immediate superiors in command in 
conducting the medical portions of their command 
inspections when requested. 

(d) Maintains liaison with the Navy Inspector 
General in matters affecting and related to the Medi- 
cal Department of the Navy. 

(e) Coordinates and requests BUMED re- 
sponses to recommendations of and inquiries from 
the Navy and other Inspectors General, 

(9) The Special Assistant for Equal Opportunity 
Programs acts as advisor and assistant to the Chief of 
the Bureau in matters related to minority group 
military personnel of the Navy Medical Department. 



(10) The Special Assistant for Automated Data 
Processing serves as the advisor to the Surgeon Gen- 
eral and program director for medical computer sys- 
tems for the Navy Medical Department. Acts as the 
program manager for development of budgetary re- 
quirements and operation of the automatic data pro- 
cessing systems for the Navy Medical Department. 

(11) The Special Assistant for Technical Informa- 
tion and Professional Publications serves as Editor of 
"U.S. Navy Medicine," an official monthly Medical 
Department publication which functions as a 
medium of direct communication between the 
Chief, BUMED, and officers of the Medical Depart- 
ment of the Regular Navy and Naval Reserve. 

(12) The Special Assistant for Medical Department 
Education and Training serves as the executive for 
Navy Medical Department education and training 
matters and the advisor to the Chief, Bureau of 
Medicine and Surgery, on all policies and needs relat- 
ing thereto. 

(13) The Special Assistant for Medical Research and 
Development serves as the executive for Navy Medi- 
cal Department Research, Development, Test and 
Evaluation matters and as advisor to the Chief, 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery on all policies and 
requirements concerning RDT&E programs. 

(14) The Director of Program Planning and 
Analysis and Special Assistant to the VCNO for Medi- 
cal Affairs (OP-09H) exercises centralized supervi- 
sion and coordination of the Bureau's program plan- 
ning, study, and information effort to assure the 
integration of planning, programming, budgeting, 
appraising, controlling and information systems 
within the Office of the Surgeon General and the 
management echelons subordinate to the Bureau. 
Provides the Surgeon General and his staff with 
information to make decisions; to readily respond to 
the requirements of the operating forces; to manage 
medical activities efficiently; and to utilize resources 
effectively. 

(a) The Planning and Programming Division 
develops and operates an integrated program plan- 
ning system for the Bureau and implements the 
responsibilities of the Director of Program Planning 
and Analysis regarding health care programs and 
plans. 

(b) The Management Information Division 
serves as the focal point for gathering and storing all 
information related to the management of the Medi- 
cal Department. Analyzes in detail all available raw 
data/information, identifies trends, shifts, and im- 
pending problem areas in health care related mat- 
ters. Maintains a management information system 
with the capability to provide accurate, current, 
relevant information in various formats on short 
notice to all levels of Bureau management. Provides 
general information and graphic arts support to 
briefing officers. Serves as the audiovisual support 
office for Bureau operations. 

(c) The Systems Engineering Division develops, 
tests, and implements health systems to increase and 



1-4 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



1-3 



CHAPTER 1. MEDICAL DEPARTMENT 



1-3 



improve health care services and achieve more 
efficient utilization of health care resources. Investi- 
gates, studies, analyzes, and makes recommenda- 
tions for the introduction of new and revised exist- 
ing health systems in the Navy Medical Department. 
Provides management assistance and consulting 
services on special studies and develops program 
requirements for the Bureau and naval medical 
facilities. 

(15) The Assistant Chief for Human Resources and 
Professional Operations develops and maintains the 
professional standards and policies relating to hos- 
pitalization and patient care practices. Develops 
personnel policies which will effectively provide for 
the appropriate staffing of the Navy Health Care 
Delivery System. Such policies will be based on the 
availability of general medical officers, the right mix 
of professional specialists, physicians assistants, 
nurse practitioners, medical technologists and Hos- 
pital Corps personnel. He ensures that these policies 
are effected through coordination with the Dental 
Division, Medical Service Corps Division, Nursing 
Division, and Hospital Corps Division. Directs the 
development and application of physical qualifica- 
tion standards for Navy and Marine Corps personnel; 
the Navy Blood Program; and the Navy Medical 
Reserve Program in accordance with overall 
Navy policy and the requirements of law. 

(a) The Medical Corps Division develops policy, 
provides professional management guidance and 
monitors the attraction, retention, assignment, pro- 
fessional development and utilization of Medical 
Corps officers; prepares or cooperates in special 
planning and professional personnel management 
projects. Plans and coordinates the psychiatry and 
clinical psychology programs of the Navy Medical 
Department; provides guidance to the Chief of Naval 
Personnel regarding medical aspects of the Navy 
Human Goals Program and coordinates BUMED 
activities in the areas of alcholism, drug abuse, child 
advocacy, and the care of returned prisoners of war; 
provides for the management of all Medical Corps 
manpower procurement programs; provides proper 
and equitable assignment of general medical offic- 
ers, physician's assistants, and physician specialists; 
manages the Medical Corps personnel data system 
and processes all separations from active service; 
coordinates and manages all Navy blood banking 
matters; and provides professional medical evalua- 
tion of medical materiel. 

(b) The Nursing Division plans for and pro- 
vides direction to the administration of nursing ser- 
vices in all naval medical facilities; plans and coordi- 
nates concepts and methods for delivery and 
evaluation of quality patient care; plans, develops, 
evaluates, coordinates and advises the Chief of the 
Bureau on nursing personnel policies and require- 
ments; develops and recommends educational and 
professional standards; and implements the policies 
of the Chief of the Bureau as they relate to nurses and 
nursing. 



(c) The Physical Standards and Special Review 
Division develops and administers primary ap- 
pointment and other physical standards and policies 
for Navy and Marine Corps personnel; develops pol- 
icy governing the interpretation and application of 
these standards for direct appointment and enroll- 
ment in officer training programs of the Navy and 
Marine Corps, Regular and Reserve. Controls waiver 
policies for enlistment in the Navy and Marine 
Corps, Regular and Reserve, and communicates 
changes in physical standards, or policy regarding 
application of such standards, in keeping with the 
current needs of the- naval service. 

(d) The Hospital Corps Division develops, 
coordinates, evaluates, and advises on policies and 
requirements affecting the Hospital Corps; adminis- 
ters Hospital Corps personnel programs; and in con- 
sultation with professional advisors, studies pro- 
grams and manpower policy and advises the Assist- 
ant Chief for Human Resources and Professional 
Operations'. 

(e) The Naval Reserve Division plans, coordi- 
nates, and directs all aspects of the Naval Medical 
Reserve Program of the Medical Corps, the Medical 
Service Corps, the Nurse Corps, and the Hospital 
Corps. Maintains liaison with the Dental Division 
for coordination of administrative, procurement, 
and recruitment efforts in Reserve affairs where 
practicable and advantageous. 

(f) The Manpower Requirements Division 
studies, evaluates, coordinates, and advises on 
policies for Medical Department military and 
civilian personnel plans, staffing criteria, and re- 
quirements. Prepares budget estimates and support- 
ing justification material for military and civilian 
personal services for Medical Department activities; 
and maintains liaison between BUMED, OPNAV, 
BUPERS, and OCMM in all matters pertaining to 
Medical Department personnel plans and policies. 

(16) The Assistant Chief for Materiel Resources 
formulates and administers the effective provision of 
medical facilities and logistic support to the De- 
partment of the Navy. Plans, directs, controls and 
administers the financial management program of 
the Medical Department; justifies and ensures op- 
timum utilization of financial resources for the busi- 
ness administration of the Medical Department and 
for the efficient delivery of health care in all Navy 
medical treatment facilities, ashore and afloat. 

(a) The Facilities Division develops health care 
and support facilities requirements, plans, and con- 
struction programs for the Medical Department. 
Prepares recommendations concerning scope, loca- 
tion, design, construction, and maintenance of Navy 
Medical Department facilities; and serves as the focal 
point for facilities planning, programming, con- 
struction, and management relative to Medical De- 
partment shore facilities. 

(b) The Medical Materiel Division acts as pro- 
gram manager for medical materiel support pro- 
grams for the Navy Medical Department. 



10 Feb 75 



1-5 

Change 83 



1-3 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



1-3 



(c) The Comptroller Division formulates and 

t^Z na Ti M ? diC u De P artme « fi^aJ Policies and 
is responsible for the preparation and presentation 
of the budgets for the Bureau and its field activities 
in accordance therewith. Prescribes cost and ap- 
propriate accounting and other fiscal procedures 
systems, guides, and criteria for control of Medical 
Department funds and property. Develops and ad- 
ministers the program review and analysis function 
tor the Bureau and its field activities 

(17) The Assistant Chief for Operational Medical 
Support develops, projects and directs Medical De- 
partment programs relating to Navy and Marine 
Corps operational medical support which includes 
aerospace amphibious, surface, underseas, occupa- 
tional and radiation health and preventive medicine 
R™n C <?° rd ! nates th «e programs within 
BUMED and with other Navy bureaus and offices, 
Department of Defense, other Government agen- 
cies, civilian organizations and foreign govern- 
ments. & * 

(a) The Aerospace Medicine Division develops 
and projects aerospace medical policies, standards 
doctrines, practices, and procedures. Directs Medi- 
cal Department programs relating to physical qual- 
ifications selection and training of aviation person- 
nel, including aerospace medical personnel, and the 
aerospace medical aspects of weapons systems and 
aircrew and aircraft safety and equipment. Assists in 
coordinating Medical Department aerospace medi- 
cal programs. Acts as Senior Member of the Board of 

medkine r8e ° nS ' AdV ' SeS °" allphases of ^rospace 
(b) The Surface Medicine Division develops and 
projects surface fleet medical policies, standards 
doctrines, practices, and procedures. Directs Medi- 
cal Department programs unique to the surface en- 
vironment. Compiles current capabilities require- 
ments as related to medical personnel, facilities 
equipment, and supply. Advises on medical training 
for fleet personnel. Coordinates on requirements 
and standards of medical spaces and medical 
materiel aboard surface fleet ships. 

(c) The Undersea Medicine Division develops 
and projects undersea and radiation medical 
polices standards, doctrines, practices, and proce- 
dures. Directs Medical Department programs relat- 
ing to physical qualifications, selection and training 
of submarine, diving and radiation medical person- 
neL Advises on and coordinates all phases of under- 
sea and radiation medicine. 

(d) The Fleet Marine Force Medicine Division 
develops and projects amphibious and Fleet Marine 
Force medical policies, standards, doctrines, prac- 
tices and procedures. Directs Medical Department 
programs unique to the amphibious and Fleet 
Marine Force environment. Compiles current 
capabilities requirements as related to medical per- 
sonnel facades, equipment, and supply. Advises 
on medical training for amphibious and Fleet Marine 



1-6 

Change 83 



Force personnel. Coordinates on standards of medi- 
cal materiel for field operations. 

(e) The Preventive Medicine Division develops 
and projects preventive medicine policies, stand- 
ards, doctrines, practices and procedures. Directs 
Medical Department programs relating to selection 
and training of preventive medicine personnel and 
training personnel in general health education, food 
sanitation and pest control aspects. Provides direc- 
tion and coordination to maintain and promote the 
health of all personnel in the Naval Establishment. 
Provides management, technical and operational 
su^pportto Navy environmental preventive medicine 
urn s and Navy disease vector ecology and control 
centers. Coordinates medical intelligence support 
with respect to disease, natural environmental 
hazards and medical aspects of biological and chem- 
suppTrt ' Co ° rdinates veterinary services 

(f) The Occupational Environmental Health Di- 
vision develops and projects industrial environmen- 
tal health polices, standards, doctrines, practices 
and procedures. Directs Medical Department pro- 
grams relating to selection and training of industrial 
environmental health personnel in occupational 
medicine, mdustrial hygiene and safety. Provides 
d.recuon and coordination in pollution abatement, 
sight and hearing conservation, thermal stress and 

7,™ matterS in the Naval Establishment. 
(18) The Assistant Chief for Dentistry directs 
supervises and coordinates all dental programs « 
the Chief of the Dental Division. 

(a) The Dental Division establishes profes- 
sional standards and policies for dental practice 
nst.tutes appropriate action to have inspections and 

den ta | S n° n f ^ PUr P° Se °<" maintaining 

dental professional standards. Functions as the 

naTru ^ n . tai Division Panning Board 
(19) The Assistant Chief for Regional Health Care 
Administration directs and coordinates all health 
care administration programs including manage- 
™™r mS ' organizations for the Bureau aid 
BUMED commandactivities.the regulations and di- 
rectives system for the Navy Medical Department, 
the food service management program, the Naw 
and Marine Corps Health Records management 
program, the Uniformed Services Health Benefits 
Program the transfer and movement of patients by 
he Armed Services Medical Regulating Office, and 
the Navy Decedent Affairs Program. 

(a) The Medical Service Corps Division 
develops, coordinates, evaluates, and advises on 
policies and requirements affecting the Medical Ser- 
vice Corps Administers all personnel matters per- 
taining to Medical Service Corps officers and Medical 
Service Warrant officers except those of the Inactive 
Reserve. In consultation with cognizant professional 
advisors studies and advises the Assistant Chief for 
Regional Health Care Administration on matters of 
procurement, training, assignment, distribution 



10 Feb 75 



1-4 



CHAPTER I. MEDICAL DEPARTMENT 



1-7 



and disposition of officers within the Medical Ser- 
vice Corps and Medical Service Warrant com- 
munities. 

(b) The Health Care Administration Division 
directs and coordinates health care administration 
programs for the Navy Medical Department; plans, 
develops, evaluates, and coordinates management 
systems for health care administration; develops and 
maintains organizations for the Bureau and BUMED 
command activities; manages the regulations and 
directive system for operation of the Navy Medical 
Department; directs and coordinates the food ser- 
vice management program; manages the health rec- 
ords of Navy and Marine Corps personnel required 
to be maintained at departmental level. 

(c) The Health Benefits Division is responsible 
for the administration of the Uniformed Services 
Health Benefits Program, the Civilian Health and 
Medical Program of the Uniformed Services 
(CHAMPUS), the Decedent Affairs Program, hos- 
pitalization and health benefits in other than Navy 
facilities for active duty naval members and others so 
entitled; and selective areas of patient administrative 
matters. The latter includes eligibility for hospitali- 
zation and benefits, the transfer of patients and 
coordination of their movement with the Armed 
Services Medical Regulating Office, arrangements 
for the admission of special category patients such as 
foreign nationals, high U.S. Government officials, 
and persons authorized admission by the Secretary 
of the Navy, responding to congressional and other 
correspondence and inquiries pertaining to pro- 
grams or patient relations, and facilitating other 
health care management matters. 

(d) The Health Records Division maintains 
Navy and Marine Corps health records held at the 
departmental level, including release of information 
and preparation of correspondence pertaining 
thereto; operates the BUMED Medical Records 
Liaison Office, NPRC, St. Louis; provides guidance 
to the Navy Medical Department regarding operation 
of the Navy health records system; and pro- 
vides medical record support to other Navy bureaus 
and offices, as directed. 

1-4. Commanding Officers of Medical Department 
Activities 

(1) A Medical Corps, Dental Corps, or Medical * 
Service Corps officer, as appropriate, is assigned as 



commanding officer, chief, or officer in charge of 
each activity over which BUMED has command. He 
is responsible for the direction and coordination of 
all functions of the activity, subject to U.S. Navy 
Regulations, the orders and instructions of BUMED, 
and those of other competent authority. 



1-5 Heads of Medical Departments and Dental De- 
partments of Ships and Stations 

(1) The medical officer and the dental officer of a 
naval activity are responsible to the commanding 
officer for the medical and dental services, respec- 
tively, of that activity. The functions of the medical 
and dental departments of a naval activity are ad- 
ministered by the medical and dental officers and 
their staffs in accordance with U.S. Navy Regula- 
tions, this Manual, BUMED directives, and the or- 
ders and instructions of the commanding officer and 
competent higher authority. 



1-6. Personnel 

(1) The Medical Department includes the Medical 
Corps, Dental Corps, Medical Service Corps, Nurse 
Corps, Hospital Corps, and Dental Technician 
Group XL Each group is composed of personnel 
specialized appropriately to perform the designated 
duties for that group. The medical, dental, and re- 
lated services and health programs for which the 
Medical Department is responsible are carried out by 
the personnel of the several corps, dental techni- 
cians, and civilians in BUMED and in the field. 



1-7. District Medical Officers and Directors of 
Dental Activities or District Dental Officers 

(1) The senior medical officer and the senior den- 
tal officer assigned to the staff of a commandant of a 
naval district shall be designated "District Medical 
Officer" and "Director of Dental Activities" or "Dis- 
trict Dental Officer," respectively. The Navy De- 
partment assigns a district medical officer and direc- 
tor of dental activities or district dental officer for 
each naval district. 



10 Feb 75 



l-6a 

Change 83 



( 



1-10 



CHAPTER 1. MEDICAL DEPARTMENT 



1-11 



Section II. NOMENCLATURE, DEFINITIONS, AND JOINT UTILIZATION 

Article 

General . ; . . 1-10 

Fixed Medical Treatment Facilities 1-11 

Nonfixed Medical Treatment Facilities 1-12 

Battle Casualty Reporting 1-13 

Administrative Terminology 1-14 

Joint Utilization of Military Health and Medical Facilities and Services 1-15 



1-10. General 

(1) Medical treatment facilities of the Depart- 
ment of the Navy are classified as either fixed or 
nonfixed. Various classifications of beds and bed 
status are employed in order that the precise rela- 
tionship of the number of patients to the number 
of beds can be determined. 



1-11. Fixed Medical Treatment Facilities 

(1) Facilities. — 

(a) Department of Defense Instruction 
6015.8 of 15 July 1955 is quoted below: 

I. PURPOSE. The purpose of this instruction is to es- 
tablish officially within the Department of Defense, for 
use by all services, uniform nomenclature and defini- 
tions applicable to the classification of fixed medical 
treatment facilities. 

II. POLICY. The policy of the Department of Defense 
is that there will be two basic types of fixed medical 
treatment facilities, and that the nomenclature and defi- 
nitions applicable to the classification of these facilities, 
used herein, will be used by the three military depart- 
ments. 

III. DEFINITIONS 

A. Dispensary: A dispensary is a medical treatment 
facility primarily intended to provide outpatient medi- 
cal service for non-hospital type ambulatory patients. 
Examination and treatment and first aid for emergency 
cases are types of services rendered. A dispensary is 
also intended to perform certain nontherapeutic activi- 
ties related to the health of the personnel served, such 
as physical examinations, immunizations, medical admin- 
istration, and other preventive medical and sanitary 
measures necessary to support a primary military mis- 
sion. A dispensary will be equipped with the necessary 
supporting services to perform its assigned mission. A 
dispensary may be equipped with beds (normally less 
than 25) for observation of patients awaiting transfer to 
a hospital, and for care of "quarters" type cases which 
cannot be cared for on an outpatient status, but which 
do not require hospitalization. Patients whose expected 
duration of illness exceeds 72 hours will not occupy 
dispensary beds for periods longer than are necessary to 
arrange transfer to a hospital. 

B. Hospital: A hospital is a medical treatment facility 
primarily intended to provide inpatient care. It is ap- 
propriately staffed and equipped to provide diagnostic 
and therapeutic services, as well as the necessary sup- 
porting services required to perform its assigned mis- 
sion. A hospital may, in addition, discharge the func- 
tions of a dispensary. 

(b) Department of the Navy Criteria for 
Hospitals. — 



(1) To qualify for hospital status, a medi- 
cal treatment facility must fulfill the following 
criteria: 

(a) Definitive. — 

(1) Have at least 25 operating beds. 

(2) Serve a minimum population of 

10,000. 

(3) Serve an active duty military 
population of which at least 75 percent are 
not members of the command to which the 
facility belongs. 

(b) Professional. — 

(1) Provide for the care of patients 
who stay in the hospital on the average of at 
least 24 hours per admission. 

(2) Have an organized medical staff 
(which may include doctors of osteopathy, den- 
tists, and appropriate allied health specialists) 
providing medical services more intensive than 
those required merely for board, room, personal 
services, and general nursing care. 

(3) Provide minimal surgical facil- 
ities (including operating/delivery rooms) and 
relatively complete diagnostic and treatment 
facilities for all patients. 

(4) Provide diagnostic radiology serv- 
ices to support the medical services provided. 

(5) Provide clinical laboratory serv- 
ices in support of the medical services provided. 

(6) Provide pharmaceutical services 

as required. 

(7) Provide registered nurse super- 
vision and such other nursing services as neces- 
sary to provide 24 hour patient care. 

(8) Provide adequate outpatient care. 

(9) Provide in-house training in ac- 
cordance with instructions of the Surgeon Gen- 
eral of the Navy. 

(10) Normally be staffed for and 
capable of self-administration, 

(2) A hospital will be reclassified to dis- 
pensary status when it no longer meets the above 
criteria. 

(c) Support and Care Provided. — 



1-7 

Change 73 



1-11 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



1-11 



(1) Hospitals. — Hospitals primarily sup- 
port the operational military needs of naval 
air commands, major Marine Corps commands, 
naval districts, sea frontiers, and forces afloat, 
including the needs of overseas commands for 
United States hospital services. Hospitals also 
support on a reciprocal basis the operational 
military needs of the Departments of the Army 
and Air Force. 

(2) Dispensaries. — Dispensaries normally 
care for patients from the local military com- 
mand and from the immediate vicinity. 

(a) In subarticle 1-11(1) (a) IIIA, ref- 
erence is made to beds for care of "quarters" type 
cases. This applies to Army and Air Force but 
not to Navy. 

(b) Subarticle 1-11(1) (a)IIIA, in the 
last sentence, states that "Patients whose expected 
duration of illness exceeds 72 hours will not 
occupy dispensary beds for periods longer than 
are necessary to arrange transfer to a hospital." 
An exception to this general rule should be made, 
particularly at isolated bases, for those patients 
whose required treatment is within the profes- 
sional capability of the admitting dispensary and 
whose transfer to a hospital would be uneco- 
nomical and not in the best interests of the 
patients. Sound professional judgment must be 
the predominating factor in determining which 
patients can be adequately treated in a dispensary 
as opposed to those requiring more extensive 
medical care. 

(d) Administrative Titles. — To differentiate 
between the various administrative types of hos- 
pitals and dispensaries, the following titles shall 
be used: 

(1) Naval Hospital {Location), for a 
hospital in the United States that is an estab- 
lished activity with a commanding officer, under 
the command of BUMED. 

(2) U. S. Naval Hospital (Location), for 
a hospital outside the United States that is an 
established activity with a commanding officer, 
under the command of BUMED. 

(3) Naval Dispensary (Location), for a 
dispensary in the United States that is an es- 
tablished activity with a commanding officer, 
under the command of BUMED. 

(4) Dispensary Without Authorized Op- 
erating Beds (Activity, Location), for a dispen- 
sary without authorized operating beds that is a 
component of a medical department at an activity 
under a bureau or office other than BUMED. 

(5) Dispensary With Authorized Oper- 
ating Beds (Activity, Location), for a dispensary 
with authorized operating beds that is a com- 
ponent of a medical department of an activity 
under a bureau or office other than BUMED. 



( 2 ) Beds. — Department of Defense Instruction 
6015-1 of 25 September 1958 is quoted below: 

I. PURPOSE. — To provide standard nomenclature and 
definitions to be used in the Department of Defense in 
accounting for bed capacity, bed status, and bed occu- 
pancy in fixed medical treatment facilities. 

II. STATEMENT. — In accounting for bed capacity, bed 
status, and bed occupancy in active and inactive fixed 
medical treatment facilities, the three military depart- 
ments will use the nomenclature and definitions set 
forth herein. Uniform requirements for collection of 
data by the military departments will be established by 
separate action. 

HI. TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

A. With respect to bed capacity: 

1. NORMAL BED CAPACITY, or capacity for 
normal peacetime use, is space for patients' beds and is 
measured in terms of the number of beds which can be 
set up in wards or rooms designed for patients' beds, 
spacing beds eight feet between centers (approximately 
100 square feet per bed) . Former ward space which has 
been disposed of or has been so altered that it cannot 
be readily reconverted to ward space is not included in 
computing bed capacities. Space for beds used only in 
connection with examination or brief treatment periods, 
such as that in examining rooms or in the physiotherapy 
department, is not included in this figure. Nursery space 
is not included in the bed capacity but is accounted for 
separately in terms of the number of bassinets it 
accommodates. 

2. EXPANDED BED CAPACITY is space for pa- 
tients' beds and is measured in terms of the number 
of beds which can be set up in wards or rooms designed 
for patients' beds, spacing beds six feet between centers 
(approximately 72 square feet per bed). Former ward 
space which has been disposed of or has been so altered 
that it cannot be readily reconverted to ward space is 
not included in computing bed capacities. Space for 
beds used only in connection with examination or brief 
treatment periods, such as that in examining rooms or 
in the physiotherapy department, is not included in this 
figure. Nursery space is not included in the bed capac- 
ity but is accounted for separately in terms of the num- 
ber of bassinets it accommodates. 

B. With respect to bed status: 

1. OPERATING BED. A medical treatment facil- 
ity bed, with space and equipment, that is currently set 
up and in all respects ready for the care of a patient, 
and that the facility is staffed to operate under normal 
circumstances. The definition excludes: nursery bassi- 
nets; transient patients' beds. 

2. INACTIVE BED. A medical treatment facility 
bed, with space (within expanded bed capacity) and 
equipment, that is in all respects other than the provi- 
sion of medical staff ready for the care of a patient; 
that is, that the facility is equipped but not staffed to 
operate under normal circumstances. The bed need not 
necessarily be set up. 

3. TRANSIENT PATIENT'S BED. A bed that a 
designated medical treatment facility operates for the 
care of a patient who is being moved between medical 
treatment facilities and who must stop over for a short 
period of time while en route to his final destination. 

C. With respect to bed occupancy: 

1. OCCUPIED BED. A bed that is assigned as of 
midnight to a patient, to include a patient on pass 
or liberty not in excess of 72 hours, and any bassinet 
assigned to a newborn infant whose mother has been 
discharged from the hospital. The definition excludes: 



1-8 

Change 55 



1-12 



CHAPTER 1. MEDICAL DEPARTMENT 



1-14 



any bed assigned to a patient subsisting out, on leave, 
ot absent without leave; any bed occupied by a transient 
patient; any bassinet assigned to a newborn infant 
whose mother is still a patient in the hospital. 

2. BED OCCUPIED BY TRANSIENT PATIENT. 
A bed assigned as of midnight to a patient who is being 
moved between medical treatment facilities and who 
stops over while en route to his final destination. 

3. It is recognized that bed requirements of a 
small medical treatment facility may not be indicated 
fully by data collected according to definitions 1 and 2 
above. Under these circumstances, a military depart- 
ment or medical treatment facility may find it useful 
to compile information on its bed utilization that can- 
not be accounted for under either definition 1 or 2. 

1-12. Nonfixed Medical Treatment Facilities 

(1) Nonfixed medical treatment facilities are: 

(a) Medical facilities for field service with 
the Marine Corps; such as, aid stations, clearing 
stations, and division field and force evacuation 
hospitals. 

(b) Medical facilities afloat (hospital ships, 
sick bays aboard ship). 

(c) The medical advance base component 
contained within mobile type units; such as, con- 
struction battalions, cargo handling battalions, 
etc. 

(2) Designated Bed Capacity.— The bed capac- 
ity of land-based, nonfixed, medical treatment 
facilities providing bed care, and of medical treat- 
ment facilities afloat, is referred to as the desig- 
nated bed capacity, defined as follows; 

(a) Designated bed capacity is the number 
of patients' beds which is specified in a table of 
organization and equipment, advanced base cata- 
log, or ship's specifications to be the number of 
beds a stated type of medical treatment facility is 
designed to provide; whenever these basic capa- 
bilities of a medical treatment facility have been 
modified by competent higher headquarters so 
that the bed capacity of the facility is either 
augmented or diminished, the modified capacity 
thereupon becomes the designated bed capacity. 

(3) Operating Beds are those beds in a func- 
tioning medical treatment facility which are set 
up, equipped, staffed, and in all respects ready 
for the care of patients. (A functioning medical 
treatment facility is one which is partially or 
completely set up and ready to receive patients, 
as distinct from a nonfunctioning facility which 
is one not set up and not ready to receive patients 
due to such conditions as being in training, in 
transit, staging, or held in tactical reserve. ) 

(4) Occupied Beds are those beds currently as- 
signed to patients. 

(5) Operating Beds Available are those of the 
operating beds not currently assigned to patients. 

(6) Base Hospitals. — Although Navy base hos- 
pitals are fundamentally different from the non- 
fixed type of medical treatment facilities and 



from medical facilities afloat as to their missions 
and military operational use, their wartime bed 
capacities are nevertheless established in the same 
way. Therefore, in wartime or in time of a 
large-scale military mobilization, the terms de- 
fined in subarticles (2) through (5) will be used 
in determining and reporting the bed capacities 
and bed status of all these types. 

1-13. Battle Casualty Reporting 

(1) Battle Casualty. — A battle casualty is any 
person lost to his organization because of death, 
wound, missing, capture, or internment provided 
such loss is incurred in action. "In action" charac- 
terizes the casualty status as having been the 
direct result of hostile action; sustained in com- 
bat and related thereto; or sustained going to or 
returning from a combat mission provided that 
the occurrence was directly related to hostile 
action. However, injuries due to the elements or 
self-inflicted wounds are not to be considered as 
sustained in action and are thereby not to be 
interpreted as battle casualties. 

(2) Wounded in Action. — The term "wounded 
in action" will be used to describe all battle 
casualties other than the "killed in action" who 
have incurred a traumatism or injury due to 
external agent or cause. Thus broadly used it 
encompasses all kinds of wounds and other in- 
juries incurred in action, whether there is a 
piercing of the body, as in a penetrating or per- 
forating wound, or none, as in a contused wound; 
all fractures; burns, blast concussions; all effects 
of gases and like chemical warfare agents; and 
the effects of exposure to radio-active substances. 

(3) Died of Wounds Received in Action. — The 
term "died of wounds received in action" will be 
used to describe all battle casualties who die of 
wounds or other injuries received in action, after 
having reached any medical treatment facility. It 
is essential to differentiate these cases from battle 
casualties found dead or who died before reach- 
ing a medical treatment facility (the "killed in 
action" group). It should be noted that reaching 
a medical treatment facility while still alive is 
the criterion. 

(4) Killed in Action. — The term "killed in 
action" will be used to describe battle casualties 
who are killed outright or who die of wounds or 
other injuries before reaching any medical treat- 
ment facility. 

1-14. Administrative Terminology 

( 1 ) The following terms are defined for use in 
Medical Department directives, regulations, and 
correspondence : 

(a ) Medical Department. — The Medical De- 
partment of the Navy is defined in article 1-1. 



1-9 

Change 55 



1-15 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



1-15 



The shortened term "Medical Department" is ac- 
ceptable if shown in initial capitals to distinguish 
it from the medical departments (normally not 
capitalized) of the ships or stations. 

(b) Bureau. — The words "the Bureau" may 
be used as a short title for the Bureau of Medi- 
cine and Surgery; however, the official abbrevia- 
tion BUMED is preferred as being more specific. 
If refrence is made to two or more bureaus 
intermittently, then the full titles or the official 
abbreviations should be used for all, avoiding use 
of the term "the Bureau." 

(c) Activities and Facilities. — 

(1) A Medical Department Activity is a 
command activity of the Naval Establishment 
under BUMED command. It includes all of the 
activities listed in Standard Navy Distribution 
List FH of the Catalog of Naval Shore Activities, 
OPNAV P09B3-105. 

(2) The term "Medical Department Facili- 
ties" includes the BUMED commanded and/or 
supported activities, plus all of the medical and 
dental departments ashore and afloat. 

(d) "To" Lines for BUMED Directives.— 
Several "To" lines peculiar to BUMED use have 
been standardized for directives applicable only 
to ships and stations having certain categories of 
Medical Department personnel aboard: 

(1) Ships and Stations Having Medical/ 
Dental Personnel includes commands having any 
or all of the following categories aboard: Medi- 
cal Corps, Dental Corps, Medical Service Corps, 
Nurse Corps, Hospital Corps, and civilian profes- 
sional and technical personnel who perform 
health services for the Navy. 

(2) Ships and Stations Having Medical 
Personnel applies to those activities having any 
or all of the following aboard: Medical Corps, 
Medical Service Corps (nondental), Nurse Corps, 
Hospital Corps Group X Medical, and civilian 
professional and technical personnel who per- 
form medical services for the Navy. 

(3) Ships and Stations Having Dental 
Personnel covers those activities having Dental 
Corps personnel, and Medical Service Corps per- 
sonnel and Hospital Corps Group XI members 
who perform dental services for the Navy. 

(4) Other standardized "To" lines are 
self-explanatory; such as Ships and Stations Hav- 
ing Medical Corps Personnel. Restricted varia- 
tions of the above "To" lines are used as circum- 
stances warrant. 

1-15. Joint Utilization of Military Health and 
Medical Facilities and Services 

(1) DoD Directive 6015.5 of 5 December 1955, 
with changes through 22 August 1962, is quoted 
for information: 



Reference: DoD Directive 6015.5, "Joint Utilization of 
Medical Facilities", July 2, 1952 

I. PURPOSE. This Directive prescribes DOD policy con- 
cerning optimum joint utilization of military health 
and medical facilities and services. 

II. POLICY. There will be planning for and practice of 
joint utilization of military health and medical facilities 
and services to attain the most efficient and economical 
operation of the three military medical departments con- 
sistent with the attainment of their primary mission. 

III. DEFINITIONS 

1. "Efficient." The ability to provide essential health 
and medical service support to the operating forces, 
plus the maintenance of the state of training, operational 
readiness, and capability for expansion required for dis- 
charge of emergency and wartime missions as defined 
in departmental and joint war plans. 

2. "Economical." The provision of efficient health and 
medical service support to the combatant arms with 
minimal expenditures of funds, manpower, and other 
resources. 

3. "Health and Medical Facilities." All facilities op- 
erated in conjunction with health and medical service 
support except supply-distribution facilities which are 
operated in accordance with specific DOD supply- 
distribution policies. 

4. "Health and Medical Services." All professional, 
technical, and related functions performed by the three 
medical departments such as general and special medical 
treatment, dental care including prosthetic laboratory 
service, veterinary service, medical laboratory service, 
patient evacuation, preventive medicine, dietetics, edu- 
cation, training, and reporting procedures. 

5. "Joint Utilization." The use of health and medical 
facilities and services of one Department by one or both 
of the other Departments, and also the provision of 
support by one Department to one or both of the other 
Departments to the extent determined, in areas as proven 
by study, to be the most economical and efficient. 

IV. SPECIFIC APPLICATION 

1. As a further guide for the application of the gen- 
eral policy stated in Section II, the following applica- 
tions in specific fields are prescribed: 

a. Health and Medical Personnel 

Joint utilization of specially trained personnel 
will be practiced in specific instances as required to 
obtain optimum efficiency and economy in the opera- 
tion of health and medical facilities and services. In 
addition, Medical and Dental Corps Reserve personnel 
will be used, regardless of departmental affiliation, 
on examining teams established to conduct physical 
examinations for various types of military reserve units, 
where there is an insufficient number of medical or 
dental corps personnel of a particular department 
available. 

Joint utilization as used herein is not to be con- 
strued as joint staffing. 

b. Health and Medical Facilities — Use of Existing 
Facilities. To accomplish optimum use of existing health 
and medical facilities and services every effort will be 
made to reduce, consolidate, or eliminate facilities in 
specific areas where another facility is available and can 
economically and efficiently provide the necessary sup- 
port. Established military medical facilities will be made 
available to medical components of Reserve Units in 
connection with training programs. 



1-10 

Change 73 



1-15 CHAPTER 1. MED 

c. Health and Medical Facilities — Construction and 
Major Alteration Planning. Requirements planning for 
new construction and major alterations will include 
consideration of total workload to be performed at the 
planned facility to provide support for all armed forces 
personnel, their dependents, and other authorized per- 
sonnel in the area to be served by the facility. The Sec- 
retary of the Military Department sponsoring the con- 
struction or alteration project will be responsible for 
developing total workload requirements for the pro- 
posed facility in collaboration with the Secretaries of 
the other Departments concerned. 

d. Patient Regulating 

(1) Oversea Evacuees, — All patients evacuated 
from overseas will be reported to the Armed Services 
Medical Regulating Office (ASMRO) from the debarka- 
tion port for a hospital designation. 

(2) CONVS Patients. — Hospitalized patients 
within the continental United States, who are expected 
to return to duty, will be transferred, if transfer is nec- 
essary, to the nearest Armed Services medical facility 
which is capable of providing the required care. Hos- 
pitalized patients, who are not expected to return to 
duty, will be transferred, if transfer is necessary, to the 
Armed Services medical facility nearest the patient's 
home which is capable of providing the required care 
and disposition. These transfers will be accomplished 
by requesting a hospital designation from ASMRO 
when the transfer is beyond the limits of the major 
Army or Navy command or to a widely separated Air 
Force hospital; other transfers will be accomplished in 
accordance with departmental instructions and after- 
the-fact reporting to ASMRO. 

(3) Veterans Administration Patients. — Requests 
for bed designations in Veterans Administration hos- 
pitals for active duty military personnel will be for- 
warded to ASMRO which will also be notified of the 
actual transfer. 

e. Operating Beds and Staffing Requirements. Op- 
erational requirements of armed services health and 
medical facilities will be based on workload experience, 
estimated workload, missions and plans for optimum 
joint utilization. Significant change in (expansion, 
curtailment or elimination) health or medical service in 
a facility or an area will be coordinated with the other 
military departments and reported to the Assistant Sec- 
retary of Defense (Manpower) before final action is 
taken, to obviate difficulties which might otherwise 
accrue to a coordinating department. 

f. Dental Care. Optimum joint use will be made of 
dental facilities and services including inpatient and out- 
patient treatment. Hospitalized personnel will be given 
authorized inpatient dental treatment. Personnel of one 
service assigned to duty with another service will be 
given outpatient treatment on the same basis as provided 
to personnel of the service rendering the service. Small 
units or detachments, located where dental facilities of 
their own service are not readily available or are un- 
economical to establish, will be provided dental care by 
nearby dental facilities of other services. Isolated indi- 
viduals and groups of military personnel will obtain 
dental care from civilian dentists, as authorized by the 
individual military department, when such procedures 
are more economical and efficient than sending patients 
long distances to military dental facilities, or requesting 
mobile dental units. 

g. Veterinary Services 

(1) To the extent practicable, uniform utilization 
of veterinary services will be effected throughout the 
Department of Defense. The Veterinary Services of the 



DEPARTMENT 1-15 



Army and Air Force will be utilized by all military 
departments to meet their individual requirements. 
Negotiations among the military departments will be 
held prior to the development of annual budgets to 
permit the department(s) assuming responsibilities to 
reflect additional requirements in its annual budget. 

(2) Optimum joint utilization will be made of 
veterinary facilities and services including: 

(a) Inspection of food products and sanitary 
inspections of establishments supplying food products to 
Department of Defense agencies. 

(b) Use of "Lists of Approved Sources of 
Foods" published by the Army major commands, 

(c) Laboratory examinations of food products. 

(d) Control of animal diseases communicable 

to man. 

(e) Veterinary care for publicly owned 

animals. 

(f) Military research and development. 

(3) Sanitary standards for commercial food 
plants will be developed by The Surgeon General, De- 
partment of the Army, for the Department of Defense. 
The standards will be prepared as Military Standards. 

h. Health and Medical Education and Training. 
Information regarding organized training programs, in- 
cluding symposia and formal post-graduate courses, will 
be freely exchanged and disseminated among the De- 
partments. Continuing study will be made of depart- 
mental health and medical training methods and 
programs with the view to standardization of courses 
and their further joint utilization. Policies concerning 
use of established military medical facilities and medical 
and dental personnel in connection with reserve train- 
ing programs are specified in Section IV, paragraphs l.a. 
and b. 

i. Preventive Medicine. Continuing studies will be 
conducted of departmental preventive health and medi- 
cine policies, organizations, procedures, and publications 
with the view to further standardization and joint use. 
Optimum joint utilization of photofluorographic units, 
industrial hygienists and industrial hygiene laboratories 
will be practiced. 

j. Medical Laboratory Service. Optimum joint utili- 
zation will be made of military hospital and other 
medical laboratories for the performance of clinical 
laboratory procedures as well as the examination of 
meat, dairy products, and other foods, and to conduct 
epidemiological investigations. Continuing studies will 
be conducted of departmental medical laboratory facili- 
ties, organizations, procedures, and functions with the 
view to further standardization and joint utilization. 

V. IMPLEMENTATION. The Secretaries of the three 
Military Departments are responsible for maximum tri- 
service coordination in placing this policy into opera- 
tion, and for continuing coordinated studies and actions 
for improving the efficiency and economy of health and 
medical service operations through joint utilization. 

VI. CANCELLATION. This Directive cancels referenced 
Directive. 

VII. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Directive is effective im- 
mediately and all regulations in conflict with the above 
stated policy will be changed accordingly. 

VIII. IMPLEMENTING INSTRUCTIONS. Copies of 
the Implementing Instructions and subsequent changes 
thereto will be furnished to the Assistant Secretary of 
Defense (Health and Medical). 



l-10a 

Change 73 



1-20 



CHAPTER 1. MEDICAL DEPARTMENT 



1-22 



Section III. GENERAL 



American National Red Cross 

Geneva Conventions 

Private Practice 

Witness in Court 

Civil Actions 

Restrictions Relative to Prospective Applicants 

1-20. American National Red Cross 

(1) General. — The American National Red 
Cross was reincorporated by the act of Congress 
of 5 January 1905 as amended (36 USC 1 et seq.) 
as the agency of the Government for the fulfill- 
ment of certain treaty obligations into which the 
United States entered when it became signatory 
to the treaty of the Red Cross, or the treaty of 
Geneva of 22 August 1864. The number of na- 
tional Red Cross sociaties officially recognized by 
the International Red Cross Committee is 63, in- 
cluding the American National Red Cross. The 
International Red Cross Committee is entrusted 
with the maintenance of fundamental Red Cross 
principles, and its essential characteristic is its 
absolute neutrality under the Geneva Conven- 
tions. Under these conventions the national socie- 
ties are recognized by their governments as auxil- 
iaries to the medical departments of their fight- 
ing services. They are pledged to prepare them- 
selves in peacetime for necessary wartime work. 

(2) Welfare Program. — Pursuant to the re- 
quest of the Secretary of the Navy, the American 
National Red Cross, in times of peace, conducts a 
welfare program for members of the Navy and 
their dependents, including home service by local 
chapters, and hospital and recreation services for 
patients in establishments under the command of 
BUMED. In times of war the Secretary of the 
Navy may request that these programs be ex- 
panded or new services appropriate to the func- 
tions of the American National Red Cross be 
provided. 

(3) Representatives. — American National Red 
Cross representatives assigned to naval establish- 
ments are considered to be members of the staff 
of the establishment for organizational purposes. 
The American National Red Cross will designate 
the representative who, acting under the com- 
manding officer, is responsible for coordinating 
all Red Cross activities of the establishment. 

(4) Volunteer Aid. — In conformity with U.S. 
Navy Regulations, volunteer aid for Medical De- 
partment establishments shall be accepted only 
through the agency of the American National 
Red Cross. The foregoing, however, does not pro- 
hibit individuals and representatives of other or- 



Article 

1-20 

1-21 

1-22 

1-23 

1-24 

1-25 

ganizations from visiting Medical Department es- 
tablishments or, when approved by the com- 
manding officer, acceptance by patients of per- 
sonal gifts or services tendered by individuals. 

(5) Requests for Services. — Requests for Red 
Cross services in new establishments, and matters 
relating to the functioning of Red Cross repre- 
sentatives within an establishment or affecting 
general policy which are not provided for in 
current instructions, shall be referred to BUMED 
for appropriate action, 

1—21. Geneva Conventions 

(1) Officers of the Medical Department shall 
familiarize themselves with the Geneva Conven- 
tions. The Conventions are contained in the 
Annex to Naval Warfare Information Publica- 
tion 10-2, Law of Naval Warfare, which is avail- 
able to all ships and stations. 

1-22. Private Practice 

(1) Private practice by Medical/Dental Corps 
officers is subject to policies heretofore stated by 
the Chief, BUMED, and also is subject to policies 
applicable to all members of the naval service as 
stated by the Chief of Naval Personnel (BUP- 
ERSMAN 342055). 

(2) BUMED does not condone private practice 
except under the following circumstances: 

(a) Emergency circumstances verging on 
community hardship exist. 

<b) Private practice shall not interfere with 
the practitioners in the locality and shall not be 
permitted to be offensive to professional associa- 
tions or to reflect discredit to the service. 

(c) Private practice must be voluntary as to 
the officer. 

(d) The efficiency of the officer shall not be 
impaired by activity in private practice. 

(e) Private activity may not involve expense 
to the Department. 

(f) The private practice which is authorized 
is "off-duty" or "outside-working-hours" practice. 

(g) The officer shall not be granted liberty 
or leave for the sole purpose of practicing. 

(3) Medical/Dental Corps officers shall not 



1-11 

Change 71 



1-23 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



1-24 



under any circumstances examine or treat their 
private patients in Medical Department facilities. 

(4) BUMED considers that the authority is in 
the commanding officer of the Medical/Dental 
Corps officer concerned to determine either that 
private practice interferes or does not interfere 
with the officer's performance of duty in the 
command. Professional liaison with local and na- 
tional medical/dental associations having to do 
with relationships between physicians/dentists 
who have status as officers of the Medical Depart- 
ment of the Navy and private practitioners is a 
matter of administrative and technical guidance 
by BUMED. 

(5) The responsibility for meeting local licen- 
sing requirements is a personal matter for Medi- 
cal/Dental Corps officers who wish to engage in 
private practice. 

(6) A physician/dentist in any private medi- 
cal/dental activity or practice who also is an 
officer of the Medical/Dental Corps on extended 
active duty shall not accept a fee, directly or 
indirectly, for care of a member, retired member, 
or dependent of such members, of the uniformed 
services entitled to medical care by the uni- 
formed services. Additionally, a fee may not be 
accepted, directly or indirectly, for the care of 
certain Veterans Administration beneficiaries 
who, under VA medical programs, are entitled to 
treatment by a licensed non- VA physician/ dentist 
on a fee-basis. 

1-23. Witness in Court 

(1) Appearance. — A Medical Department 
officer who appears in court as an expert witness 
in litigation arising out of his private practice 
shall so appear out of uniform, if possible, and 
shall establish carefully the character of both his 
appearance and testimony as being other than on 
behalf of the Navy. 

(2) Fees.— 

(a) A Medical Department officer appearing 
as a witness during "off-duty" hours for a party 
not eligible for medical care in military facilities 
may retain any fee within the Standards of 
Conduct prescribed by Department of Defense 
Directives. 

(b) A Medical Department officer who ap- 
pears privately and voluntarily as a witness on 
behalf of a member or other person generally 
eligible for care in naval medical facilities shall 
not accept a fee, directly or indirectly, except for 
actual transportation costs. 

(c) In cases where the interest of the Gov- 
ernment is not involved, a Medical Department 
officer who appears involuntarily as the physi- 
cian/dentist having firsthand knowledge of the 



case of a person eligible for care in a naval medi- 
cal/dental facility may accept any fee established 
by rule or statute and one who appears as an 
expert may accept any negotiated higher expert 
witness fee commensurate with professional local 
custom; however, such fee, beyond any actual 
expenses, shall be delivered to the disbursing of- 
ficer of his command for deposit to the Miscella- 
neous Receipt Account 173099, recoveries and re- 
funds, not otherwise classified. 

(d) Where a Medical Department officer ap- 
pears as a witness on behalf of the Government 
under Temporary Additional Duty Orders, he is 
compensated in accordance with Navy Travel In- 
structions, par. 6200 in conjunction with chapter 
4, part B; see also NAVCOMPT Manual, par. 
046278-1. He will not otherwise request or 
accept a witness fee. The foregoing applies to 
such cases as where a Government third party 
claim is attached to an independent suit filed by a 
member or other person eligible for care in a 
naval medical facility, the Government is a 
coclaimant at suit, or the Government is being 
sued under the Federal Tort Claims Act and the 
Medical Department officer is appearing as hav- 
ing firsthand knowledge of the case or as an 
expert witness, 

1-24. Civil Actions 

(1) Report. — If an officer of the Medical De- 
partment is apprised of any civil litigation or 
legal proceedings being brought against him 
wherein the United States is in legal effect the 
defendant, he shall immediately advise the com- 
manding officer so that a report can be made as 
set forth in the Manual of the Judge Advocate 
General. A copy of the report shall be submitted 
to BUMED. 

(2) Insurance. — The Navy Department does 
not recommend for or against insurance of indi- 
viduals by commercial insurers against neglig- 
ence which may occur in line of duty or scope of 
employment. 

(3) Witness in Court— See article 1-23. 

(4) Ambulances. — Navy ambulances and Navy 
ambulance drivers are susceptible to efforts or 
requests by local police officers or other persons 
for aid in cases of accidents or emergencies. Op- 
erators of ambulances, either members of the 
Hospital Corps or civil employees, should be 
thoroughly indoctrinated: 

(a) To adhere strictly to orders for picking 
up and transporting the patient for whom dis- 
patched. 

(b) To remain with vehicle and never to 
stop or to leave ambulance out of curiosity when 
halted by traffic conditions at the scene of an 



1-12 

Change 71 



1-25 



CHAPTER 1. MEDICAL DEPARTMENT 



1-25 



accident when the driver by reason of orders to 
pick up and carry a Navy patient is not in a 
position to offer the services of himself or the 
ambulance. 

(c) To recognize that the Medical Depart- 
ment is expected as a matter of policy to cooper- 
ate with local authorities in emergencies when 
this cooperation will not interfere with a Medi- 
cal Department operation, and that operators of 
Navy ambulances which are not carrying patients 
or proceeding under orders to pick up patients 
are expected to offer, in humanitarian emergency 
situations, such assistance as they are qualified to 
render. 

(d) In any case in which an ambulance car- 
rying a patient or proceeding under orders to 
pick up a patient is stopped or otherwise sub- 
jected to interference by State or other local au- 
thorities for any reason whatever, including aid 



to an emergency humanitarian patient: to give 
courteous information about current orders; to 
courteously request that compliance with these 
orders not be subjected to interference; and to 
report to the commanding officer, for transmittal 
by the commanding officer to the Judge Advocate 
General of the Navy, any measures applied by 
State or local authorities which prevent direct 
compliance with orders. 

1-25. Restrictions Relative to Prospective 
Applicants 

(1) Officers of the Medical/Dental Corps on 
active duty shall not undertake to operate upon 
or treat prospective applicants for the Navy or 
Marine Corps, Regular or Reserve, with a view 
to correcting defects, disqualifications, and disa- 
bilities barring them from enlistment or appoint- 
ment. 



1-13 

Change 71 




r— 

SO 

to 



• 




r 



o 



Chapter 2 

MEDICAL CORPS 



Sections 



Article. 

I. Medical Corps 2-1 through 2-4 

II. The Medical Officer and His Duties 2-10 through 2-23 

III. Assistant Medical Officers 2-30 through 2-31 

IV. General Duties of All Medical Corps Officers 2-40 through 2—47 

V. Surgery 2-60 through 2-63 

VI. Duties of the District Medical Officer 2-65 through 2-66 

VII. Medical Officer of a Shore (Field) Activity 2-70 through 2-79 

VIII. Staff Medical Officers, Operating Forces 2-80 through 2-88 

IX. The Medical Officer of a Ship 2-90 through 2-95 

X. Medical Department Duties in Emergencies Afloat 2-100 through 2-120 

XI. Flight Surgeons 2-130 through 2-133 

XII. Submarine Medical Officers 2-140 through 2-146 

XIII. Fleet Marine Force 2-150 



Section I. MEDICAL CORPS 

Article 

Number 2-1 

Grades 2—2 

Appointments 2-3 

Advancement in Grade 2—4 



mined shall be considered the authorized number 
of officers for the corps until a subsequent com- 
putation is made for the next year. This author- 
ized strength of the Medical Corps represents a 
maximum strength. The number actually on the 
active list and on active duty varies from year to 
year in accordance with the allocation of funds 
available in the annual appropriations acts for 
the Navy. This number on an annual basis con- 
stitutes the "appropriated strength." 

2-2. Grades 

(1) Section 405, Title IV, of the Act approved 
7 August 1947 (34 USC 10A) established for all 
staff corps grades above that of commissioned 
warrant officer similar to those established for the 
line of the Navy. Officers of the Medical Corps 
shall be distributed in various grades in that 
corps but the number of rear admirals in the 
Medical Corps shall not exceed five-tenths of one 



2-1. Number 

(1) Section 420, Title IV, of the Act of 7 
August 1947 (34 USC 3), provides that the total 
authorized number of commissioned officers of 
the Medical Corps shall be sixty-five one-hun- 
dredths of one per centum of the sum of the total 
authorized number of commissioned officers of 
the Navy and Marine Corps (exclusive of com- 
missioned warrant officers), the total authorized 
number of enlisted men of the Navy and Marine 
Corps, the total authorized number of midship- 
men at the Naval Academy, the actual number of 
commissioned warrant officers and warrant 
officers on the active list of the Navy and Marine 
Corps, and the actual number of midshipmen on 
active duty for flight training. The Act further 
requires that the Secretary of the Navy shall 
make computations to determine the authorized 
strength of the Medical Corps as of January 1 of 
each year and the number of officers so deter- 



2-1 
Change 71 



2-3 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



2-4 



per centum of the officers in that corps serving 
on active duty at any one time. 

2-3. Appointments 

(1) How Made. — Appointments as officers of 
the Medical Corps are made by the President by 
and with the advice and consent of the Senate 
except for the appointments of lieutenants (jun- 
ior grade) for temporary service (34 USC 11). 
In addition to the number of officers of the Medi- 
cal Corps of the Navy otherwise authorized, the 
President may appoint, without the advice and 
consent of the Senate, for temporary service in 
such corps, lieutenants (junior grade) who shall, 
while so serving, receive the pay and allowances 
prescribed by the law for that grade (34 USC 
21). 

(2) Regulations Governing. — 

(a) Applications for direct appointment in 
the Medical Corps of the Regular Navy or of the 
Naval Reserve from civilian physicians or mem- 
bers of the Inactive Reserve are submitted 
through the U.S. Navy Recruiting Service. Navy 
recruiting stations are located in most large cities 
in the United States. Prospective applicants in 
the 10th, 14th, I5th, and 17th Naval Districts 
may apply through the offices of the district com- 
mandants. 

(b) Applications for appointment in the 
Medical Corps of the Regular Navy from Reserve 
officers on active duty are submitted through the 
applicant's commanding officer in accordance 
with the BUPERS Manual or current BUPERS 
Instructions. 

(3) Acceptance and Oath of Office, — Every 



person, on accepting an appointment as an officer 
in the Medical Corps, shall immediately forward 
a letter of acceptance to the Chief of Naval Per- 
sonnel, together with the oath of office duly 
signed and certified. 

2-4. Advancement in Grade 

(1) Eligibility. — An officer in the Medical 
Corps shall become eligible for consideration by 
a selection board for promotion to the next 
higher grade when his running mate of the line 
becomes eligible for such selection, except that 
an officer in the grade of lieutenant (junior 
grade) or lieutenant shall not be eligible for 
such selection unless he is in the promotion zone 
in such grade or is senior to officers in the pro- 
motion zone in the grade in which he is serving. 

(2) Examinations Required. — Medical officers, 
to be eligible for promotion, must pass such pro- 
fessional, moral, mental, and physical examina- 
tion as the Secretary of the Navy may from time 
to time prescribe. Failure to pass the physical 
examination shall not exclude from promotion, 
to which he would otherwise be regularly enti- 
tled, any officer in whose case a board of medical 
examiners may report that he is not physically 
qualified for his duties at sea, but that such phys- 
ical disqualification was occasioned by wounds 
received in line of duty and does not incapacitate 
him for other duties- in the grade to which he 
shall be promoted. 

(3) Professional Examinations. — When profes- 
sional examinations for advancement in grade are 
prescribed by the Secretary of the Navy, the na- 
ture and scope of such examinations will be in 
accordance with current directives. 



2-2 

Change 71 



2-10 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-14 



Section II. THE MEDICAL OFFICER AND HIS DUTIES 



The Medical Officer 

General Responsibility 

Cate of the Sick and Injured 

Health Standards 

Physical Eitness of Personnel 

Directives 

Medical Journal 

Reports to the Officer of the Deck or Day 

Educational Measures 

Preparation for Emergency 



Cooperation With Other Agencies 

Health Conditions Abroad, MED 6200-3 — 

Compulsory Medical or Surgical Treatment 

Dental Treatment 

Medical Intelligence 

2-10. The Medical Officer 

(1) The head of the medical department of a 
command or other activity shall be the senior 
officer of the Medical Corps attached for duty 
and so assigned. He shall be designated the medi- 
cal officer. 

2-11. General Responsibility 

(1) The medical officer shall be responsible, 
under the commanding officer, for maintaining 
the health of the personnel of the command, 
making inspections incident thereto, and advis- 
ing the commanding officer with respect to hy- 
giene and sanitation affecting the command. He 
shall direct and administer the medical depart- 
ment and shall supervise the services of his sub- 
ordinates, requiring of them a proper and 
efficient performance of their duties. 

2-12. Care of the Sick and Injured 

(1) The medical officer shall provide for the 
sick and injured the most careful professional 
attention and care consistent with the highest 
standards of modern medicine. He shall make 
arrangements for the proper messing of patients, 
the proper stowage and safeguarding of patients' 
effects, and shall be attentive to the patients' 
well-being at all times. 

(2) He shall be responsible for the overall 
supervision of the treatment of patients and re- 
quire of all members of the medical department 
strict compliance with orders that are written for 
patients. He shall require that no deviation is 
made from orders given by an assistant medical 
officer in charge of a patient except in emer- 
gency, or by order of higher authority, or by 
order of another officer of the Medical Corps 
having temporary charge of the patient. 



10 Feb 75 



Article 
2-10 
2-11 
2-12 
2-13 
2-14 
2-15 
2-16 
2-17 
2-18 
2-19 
2-20 
2-21 
2-22 
2-23 
2i-24 



(3) He shall require that daily reports of * the 
sick be submitted in accordance with chapter 23. 

(4) In complicated cases, the medical officer 
shall provide for consultations with other officers 
of the Medical Corps of the Navy present con- 
cerning diagnosis, treatment, and patient man- 
agement. 

2-13. Health Standards 

(1) The responsibility of the medical officer in 
matters of health extends into fields under the 
cognizance of other departments. Nutritional ad- 
equacy; food; food handling; food preparation; 
lighting; heating; ventilation; air conditioning; 
housing; insect, pest, and rodent control; water 
supply; and waste disposal all have a direct bear- 
ing on the health of naval personnel. The medi- 
cal officer, because of his special qualifications, 
must assume the initiative in maintaining health 
standards in these spheres. The medical officer 
must assure adequate provision, including spaces, 
for the care of the sick. His responsibility in 
preventive medicine is discussed in chapter 22, 

(2) The medical officer shall recommend to 
the commanding officer that drugs, devices, and 
other medical items not be sold in Navy or Ma- 
rine Corps exchanges or ship's stores when con- 
sidered to be medically susceptible to inappro- 
priate uses. In case medical suitability is in doubt 
or in controversy, the facts should be referred to 
the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery via the 
Navy Ship's Store Office and the Naval Supply 
Systems Command or the Commandant of the 
Marine Corps, as appropriate, for decision and 
appropriate action. 

2-14. Physical Fitness of Personnel 

(1) The medical officer shall make appropriate 
recommendations to the proper authority for the 

2-3 

Change 83 



2-15 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



2-21 



promotion of health and the physical fitness of per- 
sonnel. The physical and mental benefits derived 
from athletics, recreational, and other measures to 
improve or maintain a satisfactory state of physical 
fitness should be emphasized. 

(2) The medical officer shall, with the approval of 
the commanding officer, conduct or direct examina- 
tion of personnel of the command whenever there is 
reason to believe that diseases are being concealed. 
During such examinations the physical condition 
and personal hygiene of personnel shall be observed. 

2-15. Directives 

(1) The medical officer, subject to the orders of 
the commanding officer, shall prepare and maintain 
the necessary directives for the organization and 
operation of the medical department. 

(2) Medical centers and hospitals shall send to 
BUMED (Code 72) one copy of each directive issued. 

2-16. Medical Journal 

(1) Each medical activity or facility shall maintain 
a journal in which shall be entered a complete, con- 
cise, chronological record of events of importance, 
or which may be of historical value, concerning the 
Medical Department, other than medical histories of 
individuals. 

2-17. Reports to the Officer of the Deck or Day 

(1) Injuries or death of personnel, damage, de- 
struction or loss of Medical Department property, 
and any important occurrence shall be reported by 
the medical officer to the officer of the deck or other 
proper official for entry in the log or journal of the 
command or activity. 

(2) Patients in a serious or very serious condition 
shall be the subject of a report to the commanding 
officer or officer of the deck or day, together with the 
necessary information for the notification of next of 
kin. 

2-18. Educational Measures 

( 1) The medical officer, with the approval of the 
appropriate authority, shall conduct health educa- 
tional programs, including the dissemination of in- 
formation regarding the prevention of diseases and 
other subjects pertaining to hygiene and sanitation. 

(2) The medical officer shall supervise the in- 
struction of personnel regarding venereal diseases, 



and advise them of the associated dangers. Informa- 
tion which is distributed by the Bureau relative to 
social hygiene shall be utilized. 

(3) The medical officer, with the approval of the 
appropriate authority, shall conduct a program of 
first aid instruction for officers and men attached to 
the command which will insure knowledge and abil- 
ity in the principles of first aid. 

(4) The medical officer shall provide for the in- 
struction of hospital corpsmen as set forth in the 
Hospital Corps chapter. 

(5) The medical officer shall make provisions for 
the indoctrination of personnel under his charge in 
Navy and Medical Department regulations and ad- 
ministrative procedures. 

2-19. Preparation for Emergency 

(1) The medical officer shall insure that the medi- 
cal department is at all times prepared to meet medi- 
cal emergencies. 

2-20. Cooperation With Other Agencies 

(1) The medical officer shall cooperate with the 
Public Health Service and other Federal, State, and 
local agencies for the collection of vital statistics, and 
for the prevention of disease and the reporting of 
communicable diseases in accordance with articles 
22-17 through 22-20. 

(2) The regional health directors in each of the 
Public Health Service regional areas will cooperate 
with naval authorities for the purpose of safeguard- 
ing the health of military personnel in extramilitary 
areas and may, if desired, act as the liaison between 
the naval activity and the State or local health agen- 
cies to facilitate the solution of community health 
problems of interest to the Medical Department of 
the Navy. 

2-21. Health Conditions Aboard, MED 6200-3 

(1) The medical officer (or Medical Department 
representative, if no medical officer be assigned) 
shall prepare a report in the following format con- 
taining information about health conditions in all 
areas visited outside the 50 United States except for 
established U.S. military bases. This report is dis- 
tinct from any requirements of article 2-24 and will 
normally be unclassified. The reporting require- 
ment is assigned report symbol MED 6200-3 and has 
been approved by the Chief of Naval Operations. 



2-4 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



2-22 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-23 



From: Medical Officer, (Ship or Station) 

To: Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery (Code 55) 

Via: Commanding Officer 

Subj: Health Conditions Abroad, MED 6200-3 

Ref: (a) MANMED art. 2-21 

1. Name of city, town, or political area. 

2. Location and popultion. 

3. General description of topography of town and surrounding 
country. 

4. Communicable diseases. 

5. Epidemic diseases. 

6. Endemic diseases. 

7. Venereal diseases incidence and available information con- 
cerning the prevalence and status of prostitution. 

8. Temperature: average day , average night , 

yearly maximum , yearly minimum 

9. Prevailing winds. 

10. Prevalence of mosquitoes, flies, and other insects. 

11. Rainfall. 

1 2. Drainage. 

13. Sewerage. 

14. Height above sea level. 

1 5. Camping sites. 

16. Water supply: quantity, quality, method of collection, 
methods of purification. 

17. Food and alcoholic beverages: character; sanitary conditions 
of hotels, restaurants, etc. 

18. Availability of surgical and medical supplies. 

19. Structures suitable for emergency hospitals and clinics. 

20. Health laws and regulations. 

21. Quarantine regulations. 

22. Local laws and regulations regarding disinterment. 

23. Facilities for decedent affairs, including cremation. 

24. Disaster relief medical facilities, including those for civil 
defense. 

25. Ambulance and medical evacuation services in entire area. 

26. Tourist or other maps of area showing location of all facilities 
reported. 

27. Medical, dental, veterinary, nursing, pharmacy and other 
medical-science schools, both civilian and military. 

28. Medical-research facilities. 

29. Medical-supply warehouses and depots. 

30. Blood, plasma, and tissue banks. 

31. Availability of blood and plasma substitutes. 

32. Availability of vaccines, anti venoms, and other biological 
products. 

33- Names of all persons contacted and key medical personalities 
and their specialties. 

34. General nutritional state and dietary characteristics of the 
working population. 

35. Remarks. 



2-22, Compulsory Medical or Surgical Treatment 

(1) By authority delegated by the Secretary of the 
Navy, and with the approval of the commanding 
officer, the senior medical or dental officer, as ap- 
propriate, of a ship or station, after consultation 
with other medical or dental officers if available, 
shall, where in his judgment the best interests of 
the individual or of the service require, take the 
following measures with or without the consent of 
the individual concerned: 

(a) Emergency care required to preserve the life 
or health of the member. 

(b) Care necessary to protect the life or health of 
a member who is considered by a psychiatrist to be 
mentally incompetent. 



(c) Routine treatment for minor or temporary 
disabilities.- 

(d) Isolation and quarantine for cases of sus- 
pected or proved communicable disease where med- 
ically indicated or required by law. 

(e) Detention on closed wards where necessary 
to insure proper treatment or to protect the member 
or others from harmful acts. 

(2) Reference should be made to article 18-15 for 
guidance concerning the disposition of naval per- 
sonnel who refuse medical, surgical, dental, or re- 
lated diagnostic measures. 

2-23. Dental Treatment 

(1) Except in an emergency, the medical officer of 
a command or activity having no officer of the Den- 
tal Corps attached shall make an appointment in 
advance when it becomes necessary to send patients 
elsewhere for dental services. 

(2) When the medical officer sends a patient to 
another command or activity for dental services, he 
shall make the patient's Dental Record available to 
the dental officer of such commandor activity. After 
the necessary entries have been made, the dental 
officer shall return the Dental Record to the person 
having custody of the Health Record. 

(3) The medical officer shall notify the dental of- 
ficer whenever a person suffering from syphilis or 
any other disease in a communicable stage is sent to 
him for dental treatment. 

(4) When officers or enlisted personnel are or- 
dered to a command or activity where the services of 
an officer of the Dental Corps are not available, the 
medical officer shall refer such persons to an officer 
of the Dental Corps for examination and treatment 
prior to their departure. 

(5) The medical officer shall be guided by the 
recommendations of the dental officer concerning 
discharge or granting of liberty to dental patients on 
the sicklist. 

(6) When the Health Record of an individual has 
been lost, the medical officer shall request the dental 
officer to prepare a new Dental Record. 

(7) The medical officer of a command or activity 
having a dental department shall send to the dental 
department the Dental Records of officers and en- 
listed personnel who arrive for duty or training. 

(8) The medical officer, or other person who has 
custody of the Health Record, shall be responsible 
for the inclusion of a current Dental Record when 
the Health Record is transferred. 

(9) When officers of the Medical Corps record 
dental examinations on Dental Records or other 
forms, in the absence of officers of the Dental Corps, 
they shall be guided by the instructions contained on 
the Dental Record in chapter 6, section XV. When 
recording dental examinations on Standard Form 
88, they shall be guided by instructions contained 
thereon. 



10 Feb 75 



2-5 

Change 83 



2-24 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



2-24. Medical Intelligence 

(1) The medical officer of a command or activity, 
particularly if in a foreign port, shall cooperate with 
the U.S. intelligence officers and furnish them such 
data as may be required from a medical standpoint. 



2-24 



(2) When at foreign stations or when cruising in 
waters outside of the United States, medical officers 
shall contact U. S. naval attaches in foreign countries 
and Naval Intelligence Command officers in U.S. 
territories in advance for breifing with regard to 
medically-relevant intelligence in the area or areas to 
be visited. 



2-6 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



2-30 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-31 



Section III. ASSISTANT MEDICAL OFFICERS 



Assistant Medical Officers 

Duties of Assistant Medical Officers 

2-30. Assistant Medical Officers 

(1) Assistant medical officers are those officers 
of the Medical Corps assigned to the command or 
activity for duty who serve as assistants to the 
medical officer. In the absence of the medical 
officer, the next senior officer of the Medical 
Corps shall, with the approval of the command- 
ing officer, assume this duty temporarily. 

2-31. Duties of Assistant Medical Officers 

(1) Assistant officers of the Medical Corps 
shall perform those duties assigned them by the 
medical officer of the command or activity. They 
shall conform to the directions of the medical 
officer with regard to the professional treatment, 
care, and comfort of the sick and injured, and 
shall exact from those serving under their super- 
vision a similar performance of duty. 



Article 

2-30 

; 2-31 

(2) They shall assure themselves that the treat- 
ments prescribed for patients are properly admin- 
istered by members of the Medical Service Corps, 
Nurse Corps, and Hospital Corps, and that the 
administration of such treatment is recorded in 
writing. 

(3) They shall keep the medical officer fully 
informed as to the condition of all patients and 
shall frequently consult with him in regard to 
their professional treatment. 

(4) They shall, subject to the direction of the 
medical officer, keep the Health Records and su- 
pervise the preparation of the reports and re- 
turns. 

(5) They shall, in applying for permission to 
be absent from their duties, submit such applica- 
tion to the medical officer for his action or re- 
commendation. 



2-7 

Change 71 



( 



2-40 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-47 



Section IV. GENERAL DUTIES OF ALL MEDICAL OFFICERS 



General Responsibility 

Articles on Professional Subjects 

Physical Examinations 

Transfer of Patients 

Unofficial Certificates 

Misconduct Entries 

Treatment of NBC Warfare Casualties 

Medical Aid to Civilians __ 

2-40. General Responsibility 

(1) All officers of the Medical Corps are 
charged with responsibility for the treatment of 
sick and injured personnel, for prevention and 
control of disease, for promotion of health, and 
for giving advice on such matters as hygiene, 
sanitation, and safety. Every officer of the Medi- 
cal Corps must, therefore, keep himself informed 
in all fields of general and naval medicine. 

2-41. Articles on Professional Subjects 

(1) Medical Corps officers shall be guided by 
Navy Regulations in the preparation and publi- 
cation of articles on professional subjects. 

2—42. Physical Examinations 

(1) Officers of the Medical Corps shall conduct 
physical examinations of persons in the naval 
service and of candidates for enlistment or ap- 
pointment therein. The dental examination shall 
be conducted by officers of the Dental Corps if 
available. Complete instructions concerning phys- 
ical examinations are contained in chapter 15. 

(2) Commanding officers are allowed discre- 
tionary authority to permit officers of the Medi- 
cal Corps to conduct physical examinations of 
naval personnel for the purpose of obtaining 
commercial life insurance in cases where a doctor 
in the employ of the insurance company is not 
available and where delay would be detrimental 
to the interests of the applicant. 

2-43. Transfer of Patients 

(1) Sick or injured persons may be recom- 
mended for transfer to an Armed Forces medical 
facility capable of providing the required care 
and disposition. (See art. 11-50 and chs. 12 and 
18 for further information on transfer of pa- 
tients.) 

(2) In the absence of Armed Forces medical 
facilities, the facilities of other agencies or civil- 



Article 

2-40 
2-41 
2-42 
2-43 
2-44 
2-45 
2-46 
2-47 



ian sources may be utilized in accordance with 
the BUMEDINST 6320.32 series. 

2-44. Unofficial Certificates 

(1) Officers of the Medical Corps shall not 
give an unofficial certificate of ill health or of 
inability to perform duty, except that requests 
for certificates from persons in the Naval Estab- 
lishment to enable them to receive compensation 
from lodges, benevolent societies, and the ship- 
yard relief associations may be granted unoffi- 
cially in conformance with the instruction appli- 
cable to transcripts of Health Records (sec. Ill, 
ch. 23). 

2-45. Misconduct Entries 

(1) Medical Corps officers making entries in 
Health Records or medical board reports shall 
state whether the disease or injury was or was 
not in line of duty and was or was not due to 
own misconduct. (See MANMED chs. 16 and 18 
and JAG Manual chs. VII and VIII for detailed 
information.) 

2-46. Treatment of NBC Warfare Casualties 

(1) Officers of the Medical Corps shall keep 
informed of the proper methods for the treat- 
ment of casualties which may result from nu- 
clear, biological, or chemical warfare, so that 
they will be prepared to act in such emergencies. 

2-47. Medical Aid to Civilians 

(1) The senior officer present may require of- 
ficers of the Medical Department under his au- 
thority to render aid to persons not in the naval 
service, when such aid is necessary and demanded 
by the laws of humanity or the principles of 
international courtesy. 

(2) The services to be rendered to civilian 
employees and other persons eligible for care at 
naval medical facilities are given in chapter 15 
and BUMEDINST 632031 series. 



2-9 

Change 71 




c 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-61 



Section V. SURGERY 



At Other Than General Hospitals 

Elective Surgery for Preexisting Defects 

Heterotopia 

Specialized Hospitals _ . 

2-60. At Other Than General Hospitals 

(1) Application and Purpose. — This article re- 
lates to the performance of surgery aboard ships 
(except hospital ships) or at facilities other than 
hospitals under BUMED command and compara- 
ble military general hospitals. Its purpose is to 
emphasize the absolute necessity of carefully 
weighing all pertinent factors incident to the 
performance of surgery so as to avoid misadven- 
ture due to lack of appropriate facilities or per- 
sonnel. 

(2) Discussion. — BUMED does not intend to 
prohibit the performance of minor surgery, or of 
emergency surgery where the delay incident to 
transfer of the patient would introduce a dispro- 
portionate risk and where a safe and reasonable 
capability exists. It does require, however, that 
surgical endeavor be consistent with the highest 
standards of practice. The minimum standards 
that apply under emergency circumstances are 
not acceptable when the proposed surgery is elec- 
tive. The possibility of misadventure is greatly 
increased when difficulties with exposure, anes- 
thesia, blood availability, and inexperienced as- 
sistants become superimposed. 

(3) Evaluation Factors. — Rigid rules are not 
possible in view of the many variable factors 
such as the training of available personnel, facil- 
ity staffing, ship or facility size and equipment, 
and military operations. Reliance necessarily 
must rest upon careful evaluation of a number of 
factors in each instance such as: 

(a) Training and experience of the medical 
officers to perform the proposed procedure, 

(b) Number, technical training, and relia- 
bility of the hospital corpsmen to prepare and 
assist. 

(c) Availability of anesthesia, and of alter- 
nate anesthesia should the primary method fail. 

(d) Necessary laboratory support. 

(e) Adequate postoperative care in a proper 
environment. 

(f) Availability of oxygen, blood, and other 
supportive measures. 

(g) Proper equipment and instruments. 

(h) Availability of 24-hour pathologic serv- 
ices. 

(4) Action. — Medical officers are directed, 
whenever surgical procedures are contemplated, 



Article 

2-60 

2-61 

2-62 

2-63 

to carefully evaluate the aforementioned factors 
and to use the following guidelines. 

(a) Usually it is not advisable to perform 
other than simple minor procedures aboard ship 
while in port. 

(b) Medical officers of remote stations, and 
those of ships at sea, should consult with their 
commanding officers in order that patterns of 
evacuation of patients can be visualized and im- 
plemented as indicated. Whenever surgery can be 
accomplished with more safety and with better 
chances of success at a military general hospital 
such patterns of evacuation should be utilized. 

(c) Within dispensaries, elective surgical 
procedures should be performed only by trained 
surgeons in the presence of proven anesthesia, 
operating room, nursing, pathology, clinical lab- 
oratory, and blood bank capabilities. 

(d) Patients requiring elective gastrectom- 
ies, elective thoracotomies, other procedures of 
comparable magnitude, and operations involving 
the likelihood of malignancy should be trans- 
ferred, under usual circumstances, to a naval or 
other appropriate general hospital. 

(e) In all cases where surgery is performed 
aboard ship or in other isolated areas, the medi- 
cal officer should be thoroughly familiar with 
potential emergencies and be prepared to effec- 
tively deal with them. This involves not only 
technical skill but mature judgment and having 
at hand the necessary drugs and equipment 
needed in an emergency. 

2-61. Elective Surgery for Preexisting Defects 

(1) Background. — It has come to the attention 
of BUMED that, on past occasions, major elective 
surgical procedures were undertaken for defects 
that existed prior to entrance into the service 
(EPTE) where the likelihood of return to full 
duty was questionable. In addition, such cases 
often have resulted in long periods on the sicklist 
with subsequent periods of limited duty, outpa- 
tient care, and observation, and have rendered 
the Government liable for benefits by reason of 
aggravation of these defects. 

(2) Criteria. — The following conditions 
should be met before attempting surgical correc- 
tion of an EPTE defect: 



2-11 
Change 71 



2-62 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



2-63 



(a) It interferes with the member's func- 
tional ability to perform duty. 

(b) The surgical procedure being consid- 
ered is an accepted one, carries a minimal risk to 
life, and is not likely to result in complications. 

(c) There should be a 90 percent chance 
that the procedure will correct the defect and 
restore the member to full duty within a reasona- 
ble time without residual disability. 

If the defect does not meet the above conditions 
and the member is, in fact, unfit to perform the 
duties of his grade or rate, action should be initi- 
ated to separate the member from the service. 

(3) Discussion. — The foregoing is not meant 
to apply to surgical correction of preexisting de- 
fects where necessary to save life or limb or pre- 
vent undue suffering. It is, unfortunately, not 
possible to establish inflexible guidelines and all 
factors must be carefully evaluated before a deci- 
sion is reached. In the final analysis, whether 
surgery should be undertaken in any particular 
case is a command decision and should be de- 
cided in the light of the guidelines established 
above. In questionable cases, the member may be 
referred to a medical board with submission of 
the board's report to BUMED for final decision 
prior to undertaking elective treatment for an 
EPTE defect. 

2-62. Heterotopia 

(1) Asymptomatic Cases. — 

(a) Discussion. — Adults, unlike children, 
find it difficult or impossible to acquire the abil- 
ity to suppress images falling on a sensitive but 
disparate area of the retina. Many adults with 



heterotropia have never acquired adequate fusion 
but do not have diplopia because they learned in 
childhood to suppress the disparate image. How- 
ever, if the established balance of reciprocal in- 
nervation of the extra-ocular muscles in such 
adults is upset by surgery, diplopia results be- 
cause the patient is neither able to fuse nor to 
learn to suppress the image falling on the new 
disparate area of the retina. Patients with ambly- 
opia exanopsia and visual acuity less than 20/200 
usually do not develop such a postoperative di- 
plopia since binocular diplopia is dependent 
upon useful vision in each eye. 

(b) Cosmetic Surgery Prohibited. — In view 
of the foregoing, cosmetic ophthalmic surgery on 
the extra-ocular muscles shall not be done in the 
case of members presenting heterotropia of long 
duration unless there is a permanent amblyopia 
exanopsia with visual acuity less than 20/200 in 
one eye. Visual acuity in the poorer eye shall be 
determined after prolonged, complete, and con- 
tinuous occlusion of the contralateral eye. 

(2) Symptomatic Cases. — The above is not intended 
to interdict surgical treatment of symptomatic hetero- 
tropia (e.g., cases accompanied by diplopia) when re- 
sulting from service-incurred injury or in an excep- 
tional case when authorized, in writing, by a senior 
Navy Medical Corps officer who is board certified in 
ophthalmology. 

2—63. Specialized Hospitals 

(1) Article 12-1 contains information on the 
hospitals designated to provide specialty types of 
surgery. 



2-12 

Change 73 



2-65 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 
Section VI. DUTIES OF THE DISTRICT MEDICAL OFFICER 



2-66 



Designation 

Duties 

2-65. Designation 

(1) The senior officer of the Medical Corps 
assigned to the staff of a commandant of a naval 
district shall be designated the district medical 
officer. 

2-66. Duties 

(1) The district medical officer has among 
those assigned him by the commandant the fol- 
lowing duties: 

(a) To act as liaison officer for the comman- 
dant with BUMED and with the medical officer 
of each medical activity in the district on all 
medical matters under both the direct area coor- 
dination responsibility of the commandant and 
the immediate area coordination responsibility of 
other military commanders within the naval dis- 
trict. 

<b) To keep the commandant and other 
cognizant military commanders informed of all 
recommendations or plans for establishment, dis- 
establishment, or modification of naval medical 
facilities within the district, whether originated 
locally or received from sources outside the dis- 
trict. 

(c) To participate in the formulation of the 
medical aspects of matters pertaining to opera- 
tional, logistical, and mobilization plans. 

(d) To advise and assist the commandant in 
coordinating medical activities of the district, ad- 
jacent districts, and with other Federal and local 
medical agencies. Also, to act as liasion officer for 
the commandant with civilian and public health 
authorities, 

(e) To inspect when directed, and report on 
the stock levels of medical materials maintained 
in the medical activities of the district and to 
consult with the cognizant military commanders 
and the commandant relative thereto, to insure 
the supplies and equipment are in accordance 
with the current strategic situation and with the 
stock levels prescribed by competent authority. 

(f) To advise and recommend to the cogni- 
zant military commanders and the commandant 
with respect to the adequacy and assignment of 
civilian and military personnel allowances of 
medical activities in the district, and to make 
recommendations concerning deficiencies or ex- 
cesses. 

(g) To coordinate and insure expeditious 



Article 

2-65 

2-66 

medical services by medical activities within the 
district to the operating forces both ashore and 
afloat, particularly with respect to hospitaliza- 
tion, ambulance service, examination, and treat- 
ment. 

(h) To conduct inspections of medical activ- 
ities and facilities as directed by the comman- 
dant; to make reports of these inspections; to 
continuously keep the military commanders and 
the commandant informed concerning sanitary 
conditions and prevalence of diseases; and to 
make recommendations to insure adequate train- 
ing or other programs essential to the mainte- 
nance of sanitary standards and health within the 
district. 

(i) To formulate and maintain plans for the 
coordination of medical relief and to prepare 
contributory plans in accordance with the com- 
mandant's plans for the district in times of emer- 
gency or disaster. 

(j) In conjunction with the assistant chief 
of staff for personnel, to maintain a roster of all 
medical department personnel in the district, in- 
cluding those of the Naval Reserve. 

(k) To direct and supervise the administra- 
tion of the Naval Reserve in all matters affecting 
the procurement, maintenance, and training of 
medical personnel. 

(1) To advise the commandant concerning 
communications pertaining to medical activities 
forwarded to or through the commandant. 

(m) To administer the decedent affairs pro- 
gram (current-dead phase) under the provisions 
of BUMEDINST 5360.1 series and coordinate the 
program with the other uniformed services; adju- 
dicate bills and claims for noncontract primary 
services and for secondary services when remains 
are interred within the district. 

(n) To coordinate the blood program for 
the district under the provision of BUMEDINST 
6530.1 series. 

(o) To administer and coordinate the pro- 
gram for non-Federal medical treatment for 
active duty personnel by maintaining cognizance 
of naval members hospitalized in nonnaval medi- 
cal facilities and arranging for evacuation and/or 
transfer to naval medical facilities when medi- 
cally feasible. Further, to review and adjudicate 
claims incident to hospitalization and treatment 
of naval members in non-Federal medical facili- 
ties in the district and prepare vouchers to au- 



2-13 

Change 71 



2-66 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



2-66 



thorize payments by the Navy Regional Finance 
Center. 

(p) To coordinate and provide services of 
mobile photofluorographic unit (when applica- 
ble) to vessels of the operating forces and shore 
(field) activities within the assigned area. 

(q) To coordinate and provide medical ex- 
amining teams, as required, to conduct annual 



physical examinations of NROTC students and 
precommissioning examination of graduating 
NROTC students at universities within the dis- 
trict. 

(r) To maintain cognizance of the physical 
evaluation board in accordance with existing 
laws and directives. 



2-14 

Change 71 



2-70 



Title 

General Responsibilities 

Complement of Medical Department 

Care of Dependents 

Examination of Applicants, Candidates, and Reservists _ 

Inspection of Medical Supplies 

Suggestions to Commandant ._ — — 

Fitness Reports on Subordinates _ 

Muster and Discipline of Enlisted Personnel 

Inspection of Ships 

2-70. Title 

(1) The officer of the Medical Corps detailed 
for duty as the head of the medical department 
of a shore (field) activity shall be designated the 
medical officer. 

2-71. General Responsibilities 

(1) The medical officer of a shore (field) 
activity shall be responsible, under the command- 
ing officer, for the preservation of the health of 
personnel assigned thereto and for the care of the 
sick and injured. He shall supervise the hygiene 
and sanitation of the activity and shall recom- 
mend measures to prevent or diminish disease or 
injuries. 

(2) He shall inspect or cause to be inspected 
periodically, and monthly shall note in the jour- 
nal the sanitary condition of all public buildings, 
the drainage, the sewerage, the adequacy and 
quality of the water supply, the clothing of the 
men, the nutritional value of the ration, food 
preservation, cooking, and food service, and 
make such recommendations to the commanding 
officer as he may deem proper for the preserva- 
tion of health. He shall immediately notify the 
commandant or commanding officer in writing of 
any hygienic or sanitary hazard existing in areas 
adjacent to the activity which in his opinion 
bears adversely on the health of the personnel of 
the activity. 

2—72. Complement of Medical Department 

(1) Whenever circumstances indicate that the 
complement or allowance of medical department 
personnel should be modified, the medical officer 
shall submit a request for modification, with jus- 
tification, to the commandant or commanding of- 
ficer. 

2—73. Care of Dependents 

(1) The medical officer shall provide author- 
ized medical care for dependents in those activi- 
ties which have suitable facilities, including nec- 
essary personnel, and which have been designated 
by BUMED to provide inpatient and/or outpa- 
tient medical care for dependents. Service shall 



2-79 



Article 

2-70 
2-71 
2-72 
2-73 
2-74 
2-75 
2-76 
2-77 
2-78 
2-79 



be limited to eligible dependents as authorized 
by current directives. (For further information, 
see BUMEDINST 6320.31 series.) 

2-74. Examination of Applicants, Candidates, 
and Reservists 

(1) The medical officer shall examine at the 
activity all candidates for appointment or enlist- 
ment in the Navy or Marine Corps, or the Re- 
serve components thereof, who may present 
themselves under proper authority, and all mem- 
bers of the Naval Reserve or Marine Corps Re- 
serve who appear for physical examination for 
any purpose and present orders or letters from 
proper authority directing or requesting that the 
reservist undergo physical examination. 

2-75. Inspection of Medical Supplies 

(1) The medical officer shall inspect medicines 
and other medical department supplies, or re- 
quire an assistant medical officer or a Medical 
Service Corps officer under his direction to do so. 

2-76. Suggestions to Commandant 

(1) The medical officer shall make to the com- 
mandant or commanding officer such suggestions 
in connection with his official duties as he consid- 
ers to be in the interest of the service. 

2-77. Fitness Reports on Subordinates 

(1) The medical officer shall report to the 
commanding officer on the fitness of his subordi- 
nate officers of the medical department for the 
commanding officer's use in making fitness re- 
ports. 

2-78. Muster and Discipline of Enlisted 
Personnel 

(1) The medical officer shall be responsible 
for the muster and the maintenance of discipline 
of personnel within his department. 

2-79. Inspection of Ships 

(1) The medical officer shall, or require his 
subordinates to do so, when directed, inspect 
ships going into commission to determine the 
adequacy of medical commissioning allowances 
of equipment and supplies. 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 
Section VII. MEDICAL OFFICER OF A SHORE (FIELD) ACTIVITY 



2-15 
Change 71 



< 



2-80 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 
Section VIII. STAFF MEDK <f OFFICERS, OPERATING FORCES 



2-83 



Artieh 

Definition 2-80 

Staffs to Which Assigned 2-81 

Duties 2-82 

Outline of General Inspection 2-83 

Special Inspections 2-84 

Inspection Report 2-85 

Planning 2-86 

Information on Epidemics, Etc. 2—87 

Medical Meetings 2-88 



2-80. Definition 

(1) A staff medical officer is the medical mem- 
ber of a group of officers assigned to a com- 
mander to assist him in the administration and 
ration of the command, and as such is respon- 



sible for advising the commander and other 
members of the staff on all medical matters with 
a view to maintaining the health and efficiency 
of the command at the highest possible level. 

2-81. Staffs to Which Assigned 

(1) Medical officers may be assigned, on a 
full- or part-time basis, to the staffs of the follow- 
ing; 

(a) Commanders of unified commands. 

(b) Commanders of specified commands. 

(c) Commanders in chief of fleets. 

(d) Task force commanders. 

(e) Numbered fleet commanders. 

(f) Type commanders. 

(g) Squadron and division commanders. 

2-82. Duties 

(1) Staff medical officers are responsible for 
the performance of those duties assigned them by 
the commander. Specific duties vary with the 
mission of the command to which assigned, but 
generally include the following: 

(a) Advising the commander on health of 
and care for the sick and injured personnel of his 
command. 

(b) Exercising technical supervision over 
medical personnel and medical facilities of the 
command. 

(c) Exercising cognizance over and taking 
appropriate action in connection with medical 
supply activities with a view to promoting econ- 
omy and preventing waste or unauthorized ex- 
penditure. 

(d) Effecting liaison with shore based armed 
services facilities rendering medical support to 
personnel of the command. 



(e) Providing professional advice regarding 
the management of medical emergencies at sea. 

(f) Inspecting ships and shore (field) activ- 
ities of the command when directed by the com- 
mander. 

(g) Collaborating with the staff dental 
officer in the preparation of medical and dental 
annexes to OPORDERS and OPLANS. 

(h) Advising the staff personnel officer re- 
garding the requirements for and the assignment 
of medical department personnel. 

(i) Collaborating with the assistant chief of 
staff for logistics or his representative in prepar- 
ing the medical section of logistics plans. 

(j) Establishing and coordinating overall 
preventive medicine policies, plans, and program. 

(k) Recommending evacuation policies and 
priorities. 

(1) Establishing medical training policies. 

(m) Planning and supervising the medical 
portions of "exercises." 

(n) Advising on such matters of medical 
intelligence as may influence command opera- 
tion. 

(o) Providing professional advice in connec- 
tion with nuclear, biological, and chemical 
(NBC) warfare defense plans. 

(p) Formulating and supervising command 
wholeblood programs. 

(q) Preparing directives for the administra- 
tion and execution of medical programs and poli- 
cies of command. 

(2) Duties of the unified command surgeon 
are included in Medical Service in Joint Oversea 
Operation, NAVMED P-5047. 

2-83. Outline of General Inspection 

(1) Items of Inquiry. — When it is practicable 
to make a general inspection, inquiry should be 
made into the following: 

2-17 
Change 71 



2-84 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



2-86 



(a) Personnel of the Medical Department. 
— Number of officers of the Medical Corps, Medi- 
cal Service Corps, and Nurse Corps, and enlisted 
personnel of the Hospital Corps detailed for duty 
with the medical department of the ship; 
efficiency of the organization; number of other 
ratings detailed for duty in the medical depart- 
ment; and the instruction given to hospital corps- 
men, stretcher bearers, and other personnel of the 
ship in their duties pertaining to the medical 
department. 

(b) Materiel of the Medical Department. — 
Location, arrangements, cleanliness, and equip- 
ment of the medical spaces; provisions for the 
use of medical materiel in emergencies including 
sterile packs, the antidote locker, first aid kits, 
high-line stretcher and location of semirigid 
stretchers, and NBC warfare defense materials; 
and defects in supplies and equipment. 

(c) Location and Design Layout of the Med- 
ical Department. — Appropriateness of the loca- 
tion for effective medical coverage; sufficiency of 
the spaces and functions within the medical de- 
partment to accomplish wartime tasks, and the 
efficiency of the design layout; and compliance 
with current standards concerning safety hazards 
such as static conducting covering for operating 
room decks and lead shielding for X-ray rooms. 

(d) Medical Records and Reports. — Health 
Record files for determining if records are main- 
tained as required, including records of immuni- 
zation and radiation exposures; prescription file, 
narcotic record, Medical- Department property 
journal and records; methods of stock keeping 
and issue, with due regard for economy; disposi- 
tion of overage records; general correspondence 
and files; and safety regulations. 

(e) Sanitary Conditions of the Ship. — Clean- 
liness of the ship as a whole; ventilation, heating, 
and lighting; food inspection, preparation, and 
service to the crew and to the sick; physical ex- 
amination of food handlers; bathing facilities; 
educational measures for prevention of venereal 
and other diseases; supply and protection of 
drinking water; ratio of sanitary fixtures to per- 
sonnel; the cleanliness and suitability of the 
crew's clothing; sanitary precautions used in the 
barber shop and ship's store; measures taken to 
prevent rat and insect infestation aboard ship, 
and measures to destroy them if present; facilities 
for sterilization of bedding, and similar material; 
sanitary condition of the laundry; and evidence 
of overcrowding of personnel. Standards in chap- 
ter 22 and in the Manual of Naval Preventive 
Medicine shall be used as a guide in making 
inspections of the sanitary conditions of ships. 



(i) Other Items.— First aid supplies at battle 
stations; watch, quarter, and station bills for gen- 
eral quarters, damage control, NBC defense, 
flight quarters, fire quarters, collision, fire and 
rescue party, abandon ship, man overboard, tak- 
ing aboard and handling rescued personnel, and 
landing force problems; provisions for removal 
of dead and wounded from various parts of the 
ship; care of the mental patients; statements of 
health conditions for preceding 12 months; in- 
structions relative to poisons (including pesti- 
cides) and distilled spirits; instructions in first 
aid to division officers and crews; and property 
accountability, 

(2) Recommendations.— 'When defects within 
the medical department or in the sanitary condi- 
tions of the ship are found, the inspecting officer 
shall make recommendations to the commander 
for their correction. He shall make recommenda- 
tions to BUMED, via official channels, for 
changes in medical department location and de- 
sign layout, and for changes in equipment and 
supplies, particularly in regard to those items in 
which the prescribed minimum stock is out of 
proportion to the general current rate of use, and 
to the elimination of items which have fallen 
into disuse. The staff medical officer shall recom- 
mend to the commander the transfer of medical 
department supplies from a ship carrying an 
excess stock to a vessel requiring such supplies. 

2-84. Special Inspections 

(1) When directed, the staff medical officer 
shall investigate the sanitary condition of any 
ship of the command where excessive sick rates 
exist, and he shall examine the different parts of 
the ship for unsanitary conditions. He shall make 
any other inspections necessary to ascertain the 
reasons for increase of disease and recommend 
such steps as may be necessary. 

2-85. Inspection Report 

(1) Following each inspection, the staff medi- 
cal officer shall make a written report in the 
format prescribed by the commander. 

2-86. Planning 

(1) Staff medical officers afloat shall partici- 
pate in all phases of planning to insure realistic 
planning for medical support. 

(2) The medical services portion of operation 
orders shall as a minimum cover: 

(a) Responsibilities and tasks. 

(b) Hospitalization. 

(c) Evacuation. 

(d) Preventive medicine. 



2-18 

Change 71 



2-87 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-88 



(e) Medical assistance to civilians. 

(f) Medical reporting. 

(g) Whole blood requirements. 

2-87. Information on Epidemics, Etc. 

(1) The staff medical officer shall coordinate 
and disseminate to subordinate unit medical 
officers all pertinent medical information. 



2-88. Medical Meetings 

(1) The staff medical officer shall stimulate 
interest in professional subjects by arranging 
meetings of officers of the Medical Corps for the 
discussion of professional subjects. Officers of the 
Medical Corps shall be encouraged to attend 
meetings of professional interest in the ports vis- 
ited and on board hospital ships. 



2-19 
Change 71 



( 



2-90 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-94 



Section IX. THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF A SHIP 

Article 

General 2-90 

Fitting Out 2-91 

Medical Storerooms 2-92 

Physical Inspection of Crew and Other Inspections 2-93 

First Aid Instruction 2-94 

Safety L 2-95 



2-90. General 

(1) Head of the Medical Department. — The 
head of the medical department of a ship is des- 
ignated the medical officer. The medical officer 
shall be responsible, under the commanding 
officer, for maintaining the health of the person- 
nel of the ship, making inspections incident 
thereto, and advising the commanding officer 
with respect to hygiene and sanitation affecting 
the ship. He shall be in direct charge of the 
treatment of the sick and wounded. He shall take 
charge of the personnel of the medical depart- 
ment and of the men on the sicklist, and shall 
report the medical department at quarters. 

(2) Complements and Allowances. — When it 
is believed that the complement or allowance of 
the medical department personnel should be mo- 
dified, the medical officer shall make a request to 
the commanding officer for modification. 

(3) Absence or Disability. — In the absence, or 
during the disability, of the medical officer of the 
ship, unless otherwise directed by the command- 
ing officer, the officer of the Medical Corps next 
in rank on board shall perform his duties. 

2-91. Fitting Out 

(1) After reporting, the medical officer shall 
examine the sickbay spaces and equipment, and 
other accommodations for the sick and wounded, 
and take appropriate steps to remedy any defi- 
ciencies. 

(2) The medical officer shall (a) review the 
Health Records of the crew to assure there is a 
Health Record for each and to become familiar 
with those members with significant medical de- 
fects and/or history; (b) when a crew member is 
considered to be physically unfit, with the ap- 
proval of the commanding officer, admit the 
member to the sicklist for further evaluation and 
appropriate disposition; and (c) immunize the 
snip's crew against disease as prescribed in cur- 
rent directives. 

2-92. Medical Storerooms 

(1) The medical officer shall take charge of 
the medical storerooms and keep the keys in his 



own custody or in the custody of his representa- 
tive, but in any case the medical officer is respon- 
sible for the security of the contents of the store- 
rooms. He shall insure that the storage spaces are 
dispersed when practical and feasible. Medical 
storerooms shall not be used as sleeping compart- 
ments, and only medical stores shall be kept 
therein. 

2-93. Physical Inspection of Crew and Other 
Inspections 

(1) Personnel. — Subject to the approval of the 
commanding officer, inspection of the crew shall 
be held whenever the presence of communicable 
or concealed disease is suspected. 

(2) Food and Water. — Regulations in regard 
to inspection of food and water appear in chapter 
22. The Manual of Naval Preventive Medicine, 
NAVMED P-5010, particularly chapters 1, 5, and 
6, may be used as a guide. 

(3) Compartments, Cells, Bedding, Etc. — Reg- 
ulations concerning inspections of compartments, 
cells, bedding, etc., appear in chapter 22, The 
Manual of Naval Preventive Medicine, 
NAVMED P-5010, particularly chapters 2 and 3, 
may be used as a guide. 

2-94. First Aid Instruction 

(1) The medical officer shall recommend to 
the commanding officer a schedule of instruction 
in first aid by Medical Department personnel so 
that the ship's officers and crew may administer 
to the wounded in battle when no medical per- 
sonnel are available. The medical officer is res- 
ponsible for all nuclear, biological, and chemical 
(NBC) medical defense instruction to all hands. 
Requirements for this instruction are: 

(a) Division Officers. — Knowledge of the 
degrees of proficiency of their men in first aid, 
and knowledge of the location and use of availa- 
ble first aid material. 

(b) Hospital Corpsmen. — Knowledge that 
will qualify them to become instructors. 

(c) Stretcher Bearers. — Knowledge of han- 
dling and transportation of casualties and basic 
factors of first aid. Location of stretchers and 
types to be used. 



2-21 
Change 71 



2-95 



MANUAL Of THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



2-95 



(d) Crew. — A practical knowledge of funda- 
mental first aid treatment of wounds and frac- 
tures, methods of resuscitation, and handling of 
unconscious persons. 

2-95. Safety 

(1) The medical officer shall require the strict- 
est compliance with safety regulations. 



(2) Special attention shall be devoted to the 
proper training of personnel regarding the enter- 
ing of voids and spaces which lack adequate oxy- 
gen, the use of safety equipment while operating 
power equipment, and any unsafe practice which 
might cause injury or peril life. 



2-22 

Change 71 



2-100 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-104 



Section X. MEDICAL DEPARTMENT DUTIES IN EMERGENCIES AFLOAT 



Article 

Drills and Emergencies 2-100 

Preparation for Emergencies 2-101 

Condition I, General Quarters 2-102 

Condition II 2-103 

Condition III 2-104 

Damage Control 2-105 

Defense Against Special Methods of Warfare 2-106 

Flight Quarters 2-107 

Fire Quarters '. 2-108 

Collision 2-109 

Fire and Rescue Party 2-110 

Abandon Ship 2-111 

Man Overboard 2-112 

Taking Aboard and Handling Rescued Personnel 2-113 

Landing Force _ 2-114 

First Aid Boxes and Other Medical Containers 2-115 

Battle Dressing Stations 2-116 

Final Preparation for Battle 2-117 

Duty in Battle 2-118 

Removal of Dead and Wounded 2-119 

Transfer of Wounded .. 2-120 



2-100. Drills and Emergencies 

(1) The medical department shall be prepared 
for emergencies. Personnel of the medical depart- 
ment shall be available to render medical care at 
all times. The medical officer shall be guided by 
fleet and force regulations and orders as to spe- 
cial drills and emergencies and by ship's regula- 
tions for routine drills. 

(2) The sections of the watch, quarter, station, 
and other bills which apply to the medical de- 
partment shall be posted in the sickbay spaces, 
and personnel of the medical department shall be 
continually instructed to insure that each individ- 
ual is familiar with his station and his prescribed 
duties. These bills shall be kept up to date. 

(3) The instructions contained in the follow- 
ing articles shall govern the organization of the 
medical department for emergency, subject to the 
approval of the commanding officer. 

2-101. Preparation for Emergencies 

(1) The medical officer is responsible for the 
proper dispersion of medical department person- 
nel. He shall make necessary preparations for the 
proper distribution of medical supplies and 
equipment to the battle dressing stations, first-aid 
stations, collecting stations, decontamination sta- 
tions, and repair parties. He shall arrange in ad- 
vance for space assignment to care for any over- 
flow of personnel casualties. He shall ensure that 
the crew is properly trained in the methods and 



safety equipment for evacuating personnel via 
high-line or helicopter lift. 

2-102. Condition I, General Quarters 

(1) General quarters are the battle stations of 
the officers and crew. The term is also used to 
designate the evolution in which all hands as- 
sume battle stations. In Condition I, all hands are 
at battle stations (general quarters) and engage- 
ment with the enemy is imminent. All medical 
department personnel shall proceed immediately 
to their assigned stations. Crew personnel who 
have been assigned as stretcher bearers proceed to 
their assigned stations, where they are available 
for transportation of the wounded. Efficient orga- 
nization for the removal and transportation of 
the sick and wounded shall be provided. 

2-103. Condition n 

(1) This condition is maintained when enemy 
forces may be encountered. Medical department 
personnel man battle stations in a condition of 
readiness. 

2-104. Condition III 

(1) The third condition of readiness for action 
is maintained when contact with surface ships is 
not imminent, but submarines may be present. 
The medical department prepares to assume Con- 
dition I or II, but carries on in a routine manner, 
unless otherwise directed by the commanding of- 
ficer. 



2-23 
Change 71 



2-105 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



2-112 



2-105. Damage Control 

(1) The confinement below decks of the medi- 
cal department by damage control measures 
makes the knowledge of first aid among crew 
members, and particularly among the stretcher 
bearers, an essential of the medical department in 
the preparations for battle. Ability of nonmedical 
personnel to administer first aid, ability of 
stretcher bearers to transport the wounded, and 
availability of medical facilities at battle dressing 
stations are three conditions of the preparation of 
the medical department for battle that must be 
coordinated. Each factor shall receive attention 
from inspection officers. When available, medical 
department personnel should be assigned to 
accompany repair parties to assist in first aid and 
to supervise the transportation of casualties. 

2-106. Defense Against Special Methods of 
Warfare 

(1) The medical officer must keep himself in- 
formed of the nature and effects of nuclear, bio- 
logical, and chemical (NBC) warfare. He shall 
be guided by published manuals and current 
directives in matters concerning medical aspects 
of these types of warfare. 

(2) The medical officer shall advise the com- 
manding officer concerning medical preparations 
for defense, and shall provide a specific plan for 
the handling and transportation of casualties. 

(3) The medical officer shall crain the entire 
ship's crew in the medical aspects of these special 
types of warfare, and shall conduct drills for the 
purpose of developing efficient performance dur- 
ing and following an attack. The medical depart- 
ment is responsible for decontamination of cas- 
ualties contaminated with nuclear, biological, or 
chemical agents. He shall supervise the instruc- 
tion of the ship's company in matters pertaining 
to self-aid and first aid. 

(4) The medical officer shall maintain ade- 
quate supplies for the effective decontamination 
and treatment of casualties. When the ship or its 
personnel has been exposed to any of the above- 
mentioned agents, he shall, when directed, make 
a thorough inspection, paying especial attention 
to possible contamination of food and water and 
collection of samples as required by separate in- 
structions. 

2-107. Flight Quarters 

(1) The procedure for medical attendance in 
case of emergencies during flight operations is 
provided for in the ship's organization. 

2-108. Fire Quarters 

(1) The medical department personnel shall 



assemble at the sickbay and prepare to remove 
the sick and carry out other prescribed evolu- 
tions. 

(2) One stretcher party, with an officer of the 
Medical Corps, Medical Service Corps, or a hospi- 
tal corpsman in charge, shall report to the scene 
of the fire. 

(3) The medical officer shall remove to a place 
of safety, or throw overboard, flammable liquids 
under his custody. 

2-109. Collision 

(1) The medical department personnel shall 
assemble at the sickbay and prepare to remove 
the sick and the Health Records. 

(2) Stretchers and life preservers shall be kept 
by the beds of the patients and preparations 
made to transport patients to stations on the 
weather decks. 

(3) During collision drill, bed patients with 
attendants shall remain in the sickbay with the 
doors and air ports thereto being closed as re- 
quired. However, other medical department per- 
sonnel and ambulatory patients shall assemble at 
their assigned stations. Stretcher bearers shall 
practice transportation measures by transporting 
members of their own group to the weather 
decks and abandon-ship stations. 

2-110. Fire and Rescue Party 

(1) The watch, quarter, and station bill shall 
provide that medical department personnel be 
detailed for duty with the fire and rescue party. 
Medical personnel shall always hive medical 
emergency kits or pouches and resuscitation ap- 
paratus available and shall accompany the party 
whenever it is called away. Stretcher bearers shall 
be provided. 

(2) Medical department personnel shall be 
trained in the operation of the oxygen breathing 
apparatus and the oxygen resuscitator. The train- 
ing shall be conducted as often as required to 
ensure the safety and proficiency of the rescue 
party. 

2-111. Abandon Ship 

(1) Medical department personnel shall be as- 
signed to distribute boat boxes or other medical 
equipment, to transport the sick to their proper 
stations, and to salvage Health Records when di- 
rected to abandon ship. 

2-112. Man Overboard 

(1) Upon sounding the alarm, the medical of- 
ficer or one of his assistants shall stand by the 
proposed recovery area. A hospital corpsman 



2-24 

Change 71 



2-113 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-117 



with first aid pouch may be detailed to board the 
lifeboat to be lowered. 

2-113. Taking Aboard and Handling Rescued 
Personnel 

(1) Medical department personnel shall stand 
by when personnel are being rescued. When the 
medical officer considers it advisable, he may 
have a medical department member accompany 
the rescuing craft, 

(2) Proper facilities shall be readily available 
at all times so that immediate treatment may be 
started when rescued personnel are brought 
aboard. 

2-114. Landing Force 

(1) Fleet orders provide for medical depart- 
ment participation and scope of medical readi- 
ness for landing force organization. 

2-115. First Aid Boxes and Other Medical 
Containers 

(1) First aid boxes, gun bags, and other medi- 
cal-equipment containers are to be located in 
accordance with General Specifications for Ships 
of the U.S. Navy. Medical department personnel 
are responsible for providing and maintaining 
supplies and instructing the crew as to their loca- 
tion and use. First aid is directed by the officer in 
charge of the battle station when no medical 
personnel are present. 

2-116. Battle Dressing Stations 

(1) Number and Location. — Two or more bat- 
tle dressing stations should be provided. These 
shall be dispersed and located in areas affording 
the maximum protection consistent with availa- 
bility of care to the wounded. Auxiliary battle 
dressing stations shall be located as required by 
the ship's battle plans in areas where emergency 
medical care may be given. 

(2) Equipped for Surgery. — The main battle 
dressing stations offering the best facilities for 
surgical operations after battle shall be equipped 
for this purpose. Adequate surgical and steriliz- 
ing equipment shall be placed at these stations. 

(3) Medical Stores. — 

(a) The storeroom or locker at each battle 
dressing station shall contain sufficient medical 
supplies and equipment for emergency and battle 
use. 

(b) The contents of the storeroom or locker 
shall be made a matter of record and carried as a 
reserve stock. 



(c) The contents of these lockers shall not 
be depleted except in battle or emergency. How- 
ever, deteriorable items should be rotated to the 
issue storeroom with sufficient frequency to pre- 
vent loss from items becoming overage or out- 
dated. 

(4) Water Supply.— 

(a) The battle dressing station of a surface 
ship should be equipped with a fresh-water tank 
as follows: 



Total 

accommodations Forward Midship Aft 

200—500 50 gal 50 gal. 

501—1000 100 gal. 200 gal. 100 gal. 

1001 and up 200 gal. 200 gal. 200 gal. 



(b) Each battle dressing station (except on 
submarines) should be provided with a lavatory 
connected with the water system. Prior to action, 
buckets and large cooking utensils shall be filled 
with water. Drinking water may be augmented 
by portable scuttlebutts. 

(5) Light. — 

(a) Suitable surgical lights and battle lan- 
terns with separate relays shall be installed in 
accordance with General Specifications for Ships 
of the U.S. Navy and the manual for Lighting on 
Naval Ships (NAVSHIPS 250-560-4). They 
shall be connected with both the day and battle 
lighting circuits and installed over the operating 
table at each battle dressing station. 

(b) Hand electric-battery lanterns shall be 
provided for each station. 

(6) Sterilizers. — Sterilizers shall be installed at 
all stations. All surgical supplies shall be steri- 
lized before they are placed in the battle dressing 
lockers and resterilized according to a schedule 
established by the medical department. 

(7) Routes To Be Marked. — Routes leading to 
battle dressing stations shall be indicated on 
bulkheads and hatches by the approved markings 
prescribed in General Specifications for Ships of 
the U.S. Navy. 

2-117. Final Preparation for Battle 

(1) In addition to the usual equipment trans- 
ferred from the sickbay and operating room and 
distributed in the battle dressing stations, the fol- 
lowing articles shall be provided for battle lock- 
ers: electric fans with proper connections, water 
buckets, closed stools, swabs and brooms, wash- 



2-25 

Change 7£ 



2-118 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



2-120 



ing stands, tables for apparatus, and bedding and 
mattresses for the wounded. 

(2) The supply of dressings at each station 
shall be dispersed prior to an engagement in 
order to guard against total loss in case of enemy 
action. 

(3) Emergency medical tags shall be made 
available and the personnel instructed carefully 
in their use. 

2-118. Duty in Battle 

(1) In battle, the primary duty of the medical 
department personnel is to insure that prompt 
treatment is rendered to those wounded who may 
be able to return to their stations. 



2-119. Removal of Dead and Wounded 

(1) When opportunity presents, the first-aid 
parties shall remove the injured to the battle 
dressing stations and a list of the dead and 
wounded shall be prepared and submitted to the 
commanding officer. A place shall be assigned for 
the collection of the dead. 

2-120. Transfer of Wounded 

(1) When medical evacuation facilities or a 
hospital ship is at hand, the seriously wounded 
shall be transferred as promptly as is consistent 
with their welfare. A fighting ship should be 
cleared of such casualties as soon as possible after 
action. Patients who will probably soon be fit for 
duty may be retained on board. 



2-26 

Change 71 



2-130 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-132 



Section XI. FLIGHT SURGEONS 



Flight Surgeons and Aerospace Medical Examiners 

Flight Surgeons Assigned to Ships or Stations _-. 

Flight Surgeons Assigned to Aviation Units 

Functions of Flight Surgeons 

2-130. Flight Surgeons and Aerospace Medical 
Examiners 

(1) Flight surgeons and aerospace medical ex- 
aminers assigned to aviation activities, in addi- 
tion to their responsibilities as naval medical of- 
ficers, have cognizance over the aeromedical con- 
siderations encountered within their units. They 
shall be specifically concerned with the physical 
fitness and welfare of all flying personnel, their 
aeromedical indoctrination in high altitude 
flight, the use of special personal airborne equip- 
ment, the ejection seat, night vision, and other 
physiological and psychological aspects of avia- 
tion. 

(2) The term "flight surgeon" is used 
throughout the remainder of this section as 
applying to both flight surgeons and aerospace 
medical examiners. Ordinarily aerospace medical 
examiners are under the preceptorship of flight 
surgeons. 

(3) Flight surgeons are assigned to the follow- 
ing type commands: 

(a) Naval and Marine Corps air stations, 
auxiliary air stations, air facilities, and certain 
naval hospitals. 

(b) Aircraft carriers. 

(c) Fleet air wings. 

(d) Carrier air groups or squadrons afloat, 
ashore, or at advanced bases. 

(e) Fleet Marine Force aircraft wings, 
groups, or squadrons ashore, at advanced bases, 
or afloat. 

<f) Advanced aircraft support or mainte- 
nance bases. 

(g) Fleet tactical support squadrons. 

(h) Search and rescue squadrons (SAR). 

(i) Certain of the commands listed above 
and major commands such as COMNAVAIR- 
LANT, COMNAVAIRPAC, Headquarters 
USMC, FMFPAC and FMFLANT, as staff medi- 
cal officers. They may also be assigned to aviation 
operational billets as required or administrative 
positions in aerospace medicine as medical liaison 
officers. When circumstances permit, flight sur- 
geons may be ordered to hospitals to supplement 
their training in clinical medicine, or to courses 
in preventive medicine as required for certifica- 
tion in aerospace medicine. Flight surgeons with 
special training may be assigned duty in 



Article 

2-130 

2-131 

i- 2-132 

2-133 

aeromedical research and development at various 
laboratories and operational activities. 

2-131. Flight Surgeons Assigned to Ships or 
Stations 

(1) In general, flight surgeons are assigned as 
medical officers in air commands afloat or ashore. 
If the flight surgeon is junior in rank to the 
medical officer of the ship or station, he shall be 
an assistant to the latter. He shall, however, be 
given every opportunity and all possible assist- 
ance in the performance of his primary duties in 
the practice of aerospace medicine and in the 
acquisition of additional information relative to 
the special problems of flying. The physical fit- 
ness of all flying personnel attached to the com- 
mand and their physical and psychological readi- 
ness for duty must be his concern. Through the 
application of his interests and training in aero- 
space medicine, the flight surgeon shall insure 
that all pilots and aircrewmen are adequately 
trained in the physiological aspects of flight and 
continually maintain a high level of proficiency 
in the use of personal airborne and survival 
equipment. The senior flight surgeon shall be 
responsible to the commanding officer in matters 
relating to aerospace medicine and he shall be 
cognizant of the aeromedical considerations in- 
volved in the flight-safety program. When re- 
quired, he shall be a member of the Aircraft 
Accident Board, utilizing available facilities in 
aviation pathology and toxicology. 

2-132. Flight Surgeons Assigned to Aviation 
Units 

(1) When an aviation unit such as an air 
group or squadron is embarked on a ship or is 
based on an aviation shore facility, the flight 
surgeon assigned as the medical officer of the unit 
shall be under the administrative cognizance of 
the medical officer of the ship or aviation shore 
facility. The unit flight surgeon shall, however, 
be recognized as an integral part of the command 
to which he is attached and shall advise his com- 
manding officer on all matters relating to aero- 
space medicine, as it affects the operational mis- 
sion of the unit. His knowledge and understand- 
ing of personnel within his activity will permit 
the assessment of aviators and aircrewmen as to 



2-27 

Change 71 



2-133 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



2-133 



their aeronautical adaptability for any mission 
which may be assigned to them. Frequent flights 
with pilots of his unit will assist the flight sur- 
geon in formulating such evaluations. As re- 
quired, the unit flight surgeon shall serve as a 
member of the Aircraft Accident Board estab- 
lished within his activity. 

2-133. Functions of Flight Surgeons 

(1) General. — The flight surgeon, to discharge 
his primary duties in connection with aerospace 
medicine within his command, shall associate 
himself with the immediate environment of the 
pilot as closely as possible. He shall attempt to 
know intimately each pilot, aircrewman, and 
their families to learn of any unusual circumstan- 
ces which might adversely affect their flight pro- 
ficiency. He must be familiar with the opera- 
tional missions his unit may be called upon to 
undertake and must insure that every effort is 
made to apply aeromedical considerations to the 
human factors involved to improve, if possible, 
the military capabilities of the command. The 
flight surgeon should be conversant with the 
flight characteristics of the aircraft assigned to 
his unit and should gain an understanding of 
individual pilot reactions to these aircraft. Unu- 
sual anxiety or apprehension resulting from as- 
signment to specific aircraft should be recognized 
and evaluated in connection with the back- 
ground, training, and capabilities of the aviator. 
Particular note must be made of the sum total of 
stresses to which flying personnel are subjected 
during the course of a mission; such as, fatigue, 
noise and vibration, repeated changes of altitude, 
unfavorable weather, navigational difficulties, 
combat, and night carrier operations. 

(2) Physiological Training. — Flight Surgeons 
assigned to operational duties have specific res- 
ponsibilities and shall participate actively in the 
aerospace physiology training program. Flight 
surgeons in charge of physiological training 
units shall be responsible for the content of lec- 
tures and demonstrations presented to aviation 
personnel. They shall keep adequate records of 
the activities of the unit and make appropriate 
entries in the Health Records of personnel com- 
pleting the training syllabus. In accordance with 
current instructions, training shall be presented 
in the physiological aspects of reduced barome- 
tric pressure, acceleration, temperature effects, 
noxious gases, airsickness, disorientation, fatigue, 
first aid, ionizing radiation, night vision and 
other factors which apply to operational mis- 
sions. In addition, indoctrination shall be given 
in the use and physiological implications of air- 
borne personal equipment; such as, antiblackout 
suits, oxygen systems with particular emphasis on 



regulators and masks, antiexposture suits, sur- 
vival equipment, pressure suits, parachutes, crash 
helmets, noise protective devices, ejection seats, 
escape capsules, and other protective and safety 
equipment as developed. To insure that all avia- 
tion personnel are capable of coping satisfactor- 
ily with the hazards of flight to which they may 
be exposed, it is necessary that flight surgeons 
maintain the physiological training program on 
a continuing basis through lectures, demonstra- 
tions, low pressure chamber runs, applicable mo- 
tion pictures presented at appropriate intervals, 
and other training aids. 

(3) Physical Examinations. — The physical ex- 
aminations of all flying personnel shall be per- 
formed by flight surgeons in accqrdance with the 
aviation section of chapter 15. 

(4) Equipment. — Flight surgeons attached to 
operational commands shall be concerned with 
the maintenance of personal airborne equipment 
in a supervisory capacity and shall make frequent 
inspections of the equipment in use by flying 
personnel. They shall also examine existing facil- 
ities and maintenance practices in oxygen shops 
and parachute lofts. 

(5) Fitness.— The physical well-being of 
flying personnel is a prime responsibility of the 
flight surgeon and he shall make every effort to 
insure that all flying personnel are physically and 
psychologically fit prior to flight. 

(6) Safety, — The flight surgeon shall maintain 
an active interest and participation in the flight 
safety program. The analysis of aircraft accidents 
from the standpoint of the human factors in- 
volved shall be formulated by the flight surgeon 
and integrated with existing engineering data. 
The major emphasis, however, shall be on the 
prevention of accidents and the recognition of 
incipient unsafe conditions. 

(7) Recommendations. — Based on his techni- 
cal knowledge and special training, the flight 
surgeon shall make appropriate reports and re- 
commendations to the commanding officer, via 
the medical officer when necessary, concerning 
the following: 

(a) Physical fitness of flying personnel, 
collectively and individually, as determined by 
observation and physical examinations. 

(b) Measures to promote the physical wel- 
fare of flying personnel with particular reference 
to physical exercise, recreation, and rest and leave 
periods. 

(c) Measures to promote flight safety. 

(d) Maintenance practices in connection 
with personal airborne equipment to prevent the 
possibility of malfunction in flight. 

(e) Human engineering and design factors 



2-28 

Change 71 



2-133 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-133 



pertaining to cockpits and other related equip- 
ment to improve operational effectiveness. 

(f) The presence of toxic or potentially haz- 
ardous factors having biological effects; such as, 
cockpit contamination, high-intensity noise, mi- 
crowave radiation emanating from high-powered 
radar equipment, and other conditions having an 
unfavorable influence upon flight operations. 

(8) Emergency Care. — Flight surgeons shall be 
responsible for providing adequate medical facil- 
ities for the emergency care of casualties. Hospi- 
tal Corps personnel assigned to aviation activities 
shall be thoroughly trained in first aid, with spe- 
cial emphasis on injuries most likely to occur 
during flight operations. Such training shall in- 
clude the removal and handling of aircraft cas- 
ualties, artificial respiration, and the use of resus- 
citators. 

(a) Aviation Activities Ashore. — Emergency 
bills shall be prepared to enable the medical de- 
partment to render prompt and effective assist- 
ance in the event of an aircraft crash. Medical aid 
shall be available at all times during flight opera- 
tions. When flight operations are performed at 
distant or outlying fields, a medical officer or 
hospital corpsman shall be in attendance until 
flying is secured. 



(b) Aviation Activities Afloat. — Emergency 
bills shall be prepared to cover flight operations. 
Specific and routine duties of medical personnel 
are outlined in the ship's flight quarters bills. 

(9) Air Transportation of Patients. — The Bu- 
reau has responsibility for the development and 
employment of medical facilities, techniques, and 
procedures for air transportation of patients in 
aircraft. It provides for the training of special- 
ized personnel for assignment to medical duties 
in connection with air transport, the operational 
maintenance and improvement of medical serv- 
ices and facilities required, the preparation of 
estimates of medical requirements, and the main- 
tenance of necessary records. Medical officers de- 
siring to transfer patients by air shall submit 
requests for transportation in accordance with 
current directives, indicating by class the number 
of patients for whom air transportation is de- 
sired. In coordinating the transport of patients 
by air, the Bureau maintains appropriate liaison 
with the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations 
(Air), the fleet tactical support squadrons, Ma- 
rine aircraft transport groups, and the Military 
Airlift Command. 



2-29 
Change 71 



< 



2-140 CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 2-141 

Section XII. SUBMARINE MEDICAL OFFICERS 

Article 

General Duty 2-140 



Inspections and Related Functions 

Instruction of Personnel 

Venereal Diseases 

Physical Examinations 

Illness Due to Occupational Hazards 

Special Reports 

2-140. General Duty 

(1) The submarine medical officer plays a 
major role in maintaining a state of peak opera- 
tional efficiency among personnel engaged in 
submarine, diving, and underwater-swimming 
activities. He does so by constantly devising and 
implementing improved personnel-selection pro- 
cedures, detecting and proposing measures to 
minimize the effects of personnel exposures to 
innumerable health and safety hazards, playing 
an active role in the field of human engineering 
to better fit the man to his environment, and 
prescribing definitive therapeutic measures for 
restoration and maintenance of good physical and 
mental health. Submarine, diving, and underwa- 
ter-swimming personnel have correlated duties 
and are generally exposed to common environ- 
mental conditions; principally, repeated under- 
water sojourns within a confined space with ex- 
posures to variable barometric pressures in an 
atmosphere whose composition changes fre- 
quently and often becomes adulterated by toxic 
or noxious gases and vapors. Problems of air con- 
ditioning and the physiological effects of in- 
creased air pressure are of great importance. It is 
essential that medical officers detailed to submar- 
ine or diving duty thoroughly familiarize them- 
selves with these conditions, their effects, and the 
required protective measures. This understanding 
should include a clear appreciation of the relative 
importance of air temperature, humidity, and 
turbulence as they affect a satisfactory air condi- 
tion; factors peculiar to submarines that affect air 
condition; the physiology of respiration under 
increased air pressure; safety measures provided 
for personnel; and the principle and proper 
mode of operation of the mechanism, and the 
method of effective inspection of personnel safety 
devices. 

(2) Personnel detailed to submarine and div- 
ing duty represent a select group working under 
stress of hazard. In submarines their work re- 
quires close personal contact and a high degree 
of cooperation. The morale of such a crew de- 
mands men physically and mentally fit and func- 
tioning without friction. The submarine medical 
officer has a major responsibility in assisting to 



2-141 

2-142 

2-143 

2-144 

2-145 

2-146 

maintain this morale. He should make a consci- 
entious effort to acquire the trust and confidence 
of the crew. He should become sufficiently famil- 
iar with the personnel to detect and treat early 
signs of physical disease or mental deterioration 
and should critically inspect incoming personnel 
for any factors detrimental to the physical or 
mental health of the crew. The obviously unfit 
should be hospitalized and reevaluated. Doubtful 
cases should be held for observation. 

(3) The submarine medical officer is in a posi- 
tion to observe submarine and diving activities in 
actual practice. He should observe them critically 
from the point of view of detecting defects or 
recommending improved appliances or practices 
affecting the health of personnel, and should re- 
port upon them to the Bureau for analysis and 
development. 

(4) In addition to these specialized duties at 
sea, submarine - medical officers may also be as- 
signed as medical liaison officers and, as circum- 
stances permit, to naval hospitals to supplement 
their training and practice in clinical medicine. 
For assignments ashore they are especially quali- 
fied to conduct medical research studies at var- 
ious laboratories. They may also be assigned to 
training courses in the preventive aspects of med- 
icine which is a requirement toward their certifi- 
cation in occupational medicine. Should their in- 
terests lean toward certification in one of the 
clinical specialties, training courses and residency 
programs are available for that purpose. 

2-141. Inspections and Related Functions 

(1) In addition to making routine inspections 
of personnel and materiel, the medical officer at- 
tached to a submarine squadron shall, with the 
approval of his commanding officer or superior 
officer, frequently make inspections of each sub- 
marine with regard to the adequacy and condi- 
tion of supplies for first aid; the proficiency of 
personnel assigned to administer first aid; condi- 
tion of submarine-escape equipment; readiness 
for use of oxygen cylinders and carbon-dioxide 
absorbent and submarine compartment noxious 
gas detection equipment; supply and condition of 
emergency rations and drinking water in each 



2-31 
Change 71 



2-142 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



2-143 



compartment; condition of living spaces as to 
cleanliness, bedding and vermin, and air condi- 
tion; methods and practices utilized in the prepa- 
ration and serving of food, and in garbage dis- 
posal; sanitary protection of the potable water 
supply; readiness of equipment for administering 
oxygen for resuscitation; readiness of rescue- 
breathing apparatus, etc. 

(2) The medical officer attached to a submar- 
ine squadron should observe the submarine under 
operating conditions to familiarize himself with 
the living and working conditions on board and 
to obtain a direct knowledge of the methods pro- 
vided for the protection of the personnel against 
all possible atmospheric and other hazards under 
both surface and submerged conditions. Refer- 
ence should be made to current Bureau instruc- 
tions and NAVSHIPS technical manuals. 

(3) When indicated the medical officer shall 
examine all personnel prior to a patrol run or 
prolonged cruise to detect physical or mental 
conditions likely to lead to disability during the 
cruise. Upon the completion of such a patrol run 
or prolonged cruise, the medical officer shall 
confer with the commanding officer and the hos- 
pital corpsman regarding the physical state and 
psychological behavior of the crew during patrol. 
He shall perform a complete physical examina- 
tion and have performed a thorough dental ex- 
amination of all members, giving particular at- 
tention to the psychological, including the emo- 
tional, state of each individual. These observa- 
tions and remedial procedures are also applicable 
to members of underwater demolition or explo- 
sive ordnance disposal teams who are required to 
perform hazardous missions under combat condi- 
tions. In evaluating such examinations considera- 
tion must be given to possible accumulative ef- 
fects of several stresses in combination such as 
fatigue, isolation and other claustrophobic fac- 
tors, noise, vibration, monotony and underwater 
blast effects, barometric and thermal fluctuations, 
adverse weather effects, night operations, under- 
water-swimming navigational difficulties, enemy 
actions, and the like. 

(4) With an expanding nuclear powered sub- 
marine program underway, the submarine medi- 
cal officer is required to advise with regard to 
detection and prevention of nuclear radiation 
hazards. Such a program is particularly impor- 
tant during inspection or repair procedures 
which must be performed in the lower reactor 
compartment or when replacement of the reactor 
become necessary during scheduled overhaul pe- 
riods. Because of prospective longer runs under 
nuclear power with no opportunity for replenish- 
ing the fresh air supply, the effects of low con- 



centrations of trace elements in a continuously 
closed space become an increasingly important 
problem. 

2-142. Instruction of Personnel 

(1) The medical officer shall actively support 
an instruction program for all submarine person- 
nel, both officers and men, in first aid and sub- 
marine hygiene, emphasizing artificial respira- 
tion; treatment of thermal, flash, oil, and acid 
burns; protection of the ears against increased air 
pressure and high-intensity noise; protection of 
the eyes from electric flash; protection against 
ambient atmospheric hazards such as chlorine 
gas, carbon monoxide, increased carbon dioxide, 
oxygen deficiency, arsine, stibine, hydrogen, va- 
pors of hydrocarbons, amines, refrigerant gases 
and their breakdown products, and heat prostra- 
tion; protection from nuclear radiation hazards; 
air conditioning; handling of accidents occurring 
during the use of submarine-escape equipment; 
use of rescue and survival equipment; decompres- 
sion illness; and day and night vision. 

(2) Hospital corpsmen attached to submarines 
should receive special instruction for independ- 
ent duty, with particular emphasis on the indica- 
tions for, and the technique of, the administra- 
tion of blood substitutes and other intravenous 
therapy. It must be borne in mind that the hospi- 
tal corpsman is the only Medical Department 
representative aboard a submarine in operational 
areas and thus must be carefully selected and as 
highly trained as practicable for any exigency 
which may arise. 

2-143. Venereal Diseases 

(1) Active venereal disease cases generally 
should not be retained on board submarines. 
Cases of gonococcus infection, urethra, that de- 
velop after sailing shall be treated at the discre- 
tion of the commanding officer as advised by the 
hospital corpsman when transfer is not practica- 
ble. Treatment shall conform to the generally 
accepted therapy. Treatment-resistant cases and 
those developing complications shall be trans- 
ferred to Medical Department facilities as soon as 
practicable. 

(2) (a) If open genital lesions develop after 
sailing, and it will be impracticable to transfer 
the patient within 2 weeks to a ship or station 
where diagnostic facilities are available, the pres- 
umption will be made that the patient has sy- 
philis and the necessary treatment and followup 
begun. The recommended treatment is as follows 
in order of preference: 

(1) Benzathine penicillin G in a dose of 
2,400,000 units given intramuscularly once only. 



2-32 

Change 71 



2-144 



CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL CORPS 



2-150 



(2) Procaine penicillin G in oil with 2 
percent aluminum monostearate (PAM) in a 
dose of 2,400,000 units at first injection given 
intramuscularly and 1,200,000 units in each of 
two subsequent injections 3 days apart. 

(3) Procaine penicillin G in aqueous sus- 
pension in a dose of 600,000 units given intra- 
muscularly once daily for 8 days, for a total of 
4,800,000 units. 

(b) Because of the possibility of chancroid 
or other disease which is unresponsive to penicil- 
lin, concurrent treatment with either sulfadiazine 
tablets in a dosage of 1.0 gram four times daily 
or a broad spectrum antibiotic of the tetracycline 
family in a dosage of 500 milligrams four times 
daily for 1 week is also recommended. This may 
be delayed until the response to penicillin is de- 
termined and omitted if the lesion heals 
promptly with penicillin therapy. 

(c) All such cases should be referred or 
transferred to an adequate medical facility as 
soon as is practical. 

(3) Cases of venereal diseases so transferred 
shall be returned to duty aboard submarines 
when in the opinion of the medical officer such 
cases are no longer infectious and medical facili- 
ties are adequate to continue treatment. 

(4) Men who contract syphilis after being 
trained in submarines may be returned to duty 
aboard submarines when in the opinion of the 
medical officer no further treatment is indicated 
(see also art. 15-29 (2) (j)). 

(5) Venereal disease inspections, prophylactic 
procedures, and venereal disease education pro- 
grams should be carried out in accordance with 
existing instructions and regulations. 

2-144. Physical Examinations 

(1) Physical examinations of submarine and 
diving personnel shall be conducted in accord- 
ance with instructions in this manual. In the 
physical examination and treatment of such per- 
sonnel, particular emphasis shall be placed upon 
dental, otological, and nasopharyngeal conditions 



and upon the emotional stability of the individ- 
ual. 

(2) Applicants for the Submarine School, 
New London, Conn., must meet the physical re- 
quirements for submarine duty as set forth in 
chapter 15. Scrupulous care should be taken that 
physical standards are satisfied so that rejections 
at the school may be avoided as far as possible. 

(3) Candidates for training or participation in 
duty involving diving or underwater swimming 
shall meet the physical requirements prescribed 
for diving duty in chapter 15. 

2-145. Illness Due to Occupational Hazards 

(1) All cases of disease or injury that can be 
directly attributed to factors related to submarine 
or diving duty should be admitted to the sicklist, 
even if for "record purposes only," so that useful 
statistical data may be available, 

2-146. Special Reports 

(1) Rescue or Salvage Operations. — When spe- 
cial rescue or salvage operations involve exten- 
sive diving, the medical officer shall report the 
medical aspects of the operation to the officer in 
charge for inclusion in the salvage report. The 
medical officer shall include a summary of the 
number and duration of dives per diver,, depth, 
decompression schedules and departures there- 
from, and the number of diving accidents. 

(2) Cruise, — When a medical officer makes a 
cruise on a submarine for which the command- 
ing officer is required to submit a report, the 
medical officer shall prepare a report for the com- 
manding officer concerning the appropriate mat- 
ters of interest to the Medical Department. 

(3) Report of All Diving Accidents 
(MED-6420-1). — This report shall be submitted 
on form NAVMED 6420/1 by the cognizant med- 
ical officer for each case of compressed air illness, 
air embolism, diver's squeeze, or other type of 
diving accident. Distribution of this report shall 
be in accordance with instructions on the front 
of NAVMED 6420/1. The original of the report 
shall be incorporated and retained permanently 
in the individual Health Record. 



Section XIII. FLEET MARINE FORCE 

2-150. Medical Support f or information on medical support to the Ma- 

(1) Reference should be made to chapter 19 rine Corps. 



2-33 
Change 71 



( 



( 



c 



r 



Chapter 3 



GENERAL DUTIES OF MEDICAL 
CORPS OFFICERS 

SECTIONS 

Articles 

I. The Medical Officer and His Duties 3- 1 through 3-15 

II. Assistant Medical Officers 3—16 through 3-17 

III. General Duties of All Medical Corps Officers 3-18 through 3-30 



Section I. THE MEDICAL OFFICER AND HIS DUTIES 



Article 

The Medical Officer 3-1 

General Responsibility 3-2 

Care of the Sick and Injured 3-3 

Health Standards i-A 

Physical Fitness of Personnel 3-5 

Directives 3-7 

Medical Journal 3-8 

Reports to the Officer of the Deck or Day 3-9 

Educational Measures 3-10 

Preparation for Emergency 1 3-11 

Cooperation With Other Agencies 3-12 

Cooperation With Intelligence Officers 3-13 

Compulsory Medical or Surgical Treatment 3-14 

Dental Treatment 3-15 



3-1, The Medical Officer 

(1) The head of the medical department of a 
command or other activity shall be the senior 
officer of the Medical Corps attached for duty and 
so assigned. He shall be designated the medical 
officer. 

3-2. General Responsibility 

(1) In addition to the duties prescribed in 
United States Navy Regulations for the head of a 
department, the medical officer shall be responsi- 
ble, under the commanding officer, for maintain- 
ing the health of the personnel of the command, 
making inspections incident thereto, and advising 
the commanding officer with respect to hygiene 
and sanitation affecting the command. He shall 
direct and administer the medical department 
and shall supervise the services of his subordi- 
nates, requiring of them a proper and efficient 
performance of their duties. 



3-3. Care of the Sick and Injured 

(1) The medical officer shall provide for the 
sick and injured the most careful professional at- 
tention and care consistent with the highest 
standards of modern medicine. He shall make 
arrangements for the proper messing of patients, 
the proper stowage and safeguarding of patients' 
effects, and shall be attentive to the patients' 
well-being at all times. 

(2) He shall be responsible for the overall 
supervision of the treatment of patients and re- 
quire of all members of the medical department 
strict compliance with orders that are written 
for patients. He shall require that no deviation 
is made from orders given by an assistant medical 
officer in charge of a patient except in emergency, 
or by order of higher authority, or by order of 
another officer of the Medical Corps having 
temporary charge of the patient. 



3-1 

Change 18 



3-3 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



3-10 



(3) He shall require that daily reports of the 
sick be submitted in accordance with chapcer 2.3. 

(4) In complicated cases, the medical officer 
shall provide for consultations with other officers 
of the Medical Corps of the Navy present con- 
cerning diagnosis, treatment, and patient man- 
agement. 

3-4. Health Standards 

(1) The responsibility of the medical officer in 
matters of health extends into fields under the 
cognizance of other departments. Nutritional 
adequacy; food; food handling; food prepara- 
tion; lighting; heating; ventilation; air condi- 
tioning; housing; insect, pest, and rodent control; 
water supply; and waste disposal all have a direct 
bearing on the health of naval personnel. The 
medical officer, because of his special qualifica- 
tions, must assume the initiative in maintaining 
health standards in these spheres. The medical 
officer must assure adequate provision, including 
spaces, for the care of the sick. His responsibility 
in preventive medicine is discussed in chapter 22. 

(2) The medical officer shall recommend to the 
commanding officer that drugs, devices, and other 
medical items not be sold in Navy or Marine 
Corps exchanges or ship's stores when considered 
to be medically susceptible to inappropriate uses. 
In case medical suitability is in doubt or in con- 
troversy, the facts should be referred to the 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery via the Navy 
Ship's Store Office and Bureau of Supplies and 
Accounts or the Commandant of the Marine 
Corps, as appropriate, for decision and appropri- 
ate action. 

3-5. Physical Fitness of Personnel 

(1) The medical officer shall make appropriate 
recommendations to the proper authority for the 
promotion of health and the physical fitness of 
personnel. The physical and mental benefits de- 
rived from athletics, recreational, and other meas- 
ures to improve or maintain a satisfactory state of 
physical fitness should be emphasized. 

(2) The medical officer shall, with the approval 
of the commanding officer, conduct or direct ex- 
amination of personnel of the command when- 
ever there is reason to believe that diseases are 



being concealed. During such examinations the 
physical condition and personal hygiene of per- 
sonnel shall be observed. 

Note. — There is no article 3-6. 

3-7. Directives 

(1) The medical officer, subject to the orders 
of the commanding officer, shall prepare and 
maintain the necessary directives for the organi- 
zation and operation of the medical department. 

3-8. Medical Journal 

(1) Each medical activity or facility shall main- 
tain a journal in which shall be entered a com- 
plete, concise, chronological record of events of 
importance, or which may be of historical value, 
concerning the Medical Department, other than 
medical histories of individuals. 

3-9. Reports to the Officer of the Deck or Day 

(1) Injuries or death of personnel, damage, de- 
struction or loss of Medical Department property, 
and any important occurrence shall be reported 
by the medical officer to the officer of the deck 
or other proper official for entry in the log or 
journal of the command or activity. 

{2) Patients in a serious or critical condition 
shall be the subject of a report to the command- 
ing officer or officer of the deck or day, together 
with the necessary information for the notifica- 
tion of next of kin. 

3-10. Educational Measures 

(1) The medical officer, with the approval of 
the appropriate authority, shall conduct health 
educational programs, including the dissemina- 
tion of information regarding the prevention of 
diseases and other subjects pertaining to hygiene 
and sanitation. 

(2) The medical officer shall supervise the in- 
struction of personnel regarding venereal diseases, 
and advise them of the associated dangers. Infor- 
mation which is distributed by the Bureau rela- 
tive to social hygiene shall be utilized. 

(3) The medical officer, with the approval of 
the appropriate authority, shall conduct a pro- 
gram of 



3-2 

Change 18 



3-10 



CHAPTER 3. GENERAL DUTIES OF MEDICAL CORPS OFFICERS 



3-15 



first aid instruction for officers and men attached 
to the command which will insure knowledge and 
ability in the principles of first aid, 

(4) The medical officer shall provide for the in- 
struction of hospital eorpsmen as set forth in 
chapter 9. 

(5) The medical officer shall make provisions for 
the indoctrination of personnel under his charge 
in Navy and Medical Department regulations and 
administrative procedures. 

3—11. Preparation for Emergency 

(1) The medical officer shall insure that the med- 
ical department is at all times prepared to meet 
medical emergencies. 

3-13. Cooperation With Other Agencies 

(1) The medical officer shall cooperate with the 
Public Health Service and other Federal, State, and 
local agencies for the prevention of disease, the 
reporting of communicable diseases, and the collec- 
tion of vital statistics. The regional health direc- 
tors in each of the Public Health Service regional 
areas will cooperate with naval authorities for the 
purpose of safeguarding the health of military per- 
sonnel in extramilitary areas and may, if desired, 
act as the liaison between the naval activity and 
the State or local health agencies to facilitate the 
solution of community health problems of interest 
to the Medical Department of the Navy. 

(2) The medical officer shall attempt to deter- 
mine all sexual contacts of naval personnel infected 
with a venereal disease for that period of time in 
which they could have acquired or transmitted their 
infection. A separate Venereal Disease Epidemio- 
logic Report (Med-6222-5) shall be prepared on 
each of the alleged contacts and forwarded to State, 
Territorial, or local health authorities in accord- 
ance with the Bumed Instruction in the 6222 series. 

(3) When a person with tuberculosis or other in- 
fectious disease considered to be a public menace is 
discharged from the service, report shall be made 
in accordance with article 11-7(2) (fo>. 

3-13. Cooperation With Intelligence Offi- 
cers 

(1) The medical officer of a command or activity, 
particularly if in a foreign port, shall cooperate with 
the intelligence officers and furnish such data as 
may be required from a medical or sanitary stand- 
point. 

(2) Medical intelligence information shall be 
submitted to Bumed in accordance with article 
23-124. 



3-14. Compulsory Medical or Surgical 
Treatment 

(1) Reference should be made to General Order 
No. 3 for instructions concerning disposition of 
naval personnel who refuse medical, dental, or sur- 
gical treatment. 

3—15. Dental Treatment 

(1) Except in an emergency, the medical officer 
of a command or activity having no officer of the 
Dental Corps attached shall make an appointment 
in advance when it becomes necessary to send pa- 
tients elsewhere for dental services. 

(2) When the medical officer sends a patient to 
another command or activity for dental services, he 
shall make the patient's Dental Record available to 
the dental officer of such command or activity. 
After the necessary entries have been made, the 
dental officer shall return the Dental Record to the 
person having custody of the Health Record. 

(3) The medical officer shall notify the dental 
officer whenever a person suffering from syphilis or 
any other disease in a communicable stage is sent 
to him for dental treatment. 

(4) When officers or enlisted personnel are or- 
dered to a command or activity where the services 
of an officer of the Dental Corps are not available, 
the medical officer shall refer such persons to an 
officer of the Dental Corps for examination and 
treatment prior to their departure. 

(5) The medical officer shall be guided by the 
recommendations of the dental officer concerning 
discharge or granting of liberty to dental patients 
on the sick list. 

(6) When the Health Record of an individual 
has been lost, the medical officer shall request the 
dental officer to prepare a new Dental Record. 

(7) The medical officer of a command or activity 
having a dental department shall send to the dental 
department the Dental Records of officers and en- 
listed personnel who arrive for duty or training. 

(8) The medical officer, or other person who has 
custody of the Health Record, shall be responsible 
for the inclusion of a current Dental Record when 
the Health Record is transferred. 

(9) When officers of the Medical Corps record 
dental examinations on Dental Records or other 
forms, in the absence of officers of the Dental Corps, 
they shall be guided by the instructions contained 
on the Dental Record in chapter 6. When record- 
ing dental examinations on Standard Form 88, they 
shall be guided by instructions contained thereon. 



3-3 

Change 12 



3-16 



MANUAL OP THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



3-31 



Section II. ASSISTANT MEDICAL OFFICERS 



Assistant Medical Officers 

Duties of Assistant Medical Officers, 



3-16. Assistant Medical Officers 

(1) Assistant medical officers are those officers of 
the Medical Corps assigned to the command or 
activity for duty who serve as assistants to the med- 
ical officer. In the absence of the medical officer, 
the next senior officer of the Medical Corps shall, 
with the approval of the commanding officer, as- 
sume this duty temporarily. 

3-17. Duties of Assistant Medical Officers 

CD Assistant officers of the Medical Corps shall 
perform those duties assigned them by the medical 
officer of the command or activity. They shall con- 
form to the directions of the medical officer with 
regard to the professional treatment, care, and 
comfort of the sick and injured, and shall exact 
from those serving under their supervision a similar 
performance of duty. 



Article 
3-16 
3-17 

(2) They shall assure themselves that the treat- 
ments prescribed for patients are properly admin- 
istered by members of the Medical Service Corps, 
Nurse Corps, and Hospital Corps, and that the 
administration of such treatment is recorded in 
writing. 

(3) They shall keep the medical officer fully in- 
formed as to the condition of all patients and shall 
frequently consult with him in regard to their pro- 
fessional treatment. 

(4) They shall, subject to the direction of the 
medical officer, keep the Health Records and super- 
vise the preparation of the reports and returns. 

(5) They shall, in applying for permission to be 
absent from their duties, submit such application 
to the medical officer for his action or recommenda- 
tion. 



Section III. GENERAL DUTIES OF ALL MEDICAL CORPS OFFICERS 



Article 

General Responsibility 3-18 

Official Correspondence 3-19 

Articles on Professional Subjects 3-20 

Physical Examinations 3—21 

Transfer of Patients 3—22 

Unofficial Certificates ,_ 3—23 

Examination for Evidence of Intoxication 3—24 

Misconduct Entries 3—25 

Treatment of Casualties of Atomic, Biological, or Chemical Warfare 3—26 

Private Practice 3-36A 

Medical Aid to Civilians 3—27 

Restrictions Relative to Prospective Applicants 3—28 

Civil Actions 3-29 

Geneva Conventions 3—30 



3—18. General Responsibility 

(1) All officers of the Medical Corps are charged 
with responsibility for the treatment of sick and 
injured personnel, for prevention and control of 
disease, for promotion of health, and for giving 
advice on such matters as hygiene, sanitation, and 
safety. Every officer of the Medical Corps must, 
therefore, keep himself informed in all fields of 
general and naval medicine. 

3-19. Official Correspondence 

(1) Detailed instructions for the preparation and 
routing of official correspondence are contained in 
Navy Regulations and in the Navy Correspondence 
Manual. 



3-20. Articles on Professional Subjects 

(1) Medical Corps officers shall be guided by Navy 
Regulations in the preparation and publication of 
articles on professional subjects. 

3-21. Physical Examinations 

(1) Officers of the Medical Corps shall conduct 
physical examinations of persons in the naval serv- 
ice and of candidates for enlistment or appointment 
therein. The dental examination shall be conducted 
by officers of the Dental Corps if available. Com- 
plete instructions concerning physical examinations 
are contained in chapter 15. 

(2) Commanding officers are allowed discretion- 
ary authority to permit officers of the Medical Corps 



3-4 

Change 12 



3-21 



CHAPTER 3. GENERAL DUTIES OF MEDICAL CORPS OFFICERS 



3-27 



to conduct physical examinations of naval per- 
sonnel for the purpose of obtaining commercial 
life insurance in cases where a doctor in the 
employ of the insurance company is not available 
and where delay would be detrimental to the 
interests of the applicant. 

3-22. Transfer of Patients 

(1) Sick or injured persons may be recom- 
mended for transfer to an Armed Forces medical 
facility capable of providing the required care 
and disposition. (See art. 11-30 and chs. 12 and 
18 for further information on transfer of 
patients.) 

(2) In the absence of Armed Forces medical 
facilities, the facilities of other agencies or civil- 
ian sources may be utilized in accordance with 
the BUMEDINST 6320.32 series. 

3-23. Unofficial Certificates 

(1) Officers of the Medical Corps shall not 
give an unofficial certificate of ill health or of 
inability to perform duty, except as may be 
granted in 3-23(2). 

(2) Requests for certificates from persons in 
the Naval Establishment to enable them to re- 
ceive compensation from lodges, benevolent 
societies, and the shipyard relief associations may 
be granted unofficially in conformance with the 
instruction applicable to transcripts of Health 
Records (sec. IV, ch. 23). 

3-24. Examination for Evidence of Intoxica- 
tion 

(1) Upon request by competent authority, of- 
ficers of the Medical Corps shall examine person- 
nel for evidence of intoxication in accordance 
with the instructions outlined in chapter 19- 

3-25. Misconduct Entries 

(1) Officers of the Medical Corps making 
entries in the Health Records or reports of medi- 
cal survey shall state whether the disease or 
injury was or was not in line of duty and was or 
was not due to own misconduct. Detailed infor- 
mation on this subject is contained in chapter 16. 

3-26. Treatment of Casualties of Atomic, Bio- 
logical, or Chemical Warfare 
(1) Officers of the Medical Corps shall keep 
informed regarding the proper methods for the 
treatment of casualties which may result from 
these types of warfare, so that they will be pre- 
pared to act in such emergencies. 

3-26A. Private Practice 

(1) Private practice by Medical Corps officers 
is subject to policies heretofore stated by the 
Chief, BUMED, and also is subject to policies 
applicable to all members of the naval service as 
stated by the Chief of Naval Personnel (art. 
C-11101, BUPERS Manual). 

(2) BUMED does not condone private prac- 



tice except under the following circumstances: 

(a) Emergency circumstances verging on 
community hardship exist. 

(b) Private practice shall not interfere with 
the practice of medicine by physicians in the 
locality and shall not be permitted to be offen- 
sive to medical associations or to reflect discredit 
to the service. 

(c) Private practice must be voluntary as to 
the officer. 

(d) The efficiency of the officer shall not be 
impaired by activity in private practice. 

(e) Private activity may not involve expense 
to the Department. 

(/) The private practice which is authorized 
is "off-duty" or "outside-working-hours" prac- 
tice. 

'(g) The officer shall not be granted liberty 
or leave for the sole Purpose of practicing, 

(3) Medical Corps officers shall not under any 
circumstances examine or treat their private pa- 
tients in Medical Department facilities. 

(4) BUMED considers that the authority is in 
the commanding officer of the Medical Corps 
officer concerned to determine either that private 
practice interferes or does not interfere with the 
officer's performance of duty in the command. 
Professional liaison with local and national med- 
ical associations having to do with relationship 
between physicians who have status as officers of 
the Medical Department of the Navy and private 
practitioners is a matter of technical control by 
BUMED. 

(5) The responsibility for meeting local licens- 
ing requirements is a personal matter for Medical 
Corps officers who wish to engage in private 
practice. 

(6) A physician in any private medical activity 
or practice who also is an officer of the Medical 
Corps on' extended active duty shall not accept a 
fee, directly or indirectly, for care of a member, 
or dependent of a member, of the uniformed 
services entitled to medical care by the uni- 
formed services. 

(7) Medical Corps officers whose private prac- 
tice may lead to appearances in court as expert 
witnesses in private litigation shall make this 
appearance privately, out of uniform if possible, 
and shall establish carefully the character of ap- 
pearance as appearance and testimony other than 
on behalf of the Navy. 

(8) (a) A Medical Corps officer ap- 
pearing as a witness during "off- 
duty" hours for a party not eligible 
for medical care in military facili- 
ties may retain any fee within the 
Standards of Conduct prescribed by 
Department of Defense Directives. 



3-5 
Change 20 



3-27 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



3-31 



(b) A Medical Corps officer who 
appears privately and voluntarily as 
a witness on behalf of a member or 
other person generally eligible for 
care in naval medical facilities 
shall not accept a fee, directly or 
indirectly. 

(c) A Medical Corps officer who 
appears involuntarily as the physi- 
cian having firsthand knowledge of 
the case of a person eligible for 
care in a naval medical facility may 
accept any fee established by rule 
or statute and one who appears as an 
expert may accept any negotiated 
higher expert witness fee commensu- 
rate with professional local custom; 
however, such fee, beyond any actual 
expenses, shall be delivered to the 
disbursing officer of his command for 
deposit to the Miscellaneous Receipt 
Account 173099, recoveries and re- 
funds, not otherwise classified. 

(d) The foregoing is not appli- 
cable to a Medical Corps officer who 
appears as a witness on behalf of 
the Government. 

3-27. Medical Aid to Civilians 

(1) The senior officer present may require 
officers of the Medical Department under his 
authority to render aid to persons not in the 
naval service, when such aid is necessary and 
demanded by the laws of humanity or the prin- 
ciples of international courtesy. 

(2) The services to be rendered to civilian 
employees and other persons eligible for care at 
naval medical facilities are given in chapter 15 
and BUMEDINST 6320.31 series. 

3-28. Restrictions Relative to Prospective 
Applicants 

(1) Officers of the Medical Corps on active 
duty shall not undertake to operate upon or 
treat prospective applicants for the Navy or 
Marine Corps, Regular or Reserve, with a view 
to correcting defects, disqualifications, and dis- 
abilities barring them from enlistment or ap- 
pointment. 

3-29. Civil Actions 

(1) Procedure. — If an officer of the Medical 
Corps is apprised of any civil litigation or legal 

3-6 

Change 20 



proceedings being brought against him wherein 
the United States is in legal effect the defendant, 
he shall immediately advise the commanding 
officer so that a report can be made as set forth 
in the Manual of the Judge Advocate General. 
A copy of the report shall be submitted to 
BUMED. The Navy Department does not recom- 
mend for or against insurance of individuals 
by commercial insurers against negligence which 
may occur in line of duty or scope of employ- 
ment. 

(2) Ambulances. — Navy ambulances and Navy 
ambulance drivers are susceptible to efforts or 
requests by local police officers or other persons 
for aid in cases of accidents or emergencies. Op- 
erators of ambulances, either members of the 
Hospital Corps or civil employees, should be 
thoroughly indoctrinated: 

{a) To adhere strictly to orders for picking 
up and transporting the patient for whom dis- 
patched. 

(b) To remain with vehicle and never to 
stop or to leave ambulance out of curiosity when 
halted by traffic conditions at the scene of an 
accident when the driver by reason of orders to 
pick up and carry a Navy patient is not in a 
position to offer the services of himself or the 
ambulance. 

(c) To recognize that the Medical Depart- 
ment is expected as a matter of policy to cooper- 
ate with local authorities in emergencies- when 
this cooperation will not interfere with a Medi- 
cal Department operation, and that operators of 
Navy ambulances which are not carrying pa- 
tients or proceeding under orders to pick up 
patients are expected to offer, in humanitarian 
emergency situations, such assistance as they are 
qualified to render. 

(d) In any case in which an ambulance 
carrying a patient or proceeding under orders to 
pick up a patient is stopped or otherwise sub- 
jected to interference by State or other local 
authorities for any reason whatever, including 
aid to an emergency humanitarian patient: to 
give courteous information about current orders; 
to courteously request that compliance with 
these orders not be subjected to interference; and 
to report to the commanding officer, for trans- 
mittal by the commanding officer to the Judge 
Advocate General of the Navy, any measures .ap- 
plied by State or local authorities which prevent 
direct compliance with orders. 

3-30. Geneva Conventions 

(1) Officers of the Medical Department shall 
familiarize themselves with the Geneva Conven- 
tions. The Conventions are contained in the 
Annex to Naval Warfare Information Publica- 
tion 10-2, Law of Naval Warfare, which is 
available to all ships and stations. 



CHAPTER 3. GENERAL DUTIES OF MEDICAL CORPS OFFICERS 3-34 



tions for official use shall file with the local dis- 
trict director of internal revenue a certificate on 
Treasury Form 1964, obtained from his commanding: 
officer, showing his name, official address, and official 
status. As a result of such filing, the district 
director of internal revenue will assign the officer an 
exemption identification number. At the time of 
his original certification the officer will be issued, 
without charge or request, a book of official narcotic 
order blanks. Each order for the purchase of tax- 
able narcotic drugs by such official shall be pre- 
pared on one of these order blanks. Certificates 
must be renewed on or before 1 July of each year to 
remain effective. 

<2) The exemption specified in subarticle 3-32 
<1) does not apply when the officer renders profes- 
sional treatment outside of his official duties. In 
such event the officer is required to register and in 
all other respects comply with the provisions of the 
law and regulations governing private practice. 

(3) In order to comply with the law and the reg- 
ulations, exempt officials in charge of narcotic drugs 
shall require that accurate records be maintained of 
the amounts of such drugs purchased, or obtained 
by requisition, and dispensed. Prescriptions for 
narcotics shall be given a serial file number pre- 
ceded by the letter "N" and shall be filed separately 
from other prescriptions. All such records and pre- 
scriptions shall be available for inspection by inter- 
nal revenue officials. 

3-33. Prescribing and Dispensing Drugs 

(1) All drugs shall be dispensed under the super- 
vision of officers of the Medical Corps, Dental Corps, 
Medical Service Corps, Nurse Corps; or under the 
supervision of Medical Department representatives 
at activities where there are no officers of the afore- 
mentioned corps present. Official prescriptions for 
such drugs shall be signed by a military or civilian 
medical officer, or if to be used in dental treatments, 
they shall be signed by an officer of the Dental 
Corps. Other prescriptions by attending civilian 
physicians for authorized personnel and their de- 
pendents may be filled upon approval of a repre- 
sentative designated by the commanding officer or 
the medical officer. Care shall be exercised to in- 
sure that prescriptions for drugs are properly writ- 
ten, signed, numbered, and filed. 

(2) All solutions of phenol shall be tinted pink 
(fuchsin), and solutions of bichloride of mercury 
shall be tinted blue (methylene blue) . This require- 
ment shall not apply to compounded medicines, pre- 
scribed by medical or dental officers for individuals 
and appropriately labeled as such, in which phenol 
or bichloride of mercury is one of the ingredients. 

(3) When drugs or medicines are prescribed or 
issued, the last person removing them from a dis- 
tinctive or distinctively marked container is re- 
sponsible for their proper distribution (see art. 3-34 
(4) and (5)). Medicine glasses shall not be used 



for any purpose other than the administration of 
medicines for internal use. 

(4) Bichloride of mercury tablets shall be issued 
only in the forms furnished by medical and dental 
supply depots. 

3-34. Custody Requirements 

(1) No officer of the Medical Department of the 
Navy shall take or receive into his custody on board 
ship or in any Navy or Marine Corps establishment 
any alcoholic beverages or intoxicating or narcotic 
substances; except, as may be authorized (a) for 
medicinal purposes, (b) for retention as evidence in 
disciplinary cases, or (c> by Navy Regulations and 
General C )rders. Working stocks of these sub- 
stances may be issued from time to time for dis- 
pensing purposes to the officer or enlisted person in 
charge of the pharmacy. Such person shall be re- 
quired to keep an accurate record of receipts and 
expenditures and to keep these substances under 
lock when not in use. Except as provided above, 
an officer shall not permit any of these substances 
under his custody to be placed in the possession of 
enlisted personnel in quantities other than the 
amounts required for immediate consumption by 
patients, or for use in emergency, such as combat. 
Alcoholic beverages other than those obtained 
through Medical Department sources shall not be 
accepted for medicinal purposes except upon ap- 
proval of Btjmed. When accepted these alcoholic 
beverages shall be taken up on inventory, used 
for medicinal purposes only, and accounted for 
accordingly. 

(2) Officers of the Medical Department are au- 
thorized to issue alcoholic beverages and narcotic 
substances, for medicinal purposes only, to com- 
manding officers of ships and to the pilots of air- 
craft to which no Medical Corps officer is attached. 

(3) An officer of the Medical Department, or if 
such an officer is not available, then an officer desig- 
nated by the commanding officer, shall keep in a 
separate compartment, under lock, all unissued nar- 
cotics, alcohol, alcoholic beverages, and dangerous 
and habit-forming drugs. The keys always shall be 
in the custody of an officer. 

(4) Personnel of the Medical Department shall 
assure themselves that all drugs and medicinal 
chemicals under their charge are properly labeled, 
and shall require that all dangerous poisons are 
indicated by appropriate poison labels. 

(5) Drugs of a powerful or dangerous nature 
which may be mistaken for other drugs because of 
their appearance shall be kept in containers of dis- 
tinctive color, size, or shape and in a special section 
wherever drugs are stored. 

(6) All persons in the Medical Department shall 
be duly warned regarding the danger of accidental 
poisoning and instructed in the proper handling of 
poisons and use of antidotes. An antidote locker 
shall be appropriately located and maintained under 



3-7 
Change 12 



3-34 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



3-36 



proper security. An antidote list should be placed 
near the antidote locker. 

(7) Alcohol and alcoholic beverages shall be used 
only in connection with the treatment of the sick 
or to meet the essential requirements of the Medical 
Department activities. The flies of all Medical De- 
partment activities must show for what purposes all 
alcohol and alcoholic beverages charged thereto 
were expended. 

(8) Prescriptions for alcohol and alcoholic bever- 
ages shall be given a separate serial file number 
preceded by the letter "A" and shall be filed sepa- 
rately from other prescriptions. 

3-35. Security of Narcotics, Alcohol, and 
Alcoholic Beverages 

(1) These substances require special handling and 
accounting to provide adequate protection against 
carelessness, theft, and misappropriation. Accord- 
ingly the following measures, in addition to those 
prescribed elsewhere in this chapter and in the 
manual, shall be enforced in all activities except 
stock points of the medical and dental supply sys- 
tem. (The security measures for handling this ma- 
terial at medical and dental stock points are 
included in the Busanda Manual.) 

(a) Monthly, or more frequently if circum- 
stances warrant, the person having direct or dele- 
gated custody of narcotics, alcohol, and alcoholic 
beverages in store and unissued, or issued to the 
pharmacy for dispensing or manufacturing use, 
shall assure himself by physical inventory that all 
quantities received and expended have been properly 
accounted for. 

lb) (1) Monthly, or more frequently if neces- 
sary, an inventory of these substances shall be made 
by a duly constituted board of three officers, at least 
one of whom shall be an officer of the Medical, Den- 
tal, Medical Service, or Nurse Corps who is not 
directly or by delegated authority accountable for 
same. In small ships or small stations, where three 



officers are not available, one Medical Department 
representative and one commissioned officer may 
constitute the board provided that no person di- 
rectly or by delegated authority charged with 
custody of alcohols, narcotics, and other items 
requiring special storage and issue precautions shall 
serve as senior member of the board. All prescribed 
accounting records and prescriptions for narcotics, 
alcohol, and alcoholic beverages for the prescribed 
inventory period shall be checked for compliance 
with regulations, particularly as to dating, proper 
preparation, and signature by an authorized Medi- 
cal Department representative. 

(2) The inventory board shall carefully in- 
spect the original seals on the closures of the con- 
tainers of bulk stocks and unissued items. 

(3) The inventory board shall also inspect 
the security of the places where such bulk stock or 
unissued items are stored. The responsible officer 
shall supply the inventory board with the names of 
all persons to whom he has made available the com- 
bination of the locks or supplied keys. The board 
shall also inquire into the frequency of changes in 
combination locks on such storage spaces, and 
otherwise shall include in the written and signed 
report to the command any recommendation which, 
in the board's judgment, should be made to enhance 
security. 

(2) The quantity of these substances included in 
battle dressing stations or first aid boxes shall be 
in accordance with established provisions, and shall 
be promptly removed to security when not required 
by operating conditions. The manner and degree 
of security and maintenance of accounting records 
in these instances shall be consistent with the cir- 
cumstances of use and operating conditions. 

3-36. Loss of Narcotics 

(1) Losses, thefts, or irreconcilable differences 
between physical inventory findings and the nar- 
cotic inventory records shall be reported in ac- 
cordance with article 25-7(5) . 



3-8 

Change 12 



■" ■ 







I ■ II 1 1 




r 



Chapter 4 



DUTIES OF MEDICAL OFFICERS AFLOAT 



Sections 



— .-__„__„.. 



Articles 

4- 1 through 4-11 



I. Fleet, Force, and Division Medical Officers. . 

IT. The Medical Officer of a Ship 4-12 through 4-19 

HI. Medical Department Duties in Emergencies 4-20 through 4-46 

. — . i 

Section I. FLEET, FORCE, AND DIVISION MEDICAL OFFICERS 



Article 

4— 1 

4— 2 

4- 3 



The Fleet Medical Officer 

Inspections, When Made 

Scope of Inspections 

Outline of General Inspection 4- 4 

Special Inspections 4- 5 

Written Report 4- 6 

Deleted 4- 7 

Battle Flans ... 4- 8 

Information Concerning Epidemic Diseases, Etc 4- 9 

Medical Meetings 4—10 

Force and Division Medical Officers 4-11 



4-1. The Fleet Medical Officer 

CD The fleet medical officer shall keep himself 
informed of all matters pertaining to the medical 
personnel and medical materiel of the fleet and 
shall assist the fleet commander in preparing the 
medical aspects of operational and logistic plans. 
Subject to the approval of the fleet commander he 
shall have general supervision over safeguarding 
the health of and providing care for the sick and 
injured personnel of the fleet. 

4—2. Inspections, When Made 

(1) The fleet medical officer shall inspect ships 
of the fleet when directed by the fleet commander. 

4-3. Scope of Inspections 

(1) When fleet operations permit, the fleet medi- 
cal officer shall make a detailed Inspection of the 
medical department and medical organization of 
each ship with respect to medical efficiency includ- 
ing facilities for shipboard care of the sick and 
injured, communicable diseases, emergencies, and 
the adequacy of the medical preparations for battle 
and disasters. He shall examine the entire ship to 
determine sanitary conditions and the sufficiency of 
sanitary regulations. 

(2) When operational activities prevent general 
inspections being made, the fleet medical officer 
shall inspect the facilities for rendering efficient 



medical supervision and care provided in the type 
ships representing the various groups and com- 
ponents of the fleet when such units are available. 
Such inspections may be Informal and should be 
performed on an advisory and constructive basis. 
Type ships, representative of force organizations, 
should be boarded for inspections when at rendez- 
vous for fueling, supplies, or repairs. 

4—4. Outline of General Inspection 

(1) Items of Inquiry,— When it is practicable to 
make a general inspection, inquiry should be made 
into the following: 

(a) Personnel of the Medical Department. — 
Number of officers of the Medical Corps, Medical 
Service Corps, and Nurse Corps, and enlisted per- 
sonnel of the Hospital Corps detailed for duty with 
the medical department of the ship; efficiency of 
the organization; number of other ratings detailed 
for duty in the medical department; and the in- 
struction given to hospital corpsmen, stretcher 
bearers, and other personnel of the ship in their 
duties pertaining to the medical department. 

(&) Materiel of the Medical Department. — 
Location, arrangements, cleanliness, and equipment 
of the sick-bay spaces; provisions for the use of 
Medical Department materiel in emergencies In- 
cluding sterile packs, the antidote locker, and first- 
aid kits; and defects in supplies and equipment. 



4-1 



Change 2 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, D". S. NAVY 



4-11 



(c) Medical records, reports, and returns. — Health 
Record flies for purposes of determining whether or 
not reqords are maintained as required by directives, 
including records of immunization; prescription file, 
narcotic record, Medical Department property jour- 
nal and records; methods of stock keeping and issue, 
with due regard for economy; disposition of overage 
records; general correspondence and files; safety 
regulations; and sanitary reports submitted. 

id) Sanitary conditions of the ship. — Cleanli- 
ness of the ship as a whole; ventilation, heating, and 
lighting; food inspection, preparation, and service 
to the crew and to the sick; physical examination 
of food handlers; bathing facilities; educational 
measures for prevention of venereal and other dis- 
eases; supply and protection of drinking water; 
ratio of sanitary fixtures to personnel ; the cleanli- 
ness and suitability of the crew's clothing; sanitary 
precautions used in the barber shop and ship's store ; 
measures taken to prevent rat and vermin infesta- 
tion aboard ship, and measures to destroy them, if 
present; facilities for sterilization of bedding, and 
similar material; sanitary condition of the laundry; 
records of immunization; and evidence of over- 
crowding of personnel. Standards as set forth in 
chapter 22 and in the Manual of Naval Preventive 
Medicine shall be used as a guide in making inspec- 
tions of the sanitary conditions of ships. 

(e) Other items. — First-aid supplies at battle 
stations; station bills for general quarters, damage 
control, gas defense, flight quarters, fire quarters, 
collision, Are and rescue party, abandon ship, man 
overboard, taking aboard and handling rescued per- 
sonnel, and landing force problems; provisions for 
removal of dead and wounded from various parts 
of the ship; identification tags (wartime only) ; care 
of the mental patients; statements of health condi- 
tions for preceding 12 months; instructions relative 
to poisons and distilled spirits; instructions in first 
aid to division officers and crews; and property ac- 
countability. 

(2) Recommendations. — When defects within the 
medical department or in the sanitary conditions of 
the ship are found, the inspecting officer shall make 
recommendations to the fleet commander for their 
correction. He shall make recommendations to the 
Bureal, via official channels, for changes In medical 
department equipment and supplies, particularly in 
regard to those items in which the prescribed mini- 
mum stock is out of proportion to the general cur- 
rent rate of use, and to the elimination of items 
which have fallen into disuse. The fleet medical 
officer shall recommend to the fleet commander the 
transfer of medical department supplies from a ship 
carrying an excess stock to a vessel requiring such 
supplies. 

4-5. Special Inspections 

(1) When directed, the fleet medical officer shall 
investigate the sanitary condition of any ship of the 



fleet where excessive sick rates exist, and he shall 
examine the different parts of the ship for insani- 
tary conditions. He shall make any other inspec- 
tions necessary to ascertain the reasons for increase 
of disease and recommended such steps as may be 
necessary. 

4-6. Written Report 

(1) Following each inspection, the fleet medical 
officer shall make a concise written report to his 
commander. When conditions are found to be satis- 
factory, a statement to that effect will suffice. 

(2) When necessary he shall make to his com- 
mander recommendations or reports concerning 
sanitary conditions of the fleet or force, the preven- 
tion of disease or means for checking its spread, and 
the care of the sick and wounded. 

Note. — There Is no article 4-7. 

4-8. Battle Plans 

(1) The fleet medical officer shall prepare a spec- 
ific plan for the care and transportation of the sick 
and wounded of the fleet during an action and shall 
keep himself informed of the facilities available for 
this purpose in the ships of *he fleet. He shall pre- 
pare medical department contributory plans for the 
fleet commander's basic operating plans. 

(2) After an action, a report of the number killed, 
missing, and wounded in the fleet shall be compiled 
by the fleet medical officer and sent to the fleet 
commander. 

4—9. Information Concerning Epidemic 
Diseases, Etc. 

(l)The fleet medical officer shall coordinate and 
disseminate to unit medical officers all pertinent 
medical information. 

4-10. Medical Meetings 

(1) The fleet medical officer shall stimulate inter- 
est in professional subjects by arranging meetings 
of officers of the Medical Corps for the discussion 
of professional subjects. Officers of the Medical 
Corps shall be encouraged to attend meetings of 
professional interest in the ports visited and on board 
hospital ships. 

4—11. Force and Division Medical Officers 

(1) The duties of force and division medical offi- 
cers shall be similar to those of the fleet medical 
officer insofar as they relate to their organizations. 

(2) Force and division medical officers shall see 
that expenditures from the medical stores of ships 
of their organization are made with economy and 
shall report to the force or division commander in- 
stances of wastefulness or unauthorized expendi- 
tures. 



4-2 

Change 2 



CHAPTER 4. DUTIES OF MEDICAL OFFICERS AFLOAT 4-16 
Section II. THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF A SHIP 



4-12 



General 

Fitting Out 

Medical Storerooms 
Physical Inspection of the Crew and Other Inspections . 

First Aid Instruction 

Transport Duty 

4-12. General 

(1) Head of the Medical Department. — The 
head of the medical department of a ship is 
designated the medical officer. In addition to 
those general duties prescribed in Navy Regula- 
tions for the head of a department, the medical 
officer shall be responsible, under the command- 
ing officer, for maintaining the health of the 
personnel of the ship, making inspections inci- 
dent thereto, and advising the commanding officer 
with respect to hygiene and sanitation affecting 
the ship. He shall be responsible for all BUMED 
cognizant property aboard (except that under 
the charge of the dental officer). He shall be in 
direct charge of the treatment of the sick and 
wounded. He shall take charge of the personnel 
of the medical department and of the men on the 
sicklist, and shall report the medical department 
at quarters. 

(2) Complements and Allowances. — When it 
is believed that the complement or allowance of 
the medical department personnel should be 
modified, the medical officer shall make a request 
to the commanding officer for modification, 

(3) Absence or Disability. — In the absence, or 
during the disability, of the medical officer of 
the ship, unless otherwise directed by the com- 
manding officer, the officer of the Medical Corps 
next in grade on board shall perform his duties. 

4-13. Fitting Out 

(1) After reporting, the medical officer shall 
examine the sick-bay spaces and equipment, and 
other accommodations for the sick and wounded, 
and- report any defects to the commanding 
officer. 

(2) The medical officer shall examine the crew 
in order to verify the descriptive lists and Health 
Records, and to ascertain if the crew are physi- 
cally qualified to perform their duties. If any are 
found disqualified, the medical officer shall, with 
the approval of the commanding officer, admit 
such personnel to the sicklist and recommend 
their transfer. He shall immunize the ship's 
complement against diseases in the manner pre- 
scribed in chapter 22 and in current directives. 



Article 

4-12 

4-13 

4-14 

4-15 

4-16 

4-17 

4-14. Medical Storerooms 

(1) The medical officer shall take charge of 
the medical storeroom and keep the key in his 
own custody or in the custody of his representa- 
tive, but in any case the medical officer is re- 
sponsible for the security of the contents of the 
storeroom. Medical storerooms shall not be used 
as sleeping compartments, and only medical 
stores shall be kept therein. 

4^15. Physical Inspection of the Crew and 
Other Inspections 

(1) Personnel. — Subject to the approval of the 
commanding officer, inspection of the crew shall 
be held whenever the presence of communicable 
or concealed disease is suspected. 

(2) Food and Water. — Regulations in regard 
to inspection of food and water appear in chap- 
ter 22. The Manual of Naval Preventive Medi- 
cine, NAVMED P-5010, particularly chapters 1, 
5, and 6, may be used as a guide. 

(3) Compartments, Cells, Bedding, Etc. — Reg- 
ulations concerning inspections of compartments, 
cells, bedding, etc., appear in chapter 22. The 
Manual of Naval Preventive Medicine, NAV- 
MED P-5010, particularly chapters 2 and 3, may 
be used as a guide. 

4-16. First Aid Instruction 

(1) The medical officer shall recommend to 
the commanding officer a schedule of instruction 
in first aid by Medical Department personnel in 
order that the ship's officers and crew may ad- 
minister to the wounded in battle when no medi- 
cal personnel are available. Requirements for 
this instruction are: 

(a) Division Officers. — Knowledge of the 
degrees of proficiency of their men in first aid, 
and knowledge of the location and use of avail- 
able first aid material. 

(b) Hospital Corpsmen. — Knowledge that 
will qualify them to become assistant instructors. 

(c) Stretcher Bearers. — Knowledge of han- 
dling and transportation of casualties and basic 
factors of first aid. 



4-3 

Change 14 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



4-17 



(d) Crew. — A practical knowledge of funda- 
mental first aid treatment of wounds and frac- 
tures, methods of resuscitation, and handling of 
unconscious persons. 



4-17. Transport Duty 

(1) Medical officers on transport duty shall be 
guided by article 4-13 and chapter 14, section I, 
of this Manual.. 

NOTE. — There are no articles 4-1S and 4-19. 



Section III. MEDICAL DEPARTMENT DUTIES IN EMERGENCIES 

Article 

Drills and Emergencies 4-20 

Preparation for Emergencies 4-21 

Condition I, General Quarters 4-22 

Condition II 4-23 

Condition III 4-24 

Damage Control 

Defense Against Special Methods of Warfare 4-26 

Flight Quarters 4-27 

Fire Quarters *~ 

Collision f" 29 

Fire and Rescue Party 4-30 

Abandon Ship 4-31 

Man Overboard 4-32 

Taking Aboard and Handling Rescued Personnel 4-33 

Landing Force 4-34 

Duty in Battle 4-35 

Batde Dressing Stations 4 ~ 36 

First-Aid Boxes and Other Medical Containers 4-37 

Medical Stores at Battle Dressing Stations 4-38 

Water Supply of Battle Dressing Stations 4- 39 

Light for Battle Dressing Stations 4-40 



4-4 

Change 14 



4-20 



CHAPTER 4. DUTIES OF MEDICAL OFFICERS AFLOAT 



4-27 



Sterilizers at Battle Dressing Stations 

Routes To Be Harked --. 

Pinal Preparation for Battle 

Bemoval of the Dead and Wounded 

Transfer of the Wounded to Hospital Ships 

4-20. Drills and Emergencies 

( 1 ) The medical department shall be prepared for 
emergencies. Personnel of the medical department 
shall be available to render medical care at all times. 
The medical officer shall be guided by fleet regula- 
tions and orders as to special drills and emergencies 
and by ship's regulations for routine drills. 

(2) The sections of the watch, quarter, station, 
and other bills which apply to the medical depart- 
ment shall be posted In the sick-bay spaces, and 
personnel of the medical department shall be con- 
tinually instructed to insure that each individual 
is familiar with his station and his prescribed duties. 
These bills shall be kept up to date. 

(3) The instructions contained in the following 
articles shall govern the organization of the medical 
department for emergency, subject, however, to the 
approval of the commanding officer. 

4-21. Preparation for Emergencies 

The medical officers is responsible for the proper 
dispersion of medical department personnel. He 
shall make necessary preparations for the proper 
distribution of medical supplies and equipment to 
the battle dressing stations, first-aid stations, col- 
lecting stations, decontamination station, and repair 
parties. He shall arrange in advance for space 
assignment to care for any overflow of personnel 
casualties. 

4-22. Condition I, General Quarters 

General quarters are the battle stations of the 
officers and crew. The term is also used to desig- 
nate the evolution in which all hands assume battle 
stations. In Condition I, all hands are at battle 
stations (general quarters) and engagement with the 
enemy is imminent. All medical department per- 
sonnel shall proceed immediately to their assigned 
stations. Crew personnel who have been assigned 
as stretcher bearers proceed to their assigned sta- 
tions, where they are available for transportation 
of the wounded. Efficient organization for the re- 
moval and transportation of the sick and wounded 
shall be provided. 

4-23. Condition H 

This condition is maintained when enemy forces 
may be encountered. Medical department personnel 
man battle stations in a condition of readiness. 

4-24. Condition HE 

The third condition of readiness for action is main- 
tained when contact with surface ships is not immi- 



Artkle 

4-41 

4-43 

4-43 

4-44 

4-45 

nent, but submarines may be present. The medical 
department prepares to assume Condition I or II, but 
carries on in a routine manner, unless otherwise 
directed by the commanding officer. 

4-25. Damage Control 

The confinement below decks of the medical de- 
partment by damage control measures makes the 
knowledge of first aid among crew members, and 
particularly among the stretcher bearers, an essen- 
tial of the medical department in the preparations 
for battle. Ability of nonmedical personnel to ad- 
minister first aid, ability of stretcher bearers to 
transport the wounded, and availability of medical 
facilities at battle dressing stations are three con- 
ditions of the preparation of the medical depart- 
ment for battle that must be coordinated. Each 
factor shall receive attention from inspection offi- 
cers. Hospital, corpsmen shall be assigned to 
accompany repair parties to assist in first aid and 
to supervise the transportation of casualties. 

4-26. Defense Against Special Methods 
of Warfare 

(1) The medical officer must keep himself in- 
formed of the nature and effects of atomic, bio- 
logical, and chemical warfare. He shall be guided 
by published manuals and current directives in 
matters concerning medical aspects of these types 
of warfare. 

(2) The medical officer shall advise the command- 
ing officer concerning medical preparations for de- 
fense, and shall provide a specific plan for the 
handling and transportation of casualties. 

(3) The medical officer shall train the hospital 
corpsmen in the medical aspects of these special 
types of warfare, and shall conduct drills for the 
purpose of developing efficient performance during 
and following an attack. He shall supervise the in- 
struction of the ship's company in matters pertain- 
ing to self -aid and first aid. 

(4) The medical officer shall maintain adequate 
supplies for the effective decontamination and treat- 
ment of casualties. When the ship or its personnel 
has been exposed to any of the above-mentioned 
agents, he shall, when directed, make a thorough 
inspection, paying especial attention to possible 
contamination of food and water. 

4-27. Flight Quarters 

The procedures for medical attendance in case 
of emergencies during flight operations is provided 
for in ship's organization. 



4-5 



4-28 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U. S. NAVY 



4-38 



4-28. Fire Quarters 

CD The medical department personnel shall as- 
semble at the sick bay and prepare to remove the 
sick and carry out other prescribed evolutions. 

(2) One stretcher party, with an officer of the 
Medical Corps or hospital corpsman in charge, shall 
report at the scene of the Are. 

(3) The medical officer shall remove to a place of 
safety, or throw overboard, flammable liquids under 
his custody. 

4-39. Collision 

(1) The medical department personnel shall as- 
semble at the sick bay and prepare to remove the 
sick and the Health Records. 

(2) Stretchers and life preservers shall be kept 
by the beds of the patients and preparations made 
to transport patients to stations on the weather 
decks. 

(3) During collision drill, bed patients with ne- 
cessary attendants shall remain in the sick bay with 
the doors and air ports thereto being closed as re- 
quired. However, other medical department per- 
sonnel and ambulatory patients shall assemble at 
their assigned stations. Stretcher bearers shall 
practice transportation measures by transporting 
members of their own group to the weather decks 
and abandon-ship stations. 

4-30. Fire and Rescue Party- 
CD The watch, quarter, and station bill shall pro- 
vide that an officer of the Medical Corps and a hos- 
pital corpsman be detailed for duty with the fire 
and rescue party. Medical personnel shall always 
have medical emergency outfits available and shall 
accompany the party whenever it is called away. 
Stretcher bearers shall be provided. 

(2) Training in the use of the rescue-breathing 
apparatus shall be carried on but undertaken only In 
the presence of a medical officer. 

4-31. Abandon Ship 

The medical officer shall detail personnel of his 
. department for the following duties : 

(1) Passing out boat boxes or other medical equip- 
ment provided for abandoning ship. 

(2) Transporting the sick to their proper stations. 

(3) Salvaging records. 

4-32. Man Overboard 

Upon sounding of the alarm, the medical officer 
or one of his assistants shall stand by. A hospital 
corpsman with first-aid pouch shall be detailed to 
board the lifeboat to be lowered. 

4-33. Taking Aboard and Handling Res- 
cued Personnel 

The medical officer shall stand by when personnel 
are being rescued. When it is advisable, in his opin- 
ion, he shall accompany any boat which is launched 



for rescue purposes. Proper facilities shall be read- 
ily available at all times in order that immediate 
treatment may be begun when rescued personnel 
are brought aboard. 

4—34. Landing Force 

Fleet orders provide for medical department par- 
ticipation and scope of medical readiness for land- 
ing force organization. 

4-35. Duty in Battle 

In battle, the primary duty of the medical officer 
is to insure that prompt treatment is rendered to 
those wounded who may be able to return to their 
stations. 

4-36. Battle Dressing Stations 

(I) Two or more battle dressing stations shall be 
provided. These shall be dispersed and located in 
areas affording the maximum protection consistent 
with availability of care to the wounded. Auxiliary 
battle dressing stations shall be located as required 
by the ship's battle plans in areas where emergency 
medical care may be given. 

(2> The main battle dressing stations offering the 
best facilities for surgical operations after battle 
shall be equipped for this purpose. Adequate surgi- 
cal and sterilizing equipment shall be placed at these 
stations. 

4-37. First- Aid Boxes and Other Medical 
Containers 

(1) First-aid boxes, gun bags, and other medical- 
equipment containers are located on recommenda- 
tion of the medical department with the approval of 
the commanding officer. Supplying these containers 
and instructing the crew as to their location and 
use are the responsibilities of the medical officer. 
First aid is directed by the officer in charge of the 
battle station, when no medical personnel are 
present. 

(2) Turrets, masts, handling rooms, on-deck gun 
stations; torpedo, fire, and engine rooms; fire con- 
trol; and other stations not readily accessible, in 
which officers and enlisted men are stationed in 
battle, shall be provided with first-aid supplies and 
equipment. They shall be plainly labeled and read- 
ily available. 

4-38. Medical Stores at Battle Dressing 
Stations 

(1) The storeroom or locker at each battle dress- 
ing station shall contain sufficient medical supplies 
and equipment for emergency and battle use. 

(2) The contents of the storeroom or locker shall 
be made a matter of record and carried as a reserve 
stock. 

(3) The contents of these lockers shall not be de- 
pleted under any circumstances other than in battle 
or emergency. 



4-6 



4-39 



CHAPTER 4. DUTIES OF MEDICAL OFFICERS AFLOAT 



4-45 



4-39. Water Supply of Battle Dressing 
Stations 

The forward and after battle dressing stations 
should be equipped with a fresh-water tank of 200- 
gallon capacity in vessels with total ship and troop 
complement over 500, and 100-gallon capacity in 
vessels with total ship and troop complement less 
than 500, except in destroyers and small vessels, 
which should be equipped with a tank of 50- gallon 
capacity. On ships having an amidships battle 
dressing station, this station should be equipped 
with a tank of 100-gallon capacity. 

(2) Each battle dressing station should be pro- 
vided with a lavatory connected with the water 
system. Prior to action, buckets shall be filled with 
water, as the connections with gravity tanks may 
be shot away. Drinking water may be augmented 
by portable scuttlebutts. 

4^40. Light for Battle Dressing Stations 

(1) A suitable surgical light shall be connected 
with both the day and battle lighting circuits and 
installed over the operating table at each battle 
dressing station. 

(2) Hand electric-battery lanterns shall be pro- 
vided for each station. 

4-41. Sterilizers at Battle Dressing Sta- 
tions 

(1) Sterilizers shall be installed at all stations. 

(2) All surgical supplies shall be sterilized before 
they are placed in the battle dressing lockers. 

4-42. Routes To Be Marked 

Routes leading to battle dressing stations shall 
be indicated on bulkheads and hatches by the ap- 
proved marking prescribed in General Specifications 
of the Bureau of Ships. 



4-43. Final Preparation for Battle 

(1) In addition to the usual equipment trans- 
ferred from the sick bay and operating room and 
distributed in the battle dressing stations, the fol- 
lowing articles shall be provided for battle lockers: 
electric fans with proper connections, water buck- 
ets, sand, closed stools, swabs and brooms, washing 
stands, tables for apparatus, and bedding and mat- 
tresses for the wounded. 

(2) The supply of dressings at each station shall 
be dispersed prior to an engagement in order to 
guard against total loss in case of accident. 

(3) All officers and enlisted men shall wear their 
identification tags. 

(4) Emergency medical tags shall be made avail- 
able and the personnel instructed carefully in 
their use. 

4-44. Kern oval of the Dead and Wounded 

When opportunity presents, the first-aid parties 
shall remove the injured to the battle dressing sta- 
tions and a list of the dead and wounded shall be 
prepared and submitted to the commanding officer. 
A place shall be assigned for the collection of the 
dead. 

4-45. Transfer of the Wounded to Hos- 
pital Ships 

When a medical transport or a hospital ship is 
at hand, the seriously wounded shall be transferred 
as promptly as is consistent with their welfare. A 
fighting ship should be cleared of such casualties 
as soon as possible after action. Patients who will 
probably soon be fit for duty may be retained on 
board. 



* 



4-7 



c 



. 4 

c 



( 

* 



■ 



r 



Chapter 5 

DUTIES OF MEDICAL OFFICERS ASHORE 



Sections 



Articles 

I. Duties of the Inspector, Naval Medical Activities 6- 1 through 5- 2 

II. Duties of the District Medical Officer 5- 3 through 5- 5 

III. The Medical Officer of a Shore Station 5- 6 through 5-17 

IV. Medical Inspection of Naval Activities 5-18 through 5-23 

V. Civilian Physicians 5-24 through 5-29 



Section I. DUTIES OF THE INSPEC 

Designation 

Duties - 

5-1. Designation 

CD The regional medical officer assigned to per- 
form inspections and related duties in an area com- 
prising more than one naval district shall be a 
senior officer of the Medical Corps specifically as- 
signed to that duty, as hereinafter defined, and shall 
have the title of Inspector, Naval Medical Activities 
(Atlantic Coast, Pacific Coast, or as the case may 
be) . He reports to the commandant of the naval 
district in which he is located for military command 
and coordination control and may have additional 
duty as the medical officer on the staff of the sea 
frontier commander. However, his primary duty 
is that of Inspector. 

5-2. Duties 

(1) The Inspector, Naval Medical Activities, shall 
have the below listed duties. In their execution he 
shall work through and obtain the concurrence of 
the sea frontier commander or the commandant of 
the naval district as the case may be in matters of 
concern to each. 

(a) To act as advisor to the Bureau on Medical 
Department affairs other than dental in the region. 

(b) To represent the Bureau in matters per- 
taining to Medical Department coordination and 
correlation other than dental, with particular ref- 
erence to professional matters and physical plant 
facilities in the region. 

(c) To perform such inspections, investigations, 
and inquiries as may be directed by the Chief of 
the Bureau or other competent authority. 



)R, NAVAL MEDICAL ACTIVITIES 

Article 

5-1 

5-2 

(ct) To have cognizance of the conduct of in- 
spections of the Medical Department activities 
other than dental, to determine the adequacy and 
effectiveness of such inspections by examination of 
the reports submitted, and to advise the inspector 
General, Medical, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, 
accordingly. 

(e) To exercise over-all coordination of the 
Regular Navy Medical Department personnel- train- 
ing programs other than dental in the naval dis- 
tricts within the region. 

(/) To collaborate with the respective district 
medical officers in procurement of suitable Medical 
Department personnel (Medical Corps, Medical 
Service Corps, Nurse Corps, Hospital Corps) , for 
induction into the Naval Reserve and to support 
their efforts in furthering the development of vari- 
ous elements of the Reserve. 

(flO To review and make recommendations 
from the standpoint of the region on war plans and 
postwar plans for medical facilities and services 
within the respective naval districts; to eliminate 
duplication, provide for integration where possible, 
and insure their adequacy as subsidiary plans of the 
sea frontier of which they are a part. 

(h) To act in an advisory capacity to the Bu- 
reau and the sea frontier commander on all phases 
of medical logistic support required from shore ac- 
tivities within the region, and on medical-supply 
requirements originating from forces and bases be- 
yond the regional limits. 



5-1 
Change 7 



5-5 



5_3 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 

Section II. DUTIES OF THE DISTRICT MEDICAL OFFICER 

Designation 



Duties 

River Command Medical Officer 

5-3. Designation 

CD The senior officer of the Medical Corps as- 
signed to the staff of a commandant of a naval dis- 
trict shall be designated the district medical officer. 

5-4. Duties 

(1) The district medical officer has among those 
assigned him by the commandant the following 
duties: 

(a) To act as liaison officer for the comman- 
dant with the Bureau, with the regional inspector 
of medical activities, with the medical officer of 
each medical activity in the district on all medical 
logistics matters under the cognizance of the 
commandant. 

(b) To keep the commandant informed of all 
recommendations or plans for increases in or modi- 
fications of naval medical facilities within the dis- 
trict, whether originated locally or received from 
sources outside the district. 

(c) To advise the commandant on the medical 
aspects of matters pertaining to operational and 
logistical plans. 

(d) To advise the commandant concerning co- 
ordination of medical activities of the district with 
each other, with those of adjacent districts, and 
with other Federal and local medical agencies. To 
act as liaison officer for the commandant with civil- 
ian and public health authorities. 

(e) To Investigate, inspect, and report on the 
stock levels of medical materials maintained in the 
medical activities of the district and to consult with 
the commandant relative thereto, to insure that 
supplies and equipment are in accord with the cur- 
rent strategic situation and with the stock levels 
prescribed by the Bureau, 

(/) To advise the commandant with respect to 
the adequacy and assignment of the civilian and 
military personnel allowances of medical activities 
of the district, and to make recommendations in 
regard to increases or reductions therein. 

ig ) To correlate and insure expeditious medical 
services by district medical activities to operating 
forces afloat and overseas bases, particularly with 
respect to hospitalization, ambulance service, special 
examinations and treatments, and issue of medical 
stores to ships. 



Article 

5-3 
5-4 
5-5 

(ft) To conduct inspections of all medical activ- 
ities, except Meet Marine Force medical activities, 
and sanitary inspections within the district, includ- 
ing naval and Marine Corps Reserve activities, 
naval recruiting stations, offices of naval officer pro- 
curement, vessels of the Military Sea Transportation 
Service, and miscellaneous craft, as directed by the 
commandant, or by the Bureau with the concur- 
rence of the commandant; to make reports of these 
inspections; and to continuously advise the com- 
mandant concerning sanitary conditions and preva- 
lence of diseases, and make recommendations that 
will insure adequate training or other programs 
essential to the maintenance of sanitation standards 
and health within the district. 

Ci) To formulate and maintain plans for the 
organization of medical relief and to prepare con- 
tributory plans in accordance with the comman- 
dant's plans for the district in times of emergency 
or disaster. 

(j) In conjunction with the assistant chief of 
staff for personnel, to maintain a roster of all Medi- 
cal Department personnel in the district, including 
those of the Naval Reserve ; but, excepting personnel 
of activities commanded by or in charge of officers 
of the Dental Corps, personnel of the dental depart- 
ments of activities in the district, and dental per- 
sonnel of the Naval Reserve. 

(k) To coordinate the administration of the 
Naval Reserve in all matters affecting the procure- 
ment, maintenance, and training of Medical Depart- 
ment personnel, except dental. 

(I) To advise the commandant concerning com- 
munications pertaining to medical activities for- 
warded to or through the commandant. 

(m) To inform appropriate local organizations, 
insofar as security regulations permit, concerning 
the activities of the Medical Department of the 
Navy in order to promote cooperative effort. 

5-5. River Command Medical Officer 

(1) The duties outlined above for the district 
medical officer shall also apply to the senior officer 
of the Medical Corps assigned to the staff of a com- 
mandant of a river command. The officer of the 
Medical Corps so assigned shall be designated the 
river command medical officer. 



5-2 

Change 9 



5-6 CHAPTER 5. DUTIES OF MEDICAL OFFICERS ASHORE 5_13 
Section III. MEDICAL OFFICER OF A SHORE STATION 

Article 

Title 5- 6 

General Responsibilities . 5- 7 

Complement of Medical Department 5- 8 

Care of Dependents.. 5— 9 

Physical Examination and Medical Treatment of Civil Employees „ , 5—10 

Examination of Applicants, Candidates, and Reservists 5—11 

Accountability for Property 5—13 

Inspection of Medical Supplies . 5—13 

Suggestions to Commandant 5-14 

Fitness Reports on Subordinates 5-15 

Muster and Discipline of Enlisted Personnel 5—16 

Inspection of Ships 5—17 



5-6. Title 

(1) The officer of the Medical Corps detailed for 
duty as the head of the medical department of a 
shore station shall be designated the medical officer. 

5—7. General Responsibilities 

(1) The medical officer of a shore station shall be 
responsible, under the commanding officer, for the 
preservation of the health of personnel assigned to 
the station and for the care of the sick and injured. 
He shall supervise the hygiene and sanitation of the 
station and shall recommend measures to prevent 
or dimmish disease or in juries. Reference should 
be made to chapter 3 for additional basic responsi- 
bilities not specified in this chapter. 

(2) He shall inspect or cause to be inspected 
periodically, and monthly shall note in the journal 
the sanitary condition of all public buildings, the 
drainage, the sewerage, the adequacy and quality 
of the water supply, the clothing of the men, the 
nutritional value of the ration, food preservation, 
cooking, and food service, and make such recom- 
mendations to the commanding officer as he may 
deem proper for the preservation of health. He 
shall immediately notify the commandant or com- 
manding officer in writing of any hygienic or sani- 
tary hazard existing in areas adjacent to the station 
which in his opinion bears adversely on the health 
of the personnel of the station. 

5-8. Complement of Medical Department 

(1) Whenever circumstances indicate that the 
complement or allowance of medical department 
personnel should be modified, the medical officer 
shall submit a request for modification, with justifi- 
cation, to the commandant or commanding officer. 

5-9. Care of Dependents 

(1) The medical officer shall provide authorized 
medical care for dependents in those activities 



which have suitable facilities, including necessary 
personnel, and which have been designated by 
Bum ed to provide inpatient and/or outpatient 
medical care for dependents. Service shall be 
limited to eligible dependents as authorized by 
current directives. (For further information, see 
Bumedinst 6320.31 series.) 

5-10. Physical Examination and Medical 
Treatment of Civil Employees 

(1) Detailed information on this subject is in- 
cluded In chapter 15, Bumed Instruction 6320.31 
series, and Navy Civilian Personnel Instructions 
310, 792, 810, 830, and 5100. 

5—11. Examination of Applicants, Candi- 
dates, and Reservists 

(1) The medical officer shall examine at the sta- 
tion all candidates for appointment or enlistment in 
the Navy or Marine Corps, or the Reserve com- 
ponents thereof, who may present themselves under 
proper authority, and all members of the Naval 
Reserve or Marine Corps Reserve who appear for 
physical examination for any purpose and present 
orders or letters from proper authority directing or 
requesting that the reservist undergo physical 
examination. 

5-1 2. Accountability for Property 

(1) The medical officer is responsible and ac- 
countable for all property belonging to the Medical 
Department of the Navy and in his custody. 

5-13. Inspection of Medical Supplies 

(1) The medical officer shall inspect medicines 
and other medical department supplies, or require 
an assistant medical officer or a Medical Service 
Corps officer under his direction to do so. 



0-3 
Change 12 



5-14 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U. S. NAVY 



5-20 



5-14. Suggestions to the Commandant 

(1) The medical officer shall make to the com- 
mandant or commanding officer such suggestions in 
connection with his official duties as he considers to 
be in the interest of the service. 

5-15. Fitness Reports on Subordinates 

(1) The medical officer shall report to the com- 
manding officer on the fitness of his subordinate 
officers of the medical department for the com- 
manding officer's use in making fitness reports. 



Reporting 

5-18. General Instructions 

CI) Each medical activity of the Navy shall be 
inspected in detail once each calendar year (every 
12 months) , by a district or a staff medical officer, 
at such times as may be directed by appropriate 
administrative commanders. Special inspections 
shall be conducted when considered essential or 
when ordered by competent authority. 

(2) The medical officer conducting such inspec- 
tions shall submit to the Bureau, on 31 December 
and 30 June of each year, a schedule of the inspec- 
tions to be made during the succeeding 6 months. 

(3) A standard form and outline of basic subjects 
of inspection for purposes of uniformity and as an 
aid to the inspector when he compiles his question- 
naire and plan of action for inspecting medical 
activities and medical functions is presented in the 
following articles. 

5—19. Scope of Inspection 

(1) The general scope of the inspection shall in- 
clude all matters prescribed by law, Navy Regula- 
tions, and current directives and orders, for the 
activity to be inspected. Major emphasis through- 
out an inspection shall be placed upon determining 
whether specific units of a medical activity are or- 
ganized, equipped, and manned to fulfill the assigned 
mission and to what degree. A most searching in- 
quiry is required in order to present a complete 
picture of the components and of the activity as 
a whole. 



5-16. Muster and Discipline of Enlisted 
Personnel 

(1) The medical officer shall be responsible for 
the muster and the maintenance of discipline of per- 
sonnel within his department. 

5-17. Inspection of Ships 

(1) The medical officer shall, or require his subor- 
dinates to do so, when directed, inspect ships going 
into commission to determine the adequacy of medi- 
cal commissioning allowances of equipment and 
supplies. 



Article 
. 6-18 
. 5-19 
. 5-20 
- 5-21 
. 5-22 
. 5-23 

5—20. Inspection Objectives for Activities 
Under the Management Control of 
the Bureau 

(1) The objective of inspection of these activities 
is to promote efficiency and economy by observing 
and reporting upon the mission of the activity, the 
state of work and discipline, and the condition and 
preparedness of the activity to fulfill the mission, by 
determining whether the laws and regulations are 
being complied with, and by reporting upon the 
general, economic, and administrative efficiency of 
the activity in order that the factors controlling the 
efficiency of medical facilities may be given continu- 
ous review and study by the Bureau. 

(2) Inspection of General Administration. — In- 
spection of the general administration of a medical 
activity under the management control of the Bu- 
reau includes inquiry and comment on the 
following: 

(a) The organization and organization chart of 
the activity, order books, and other internal direc- 
tives affecting administration, including adequate 
provisions for : 

(1) Peacetime operation. 

(2) Disaster and emergency. 

(3) Performance of the assigned mission. 

(4) Development of procedures to the end 
that the activity will operate according to a func- 
tional plan consistent with best possible utilization 
of personnel and available funds. 

(5) Continuing review of organizational units. 



Section IV. MEDICAL INSPECTION OP NAVAL ACTIVITIES 

General Instructions . 

Scope of Inspection * 

Inspection Objectives for Activities Under the Management Control of the Bureau 

Inspection Objectives for Medical Activities Not Under the Management Control of the Bureau, _ 
Inspection Conferences 



5-4 

Change 1 



5-20 



CHAPTER 5, DUTIES OF MEDICAL OFFICERS ASHORE 



5-30 



(6) Study of personnel requirements. 

(7) Maintenance of equipment and appli- 
ances in a high state of efficiency. 

(8) Performance standards. (Comparative 
and relationship statistics on work-load factors.) 

(9) Development of manuals of standard 
procedures governing administrative actions or gen- 
eral procedures to be followed to accomplish work 
processes in the various administrative billets. 

(10) Planning board, to insure proper admin- 
istrative and material status of the activity, and to 
review and conduct special investigations as directed 
and recommend changes in personnel require- 
ments, administrative organizations, and operating 
methods. 

(b) The appearance and bearing of military 
personnel. 

(c) The cleanliness, sanitation, and appearance 
of the medical activity as a whole. 

(d> Adequacy of public relations, 
(e) Internal and external security. 
(/) The communication system. 
(g) Details of the muster system, 
(ft) Maintenance of discipline and administra- 
tion of justice. 

(1) Brig administration. 

d) Dissemination of information to personnel 
of the command. 

(ft) Coordination of the personnel training pro- 
gram in all departments. 

(2) Indoctrination of newly reported personnel, 
(m) General educational facilities for person- 
nel of the command. 

(«) The operation of the general mess, officers' 
mess, chief petty officers' mess, and special diet mess, 
including the preparation, quality, quantity, and 
variety of food, and the adequacy of the food service. 

(0) The comfort and convenience of living 
spaces for housing personnel including adequacy 
of light, heat, ventilation, and fresh water, with due 
regard to economy. 

(p) The administration of morale activities in- 
cluding provisions for athletics, crew's library, mo- 
tion picture shows, Navy exchange, post office 
arrangements, religious activities, welfare, and rec- 
reation. Whether the welfare and recreation pro- 
grams are efficiently administered for both personnel 
of the command and for patients. 

(or) Administration of request mast. 

(r) Placement and classification 'of military 
personnel of the command. 

(s) Provision for advancement in rating of en- 
listed personnel, 

(1) Leave and liberty, transportation facilities 
to nearby cities and towns, method of issuing and 
collecting liberty cards, and provision to prevent 
duplication and forging of liberty cards. 

(ti) Maintenance of personnel and financial 
records. 

(u) Civilian personnel management, including 
training program. 



(to) Security, custody, and care of Government 
property, including the security and accountability 
of narcotics and alcoholic liquors. 

(x) Liaison with other agencies. 

(y) Method of handling prisoner patients (na- 
val hospitals). 

(3) Other items as may fall within the scope 
of the general administration of a medical activity. 

(3) Inspection of Specific Organization Units of 
a Medical Activity. — Inspection of the administra- 
tion of each organizational unit shall include ex- 
amination of the following (as applicable) : 

(a) Organization chart. 

(b) Planning and coordination of activities. 

(c) Orders, instructions, procedures, and other 
directives, concerning matters under the cognizance 
of the specific organizational unit, including ade- 
quacy for peacetime mission. 

id) Administration and effectiveness of train- 
ing of military and civilian personnel for current 
and prospective duties. 

(e) Care of the patient. 

(/) Dissemination of information within the 
organizational unit. 

(flf) Assignment of personnel, watches, Sunday 
and holiday routine, and fire stations. 

(ft) Safety precautions, including machinery- 
operating instructions. 

(i> Procedures established for procurement, ac- 
counting, inventory, and economy (conservation), in 
the use of all consumable supplies, and spare parts. 
Security, care, and custody of Government property 
including the security and accountability of nar- 
cotics and alcoholic liquors. 

(j) Procedures in connection with maintenance 
and preservation of the physical lay-out. 

(ft) Provision for maintaining the alteration, 
repair, and improvement program. 

(i) Handling and accounting for correspond- 
ence, documents, and other material. 

(to) Maintenance of records, including 
patients' records and hospital case records, 

(ti) Availability and correctness of publications, 
Navy Department Bulletins, directives, and technical 
instructions. 

(o) Storage facilities for supplies, spare parts, 

etc. 

(p) Other items as may fall within the category 
of the administration of a specific organizational 
unit. 

(4) Material Inspections. — Inspection of material 
is made to: (1) determine actual condition of the 
equipment, etc., in each specific organizational unit, 
with respect to adequacy to perform all functions for 
which the items are separately and interrelatedly 
designed, and (2) , recommend the changes or modi- 
fications necessary to insure material readiness of 
the unit to carry out the mission for which it was 
established. If considered desirable to determine 
the material condition, the inspecting officer should 
have the machinery, equipment, apparatus, etc.. 



5-5 



5-20 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U. S. NAVY 



5-21 



operated before reporting on the condition. Other 
items of inspection include : 

(a) The item and priorities assigned, for ap- 
proved projects in the current replacement or main- 
tenance program to accomplish changes, additions, 
improvements, etc., within the unit. 

(5) The care of equipment, inventory proced- 
ures, and custody responsibility. 

(c) The effectiveness of the methods of upkeep, 
and preservation of the structure housing the unit, 
and of conditions which may lead to future deterio- 
ration. 

(d) Adequacy of allowance list for equipment 
and supplies with particular emphasis on material 
readiness. Review of stock levels and stock con- 
trols to determine whether or not Bureau directives 
are being complied with. 

(c) Adequacy of fire-fighting equipment, and 
the presence of hazards. 

(/) Any other factors affecting material readi- 
ness. 

5—21. Inspection Objectives for Medical 
Activities Wot Under the Man- 
agement Control of the Bureau 

(1) At naval shipyards, air activities, stations, 
bases, and other naval activities, medical inspections 
include: (1> an evaluation of the condition and pre- 
paredness of the medical department to fulfill its 
primary mission in connection with the care of the 
sick and injured, and (2) , a review and evaluation of 
the medical organization and programs relating to 
the prevention and control of diseases with partic- 
ular emphasis upon sanitary, hygienic, and dietetic 
standards, industrial health, and safety measures. 

(2) Care of the Sick and Injured. — Inspection of 
a naval activity dispensary includes the following 
broad subjects: 

(a) Location of dispensary. 

(b) Mission and organization. 

(c) Personnel of the naval activity entitled to 
medical care. 

(d) Medical department personnel, 
(c) Facilities for the care of the sick. 
(/) Equipment, stores, and stock levels. 

(ff) Records, reports, returns, accounts, etc. 

(ft) Log, journal, and standing order book. 

(f) Security, care, and custody of Government 
property, including the security and accountability 
of narcotics and alcoholic liquors. 

(?) Inventory and Plant Account. 

(k) Medical services and work-load statistics. 

(I) Wards, laboratory, pharmacy, X-ray, etc. 

(m) Ward narcotic book and clinical records. 

(re) Diets and messing for the sick. 

(o) Disaster and emergency plans. Safety 
measures and extent of cooperation of medical de- 
partment in the station safety programs. 



(p) Other items, including hospitalization 
facilities. 

(3) General Provisions Concerning Hygiene and 
Sanitation.— -The responsibility of the medical offi- 
cer of a naval activity in matters of sanitation ex- 
tends into fields under the cognizance of other 
departments. To ascertain the actual hygienic and 
sanitary measures in force, personal observation is 
made by the medical inspector into matters 
including: 

(0) Nutrition. 

(6) Sanitary standards of living spaces, bar- 
racks, and berthing spaces, including lighting, heat- 
ing, ventilation, and air conditioning. 

(c) Water supply. 

(d) Sanitary standards for food supply, mes- 
sing, food handling, preservation, and food serving 
in general messes, cafeterias, snack bars, and Navy 
exchanges. 

(e) Sewage disposal. 

(/) Waste disposal, garbage, refuse, and trash. 
(?) Insect and rodent control, 
(ft) Communicable disease control. 

(1) Swimming sites. 

(?) Brig sanitation (and medical care of 
prisoners) . 

(ft) Industrial health. 

(!) Immunization. 

(m) Epidemiological matters. 

(re) Physical exercises, athletics, recreational 
measures. 

(o) Review of monthly sanitary recommenda- 
tions contained in the medical department journal, 

(p) Education of personnel in matters concern- 
ing health and first aid. 

Co) Venereal disease control. 

(r) Other matters which may lead to disease 
or injury or threaten the physical well-being and 
safety of command personnel. 

(s) Cooperation with Federal, State, and local 
agencies. 

(4) Other General Provisions. — Air facilities, ship- 
yards, submarine bases, ammunition bases, and other 
types of naval activities require specific inspection 
subjects concerning the responsibilities of the medi- 
cal department. The organization of the medical 
department of an air station must contain provi- 
sions for attending crashes and the handling of 
crash injuries. At submarine bases there are spe- 
cial medical problems connected with illness due 
to occupational hazards and the medical aspects of 
operations involving diving. At ammunition de- 
pots, the medical organization must include provi- 
sions for accidents and hazards connected with the 
storage and the handling of ammunition. Such 
items as the above are supplementary to the routine 
inspection subjects mentioned elsewhere in this 
chapter. 



5-6 

Change 2 



5-22 



CHAPTER 5. DUTIES OF MEDICAL OFFICERS ASHORE 



5-25 



5-22. Inspection Conferences 

fl) The condition sheets (rough work sheets of 
administrative, personnel, and material inspections) 
and notes collected by the inspector and his staff 
are used at a conference held at the activity upon 
completion of the inspection to insure that the ac- 
tivity may derive the greatest benefit from the in- 
spection. At the conference, observations not con- 
sidered of sufficient importance to be included in 
the report but which merit attention by the com- 
mand or by the medical officer, are discussed in 
order that corrective action may be taken. It is the 
duty of all medical inspectors to assist medical de- 
partment personnel in the performance of their 
duties by supplying information when appropriate 
and by suggesting ways and means to improve 
conditions. 

5-23. Reporting 

(1) Reports of Medical Inspection.— Reports of 
inspection shall be prepared at the earliest practica- 
ble date following the inspection and forwarded 
through the commanding officer of the activity, or of 
the naval hospital inspected, and thence, via chain 
of command, to the Chief of the Bureau. 

(2) Report Procedure. — The inspection report 
shall be prepared in letter form. Paragraphs of 
the report shall be numbered consecutively in one 
series throughout a report. The authority for mak- 
ing the inspection, the name and location of the 
activity inspected, the date of the inspection, the 
date of the preceding annual medical inspection, 



and the name of the medical officer of the activity 
being inspected shall be indicated in the first para- 
graph. For reports of inspection of naval hospitals, 
naval medical supply depots, naval dispensaries, 
and the larger medical activities, the subsequent 
paragraphs of the report shall be arranged, first 
by the comments on the general medical adminis- 
trative inquiry, followed by the remarks on the vari- 
ous organizational units. Either preceding or fol- 
lowing this, the inspectors' facts and conclusions 
are presented. Recommendations, if any, shall fol- 
low the facts and conclusions. Recommendations 
are to be presented in two parts: (1) those requir- 
ing decision within command, and (2) those re- 
quiring decision by higher authority. The last 
item in the report will be the grading. This per- 
centage grading will be in addition to the current 
practice of submitting statements in the report with 
reference to command management, remarks on the 
handling of various situations, or other matters con- 
sidered worthy of special comment. Percentage 
grading shall be based upon the inspection of the 
medical activity as a whole. 

(3) Enclosures to Reports. — In the interest of 
reducing the volume of inspection reports, a Person- 
nel-Patient Data Sheet is the only enclosure desired. 
Sample forms for preparation of this data sheet 
have been supplied and are on file in the offices 
of district and staff medical officers. Unless con- 
sidered desirable by the inspector as justification 
to support a recommendation or comment, other 
statistical data, maps, and charts should not be 
submitted. 



Section V. CIVILIAN PHYSICIANS 



General 

Methods of Obtaining Services 

Selection 

Bureau Approval 

Security Clearances 

Duties 

5—24. General 

(1) The absence or nonavailability of a Navy 
Medical Corps officer, or the nonavailability of a 
Medical Corps officer with a particular qualifica- 
tion, may at times necessitate the employment or 
the procurement of the medical services of a 
civilian physician. 

(2) Civilian physicians may be utilized on a part- 
time basis in the continental United States at U.S. 
naval hospitals and U.S. naval dispensaries to aug- 
ment the military medical staff. 

(3) Civilian physicians may be utilized on a full- 
time or part-time basis, under the general super- 
vision of a Navy medical officer, at industrial and 
industrial-type activities of the Navy and Marine 



Article 

5_ 24 

5 _25 

5_26 

5-27 

5-28 

5-29 

Corps. At certain isolated locations, it may be 
necessary to utilize the services of civilian physicians 
in the absence of a Navy medical officer. 

(4) Chapter 20 contains instructions for obtain- 
ing services of civilian physicians when required on 
an individual case basis. 

5-25. Methods of Obtaining Services 

CD Regular Civil Service Appointment to Classi- 
fied Positions. — Each activity is expected to employ 
civilian physicians pursuant to Navy Civilian Per- 
sonnel Instructions, which cover procedures for 
classification, appointment, and compensation. In 
the event that there are no acceptable applicants 
for appointment or if applicants do not accept ap- 



5-7 
Change 7 



5-25 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



5-29 



pointments for one reason or another, activities 
may consider under justifiable circumstances a 
method described below. 

(2) Employment of Experts or Consultants 
Under Personal Service Contracts. — Employment 
of experts or consultants under personal service 
contracts is governed by Navy Civilian Personnel 
Instruction 306. 

(3) Contracts for Nonpersonal Services. — Con- 
tracts for nonpersonal services may be considered 
only in the event that there are neither accepta- 
ble applicants for regular civil-service positions 
nor acceptances of offers for employment, as ex- 
perts, under personal service contracts. In this 
event, appropriate requests for authority for the 
procurement of professional medical services of 
physicians on a "when needed" basis shall be 
forwarded by the requiring activity on a Requisi- 
tion Form, DD Form 1145, for approval by the 
management control bureau via the Chief of the 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. Procurements 
pursuant to this subarticle are governed by 
SECNAV Instruction 6260.1 series and existing 
procedures for obtaining nonpersonal services 
by contract. 

5-26. Selection 

(1) Careful selection of civilian physicians is 
required to insure the highest standards of pro- 
fessional service. Physicians selected for special 
clinical services must have the particular quali- 
fications required for the position including 
board eligibility or board certification by an 
American Specialty Board where appropriate. 

(2) Physicians selected for general practice 
type of medical service must be acceptable to the 
local profession as having the required qualifi- 
cations. 

(3) Civilian physicians selected must (a) be 
graduates of an accredited medical school; (b) 
be currently licensed to practice in a State or 
Territory of the United States; (c) possess high 
moral, professional, and ethical standards; and 
(d) be in good professional standing in their 
community. 



5-27. BUMED Approval 

(1) U.S. naval hospitals and U.S. naval dispen- 
saries requiring the services of civilian physicians 
as provided in this section shall submit requests 
for authorization to BUMED for approval prior 
to employment. Such request shall contain the 
following information: 

(</) Justification for the request. 

(b) Name and qualifications of the civilian 
physician. 

(c) Schedule of proposed employment. 

(d) Method of payment. 

5-28. Security Clearances 

(1) Security investigations for physicians who 
are employed or furnish professional medical 
services under the provisions of this section shall 
meet the requirements of the Navy Civilian Per- 
sonnel Instructions and the Department of the 
Navy Security Manual for Classified Information 
(OPNAVINST 5510.1 series). 

5-29. Duties 

(1) Civilian physicians may be utilized to per- 
form any professional duties for which they are 
qualified. 

(2) Under the direction of a Navy Medical 
Corps officer, they may perform general medical 
duties involving military personnel with the ex- 
ception of those purely military in nature such 
as: 

(a) Physical examinations of candidates for 
duty involving flying, submarine and diving, or 
any other specialized duty, 

(b) Physical examinations for promotion of 
active duty officers or applicants for appointment 
to commission status in the Regular Navy or 
Marine Corps. 

(c) Physical examinations of applicants to 
officer candidate training programs. 

(d) Physical examinations of officers of Re- 
serve components incident to reporting for active 
duty other than training duty. 

(e) Exercise of military command and ad- 
ministration over naval uniformed personnel. 

(/) Duties as member of boards of medical 
survey, medical boards, or physical evaluation 
boards. 



5-8 
Change 14 



n 



m*-^mi^m'*w**< mm i 

r 
r 



■ ( 



Chapter 6 

DENTAL CORPS 



Sections 



Articles 

I. Function, Organization, and Responsibility 6- 1 through 6- 2 

II. Dental Division, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 6- 3 through 6- 12 

III. Dental Corps 6- 1 3 through 6- 21 

IV. General Duties of Dental Officers 6- 22 through 6- 36 

V. Dental Officers Afloat 6-37 through 6- 46 

VI. Dental Officers Ashore 6-47 through 6- 58 

VII. Dental Officers With Marine Corps 6- 59 through 6- 62 

VIII. Dental Technicians 6-63 through 6- 68 

IX. Dental Service Warrant Officers, Medical Service Corps Officers, and Nurse Corps 

Officers in Dental Facilities 6- 69 through 6- 73 

X. Civilian Employees in Dental Facilities 6- 74 

XI. Naval Dental Clinics 6-75 through 6- 81 

XII. Fleet Marine Force Dental Companies 6- 82 through 6- 85 

XIII. Dental Standards . 6-86 through 6- 97 

XIV. Dental Examination and Treatment 6- 98 through 6- 106 

XV. The Dental Record and Other Standard Forms 6-107 through 6- 121 

XVI. Dental Officer Training 6-122 through 6- 132 

XVII. Dental Research 6-133 through 6-134F 

XVIII. Naval Graduate Dental School 6-135 through 6- 138 

XIX. Naval Dental Technicians Schools 6-1 39 through 6- 144 

XX. Publications and Files in Dental Facilities 6- 145 through 6- 147 

XXI. Reports, Records, and Correspondence 6-148 through 6- 159 

XXII. Dental Supplies and Equipment 6-160 through 6- 172 

XXIII. Dental Fiscal Matters 6-175 through 6- 177 

XXIV. Planning Dental Facilities 6-178 through 6- 190 

XXV. Inspection of Dental Activities and Facilities 6-193 through 6- 195 



Section I. FUNCTION, ORGANIZATION, AND RESPONSIBILITY 

Article 

Primary Function 6- 1 

Organization and General Responsibility 6-2 



6-1. Primary Function 

(1) The primary function of the Naval Dental 
Corps is to provide such care for active duty Navy 
and Marine Corps personnel as will prevent or re- 
medy diseases, disabilities, and injuries of the teeth, 
jaws, and related structures, which may directly or 
indirectly interfere with the performance of military 
duties. 



6-2 Organization and General Responsibility 

{1) The Assistant Chief for Dentistry and Chief of 
the Dental Division, Bureau of Medicine and 
Surgery, is responsible to the Chief of the Bureau for 
the supervision, direction, and coordination of the 
Navy dental service and programs. He is responsible 
for continual appraisal of all programs over which 
cognizance has been assigned and coordinates with 



10 Feb 75 



6-1 

Change 83 



6-3 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U. S. NAVY 



6-6 



the Director of Program, Planning and Analysis all 
proposed changes brought about by internal plan- 
ning affecting existing programs and for new efforts 
proposed. He is the Chief of the Dental Corps. 

(2) The Deputy Chief ranks next in authority to 
the Chief of the Dental Division and is responsible 
for the projection of the policies of the Chief of the 
Dental Division and acts with full responsibility and 
authority in his absence. 

(3) The Inspector General, Dental, is responsible 
to the Chief of the Dental Division for planning, 
coordinating, and conducting the inspection program 
of the Navy dental service except for those areas 
of responsibility which rest with the Commandant of 
the Marine Corps, to assure efficiency and confor- 
mance with BUMED policies and for advising the 



Chief of the Bureau via the Chief of the Dental 
Division regarding the results of inspections which 
he makes or which are reported to him. 

(4) District and staff dental officers are responsi- 
ble for advising their respective commandants and 
commanders on all dental matters within their 
commands. They are responsible for assuring the 
support of Department of the Navy policies which 
pertain to the Navy dental service in the districts or 
commands to which they are attached. 

(5) The head of a dental department, the chief of a 
dental service, and the commanding officer or of- 
ficer-in-charge of a dental activity are responsible to 
the commanding officer or superior in the chain of 
command for the dental service provided by the 
command or activity to which attached. 



Section II. DENTAL DIVISION, BUREAU OF MEDICINE AND SURGERY 

Article 



Establishment and Responsibility 6- i 

Organization Chart, Dental Division 6- 4 

Chief of Dental Division 6- 5 

Assistant Deputy Chief of the Dental Division 6-6 

Professional Branch , , , 6- 7 

Planning and Logistics Branch 6-8 

Personnel Branch 6- 9 

Research Branch . . . . 6-10 

Marine Corps — BUMED Dental Liaison Officer 6-11 



6-3. Establishment and Responsibility 

(1) Establishment. — The Secretary of the Navy, 
on 28 June 1946, established the Dental Division 
within the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, in ac- 
cordance with the act approved 28 December 1945 
(10 USC 5138). 

(2) Responsibility. — All matters relating to den- 
tistry and required by law to be referred to the 
Dental Division and that Division is responsible for 
the study, planning, and direction of all matters 
coming within its cognizance. 

(a) Specifically, the Dental Division is required 

to: 

(1) Establish professional standards and 
policies for dental practice. 

(2) Conduct inspections and visits for 
maintenance of such standards. 

(3) Initiate and recommend action pertain- 
ing to complements, appointments, advancement, 
training, assignment, and transfer of dental person- 
nel. 

(4) Serve as the advisory agency for BUMED 
on all matters relating directly to dentistry. 

6-4. Organization Chart, Dental Division 

(1) See next page. 



6-5. Chief of Dental Division 

(1) The Chief of the Dental Division is responsible 
for the performance of all the functions of the Dental 
Division. He is detailed from among the officers of 
the Dental Corps in the grade of rear admiral, in 
accordance with the act approved 28 December 
1945, as amended. (10 USC 5138.) 

(2) The Chief of the Dental Division, while so 
serving, receives the pay and allowances provided by 
law for rear admirals of the upper half and is enti- 
tled, in all respects, to the same privileges of retire- 
ment and retired pay benefits as are provided by law 
for chiefs of bureaus of the Navy Department. 

(3) The Chief of the Dental Division is assisted by 
the staff of the Dental Division in carrying out his 
responsibilities. 

6-6. Assistant Deputy Chief of the Dental Division 

(1) The Assistant Deputy Chief of the Dental Di- 
vision is the nonflag dental officer next in authority 
to the Chief and the Deputy Chief of the Dental 
Division and is responsible for the projection of the 
policies of the Chief of the Dental Division. In the 
absence of the Chief of the Dental Division and the 
Deputy Chief, the Assistant Deputy Chief acts for 
them. 



6-2 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



/ 



ASSISTANT CHIEF FOR DENTISTRY 
6/61 

DENTAL DIVISION 



OFFICE OF THE CHIEF 61 - 

DEPUTY CHIEF 61-1 
ASSISTANT DEPUTY CHIEF 61-2 



EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT 6A 






ENLISTED ASSISTANT 6B 







INSPECTOR GENERAL, DENTAL 

61A 






MARINE CORPS - BUMED 

DENTAL LIAISON OFFICER 61B 







1 


I 


J 






PROFESSIONAL BRANCH 

611 




PLANNING AND LOGISTICS 
BRANCH 

612 


PERSONNEL BRANCH 

613 




RESEARCH BRANCH 

614 



6-7 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-14 



6-7. Professional Branch 

(1) This Branch advises the Chief of the Dental 
Division on professional standards and practices, 
training programs, preventive dentistry programs, 
and statistical data and conducts liaison with other 
bureaus and offices as may be appropriate. 

6-8. Planning and Logistics Branch 

(1) This Branch advises the Chief of the Den- 
tal Division on matters related to dental finance, 
material, logistics, organization and dental facil- 
ity planning. 

6-9. Personnel Branch 

(1) This Branch advises the Chief of the Dental 
Division on the requirements, qualifications, pro- 
curement, assignment, and distribution of dental 
personnel. 



6-10. Research Branch 

(1) The Research Branch provides coordination 
between the Dental Division and the Medical Re- 
search and Development Command for manage- 
ment and conduct of the research development ef- 
fort. The Branch advises the Chief of the Dental 
Division on any research matters which involve new 
approaches to resource management. 

6-11. Marine Corps— BUMED Dental Liaison 
Officer 

(1) The Marine Corps — BUMED Dental Liaison 
Officer maintains liaison between the Commandant 
of the Marine Corps and the Assistant Chief for 
Dentistry on all matters relating to the dental sup- 
port of the Marine Corps. 

(2) The officer maintains liaison with the Fleet 
Marine Force Medicine Division. 

NOTE — There is mi article 6- 1 2. 



Section III. DENTAL CORPS 

Article 

Establishment 6-13 

Grades and Strength 6-14 

Appointments 6-15 

Duty Assignments 6-16 

Eligibility for Promotion 6-17 

Requirements for Promotion 6-18 

Written Examinations and Exemptions 6-19 

Written Examination Subjects 6-20 

Retirement 6-2 1 



6-13. Establishment 

(1) The Naval Dental Corps was established by 
provisions of an act of 22 August 1912 (now codified 
by act approved 10 Aug 1956, 10 USC 6027). This 
act authorized the appointment of not more than 30 
assistant dental surgeons to serve professionally the 
personnel of the naval service and to perform such 



other duties as may be prescribed by competent 
authority. 

6-14. Grades and Strength 

(1) The Naval Dental Corps consists of officers in 
the grades of lieutenant, junior grade; lieuten- 



6-4 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



6-14 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-15 



ant; lieutenant commander; commander; captain; 
and rear admiral. 

(2) The total authorized number of officers of 
the Dental Corps on the active list is % 0 of 1 per- 
cent of the sum of — 

(a) the authorized strengths of the active lists 
of officers of the Navy and the Marine Corps author- 
ized by 10 USC 5403, 5404, and 5405; 

(b) the authorized strengths of the Regular 
Navy and the Regular Marine Corps in enlisted 
members authorized by 10 USC 5401 and 5402; 

(c) the authorized strength of the Navy in mid- 
shipmen at the Naval Academy; 

(c£) the actual number of officers holding per- 
manent appointments in warrant officer grades in 
the Regular Navy and the Regular Marine Corps, 
excluding retired officers; and 

(e) the actual number of aviation midshipmen 
on active duty as appointed under 10 USC 6906 (10 
USC 5404). 

(3) The Secretary of the Navy computes the au- 
thorized strength of the active list of the Navy in 
officers in the Dental Corps as of 1 January of each 
year (10 USC 5404). The terms "active list of the 
Navy" and "active list of the Marine Corps" as used 
in this article mean the lists of officers of the Regu- 
lar Navy and the Regular Marine Corps, other than 
retired officers, holding permanent appointments in 
grades above chief warrant officer, W-4 (10 USC 
5001 (a) (9-10)). 

6-15. Appointments 

(1) Original Appointments. — Generally, original 
appointments in the Dental Corps, U.S. Navy, are 
made in the grade of lieutenant (junior grade). 
Appointments are made as vacancies occur, in order 
of the candidates' group lineal position, as shown 
by competitive examination or as otherwise deter- 
mined by the Chief of Naval Personnel. 

(2) Appointments in the Dental Corps of the U.S. 
Navy. — 

(a) Qualifications for Appointment. — 

(1) Sex — male or female. 

( 2 ) Citizenship — United States citizen . 

(3) Appointees in the grade of lieutenant 
(junior grade) in the Dental Corps shall be citizens 
of the United States between 21 and 32 years of age. 
(Codified by act approved 10 Aug. 1956, 10 USC 
5571, 5578.) 

(4) A limited number of qualified civilian 
dentists (including those who may hold Reserve 
commissions) of other ages may be appointed. 
(Codified by act approved 10 Aug. 1956, 10 USC 
5578.) The grade in which appointed will be deter- 
mined by the professional age, experience, and at- 
tainments of the individual. 



(5) All appointees shall be graduates of ap- 
proved dental schools. 

(6) Candidates for such appointment must 
meet certain physical, mental, moral, and profes- 
sional qualifications before medical and profes- 
sional examining boards appointed by the Secre- 
tary of the Navy. Medical examining boards for 
the examination of candidates are appointed by the 
Secretary of the Navy. The Secretary has pre- 
scribed that the candidates shall be examined for 
professional qualifications by a board of officers of 
the Dental Corps. An applicant for appointment 
may be required to demonstrate his professional 
qualifications by written, oral, or practical exam- 
inations, 

(7) Women may be appointed in the Dental 
Corps of the Navy as determined by the Secretary 
of the Navy (act of 12 Jun 1949, now codified by 
act approved 10 Aug. 1956 (10 USC 5590) ; act 
of 24 Jun 1952, now codified as 10 USC 5578). 

(8) Additional qualifications may be pro- 
mulgated by the Chief of Naval Personnel from time 
to time, 

(o) Application for Appointment. — 

(1) Inactive Reserve officers, former dental 
officers, and other civilians must submit an appli- 
cation for appointment to the nearest Navy recruit- 
ing station in the form prescribed by the Chief of 
Naval Personnel. 

(2) A senior dental student may submit an 
application for an appointment as a lieutenant (jun- 
ior grade) to be issued after his graduation, in ac- 
cordance with current Bureau of Naval Personnel 
instructions. 

(3) Reserve officers on active duty should 
submit letter requests for consideration to the Chief 
of Naval Personnel via their commanding officer. 

(c) Consideration of Candidate for Appoint- 
ment. — 

(1) Qualifications. — The professional quali- 
fications of a candidate for appointment will be 
considered by a board of dental officers. If the can- 
didate is to appear in person for consideration, he 
will be authorized to appear before a board of med- 
ical examiners for determination of his physical 
qualifications, and a naval examining board for 
determination of his mental, moral, and profes- 
sional qualifications at a time and place desig- 
nated by the Chief of Naval Personnel. The mili- 
tary qualifications shall be determined by the Chief 
of Naval Personnel. 

(2) Expenses. — No allowance is made for 
travel or other expenses incurred by the candidate 
in appearing for examination. 

(3) Physical Examination ,-~A thorough phys- 
ical examination, conducted by a board of medical 



17 Apr 61 



6-5 
Change 11 



6-16 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, TJ-S. NAVY 



6-19 



examiners, shall precede the professional examina- 
tion. The candidate shall be required to certify 
that he is free from any bodily or mental ailments. 
If the candidate is found to be physically disquali- 
fied, the examination shall be concluded. 

<4) Professional Examination. — When a can- 
didate is required to appear in person for examina- 
tion, the professional examination will include: 

(a) Written and oral examinations on oral 
diagnosis and roentgenology, operative dentistry, 
periodontics, prosthodontics, and oral surgery. 

(E>) Clinical examination on operative den- 
tistry, prosthodontics, and roentgenology. 

(c) Oral examination on subjects of pre- 
liminary education. 

<5) Termination of Examination.— The naval 
examining board may conclude the examination at 
any time and may deviate from the plan as outlined 
above as may seem best for the interests of the naval 
service. 

(6) Withdrawal From Examination. — Upon 
written request and with the consent of the board, 
a candidate may withdraw from further examina- 
tion without prejudice as to eligibility for subse- 
quent examination. 

(7) Disqualification. — Any candidate who 
knowingly gives a false certificate of age or char- 
acter, or knowingly makes a false statement to a 
board of examiners shall be disqualified. 

6-16. Duty Assignments 

(1) Dental officers are assigned to duty in naval 
activities in the United States, to duty afloat in the 
large combatant and auxiliary ships of the fleet, to 
oversea duty, and to duty with the Marine Corps. 
The normal rotation pattern is an initial short tour 
of duty in the United States, except Hawaii or 
Alaska, and then sea or oversea duty, including 
Hawaii and Alaska, followed by another tour of 
duty in the United States, except Hawaii or Alaska. 
Subsequent tours of duty will be in consonance with 
the overall needs of the naval service. 

(2) A tour of duty is influenced by several factors. 
These include, but are not limited to, the ratio of 
sea and oversea billets to those ashore within the 
United States, except Hawaii and Alaska, the num- 
ber of officers on active duty! for limited periods, 
requirements for officers with special qualifications, 
billets of an unusually arduou& nature or in isolated 
areas, and training requirements. The tour lengths 
indicated below are considered to be normal. 

(a) Cruises afloat — 2 years. 

(b) Oversea tours — 3 years, unless specified 



otherwise by Bureau of Naval Personnel Instruc- 
tions. 

(c) Tours with Fleet Marine Forces — 3 years 
in the United States, except Hawaii and Alaska, or 
for varying shorter periods depending upon deploy- 
ment overseas. 

(d) Tours ashore in the United States, except 
Hawaii and Alaska — 3 years for officers in the grades 
of lieutenant commander through captain; 2 years 
for lieutenants and lieutenants, junior grade. 

6-17. Eligibility for Promotion 

(1) Officers of the Dental Corps become eligi- 
ble for promotion when they accumulate the re- 
quired promotion and entry grade credits, or com- 
plete the prescribed period of active duty in the 
next lower grade as specified in Public Law 
; 90-228 of 28 December 1967, as promulgated to 
the military services by DOD Directive 1320.7 
series. 

6-18. Requirements for Promotion 

(1) Officers of the Dental Corps who have been 
selected for promotion must be found qualified by 
a naval examining board before being promoted. 
The type of examination which is given by the 
examining board is specified by the Secretary of the 
Navy. It may be either an examination on official 
records only, or it may be a written examination. 

(2) There are three broad areas of knowledge 
in which officers of the Dental Corps must be quali- 
fied in order to be promoted. 

(a) Executive Area.— Understanding of the 
basic principles and policies in the organization of 
the Department of Defense and in the planning, 
control, and administration of the Naval Establish- 
ment. 

(b) Operations Area. — Knowledge of the pro- 
fessional subjects essential to the efficient operation, 
management, and logistic support of the dental 
facilities throughout the naval service. 

(e) Technical Area. — Knowledge of the profes- 
sional subjects essential to provide dental care to 
the personnel of the Navy and Marine Corps. 

6-19. Written Examinations and Exemp- 
tions 

(1) Examinations. — When written examinations 
are required, the subjects and scope of examination 
for dental officers in the various grades shall be in 
acordance with current directives. 

(2) Exemptions.— Exemptions from written ex- 
aminations for dental officers in the various nmHet 



6-6 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



6-19 



CHAPTEB 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-23 



shall be in accordance with current directives which 
list schools and courses effecting exemptions in the 
executive, operations, and technical areas. 

6-20. Written Examination Subjects 



Subject 


LTJG 
to LT 


LT to 
LCDR 


LCDR 
toCDR 


CDRto 
CAPT 


PART I-EXECUTIVE 










AREA 












X 








2. Administrative Organization 












X 


X 


X 


X 


3. Personnel Administration and 














X 


X 


X 


4. Military Justice 


X 


X 


X 


X 


PART II-OPERATIONS 










AREA 










1, Operation of a Dental Depart- 










ment. 


X 








2. Administration ot Dental De- 

partments Ashore and Afloat. 

3. Operation ot a- U.S. Naval 


X 


X 
X 






X 



Subject 



PART II— OPERATIONS 
AREA— Con, 

4. Fleet. District, or Staff Dental 

Officer Responsibility 

5. Logistics - 



LTJO 
to LT 



PART III-TECHNICAL 
AREA 

1. Oral Diagnosis and Roent- 

genology.- 

2. Operative Dentistry 

3. Periodontics 

4. Frosttaodoutlcs 

5. Oral Surgery 



X 
X 
X 
X 
X 



LT to 
LCDR 



X 
X 
X 
X 
X 



LCDR 
to CDR 



CDR to 
CAPT 



X 
X 



6-21. Retirement 

(1) The several types of retirement for officers 
of the Regular Navy are explained in chapter 14 
of the Bureau of Naval Personnel Manual and cur- 
rent directives (see also 10 USC 6406 concerning 
furlough) . 



Section IV. GENERAL DUTIES OF DENTAL OFFICERS 

Article 

The Dental Officer : 6-22 

Assistant Dental Officer 6—23 

Principal Duty of All Dental Officers 8-24 

Proficiency in All Fields of Dentistry 6-25 

Duties Upon Reporting to a Ship or Station 6-26 

Duties in Care of Mass Casualties 6-27 

Organization and Instruction Books 6-28 

Maintenance of Dental Department Log 6-29 

Official Correspondence 6—30 

Narcotics, Alcohol, and Drugs 6-31 

Knowledge of Official Directives 6-32 

Publication of Professional Articles 6-33 

Participation in Civilian Professional Activities 6-34 

Private Practice 6-35 

Civil Suits 6-36 



6-22. The Dental Officer 

(1) The Secretary of the Navy shall prescribe 
regulations for dental services on ships and at 
shore stations; such services shall be under the 
senior dental officer, who is responsible to the com- 
manding officer of the ship or station for all pro- 
fessional, technical, and administrative matters con- 
cerning dental services (sec. 4 of act of 28 Dec 1945, 
now codified by act approved 10 Aug 1956 (10 U.S.C. 
6029 ) ) . Therefore, the head of the dental depart- 
ment of a command or other activity shall be the 
senior officer of the Dental Corps permanently at- 
tached for duty and so assigned. He shall be desig- 
nated the dental officer. 



(2) The dental officer is responsible for the gen- 
eral duties prescribed in Navy Regulations for a 
head of a department as well as the duties pre- 
scribed for a head of a dental department. 

(3) The dental officer of a ship or station shall 
advise the commanding officer of the number and 
grades or ratings of dental personnel needed for 
efficient operation of the dental department when- 
ever the requirements are altered appreciably be- 
cause of personnel, physical facilities, or workload 
changes. 

6-23. Assistant Dental Officer 

(1) Assistant dental officers shall conform to the 
policies established by the dental officer with regard 

6-7 

Change 15 



6-23 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPABTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-31 



to the professional treatment and care of patients. 
They shall perform such other duties as may be 
assigned them by the dental officer or other com- 
petent authority. 

6-24. Principal Duty of All Dental Offi- 
cers 

(1) The principal duty of all officers of the 
Dental Corps is to treat and prevent diseases, disa- 
bilities, and injuries of the jaws, teeth, and re- 
lated structures. Although it is essential for dental 
activities to be administered properly, it is desirable 
that all dental officers keep the time required for 
administration and supervision to an absolute mini- 
mum in order to increase their professional 
accomplishment. 

(2) The dental officer shall be responsible for con- 
ducting an organized program of preventive den- 
tistry and dental health education for all personnel 
dependent on him for dental service. In larger 
dental activities, the dental officer shall designate 
one dental officer as the preventive dentistry offi- 
cer, who shall implement the preventive dentistry 
program. 

6-25. Proficiency in All Fields of Den- 
tistry 

(1) It is desirable that all dental officers have an 
opportunity to become proficient fn the various fields 
of dentistry which are practiced in the naval service. 
The dental officer should, insofar as may be prac- 
ticable, afford assistant dental officers the oppor- 
tunity to acquire experience in the various dental 
fields. This may be accomplished in two ways : 

(a) Permit all dental officers to conduct a gen- 
eral practice and perform all types of dental opera- 
tions and treatments. 

(b) Rotate dental officers for limited periods in 
the various fields of dentistry. 

(21 When appropriate, qualified dental officers 
should act as consultants and advisors to dental 
officers with lesser experience. 

6-26. Duties Upon Reporting to a Ship or 
Station 

(1) As soon as possible after reporting, the dental 
officer of a ship or station shall examine the dental 
operating spaces, the equipment therein, and other 
accommodations provided for the dental depart- 
ment. He shall make a detailed written report to 
the commanding officer if any defects or deficien- 
cies are discovered which interfere with the efficient 
operation of the dental department. 

(2) The Bureau desires full knowledge of the 
functioning of the Navy Dental Corps ashore and 
afloat in order to be prepared to anticipate and 
meet needs fox personnel and material and be in- 



formed of the adequacy of dental treatment facili- 
ties as related to the need or demand for dental 
treatment. Dental officers are, therefore, encour- 
aged to submit to the Bureau, via official channels, 
well-considered suggestions for the betterment of 
the Navy Dental Corps. 

6-27. . Duties in Care of Mass Casualties 

CD Dental officers shall be qualified to perform 
first aid procedures in order that they may treat 
or assist in the treatment of mass casualties. 

6-28. Organization and Instruction Books 

(1) Each dental activity and dental department 
of a ship or station shall publish an "Organization 
Book" and "Instruction Book." These may be com- 
bined into a single publication. All Organization 
and/or Instruction Books should be brought into 
the Navy Directives System through identification or 
conversion. Standard dental department organiza- 
tion manuals or books may be used as a guide. Ref- 
erence should be made to Organization Planning for 
Naval Units (Navfers 18371) . 

6-29. Maintenance of Dental Department 
Log 

(1) The dental officer of a ship or station shall 
keep a rough watch log or journal which shall be 
a chronological record of pertinent matters within 
the province of the dental department. 

(2) Any important occurrence coming under the 
cognizance of the dental officer such as damage, 
destruction, or loss of dental department property, 
or breaches of discipline by dental department per- 
sonnel, shall be reported to the officer of the deck 
or other proper official for entry in the log, report 
book, or journal of the ship or station. 

6-30. Official Correspondence 

(1) All official correspondence on dental depart- 
ment matters shall be signed or cleared by the 
dental officer and forwarded through official chan- 
nels. 

(2) Dental reports shall be prepared and for- 
warded by the dental officer of a ship or station, 
in accordance with sections XV and XXI of this 
chapter, chapter 23, and current directives. 

6-31 o Narcotics, Alcohol, and Drugs 

(1) The dental officer of a ship 
or station shall not permit narcot- 
ics, alcohol, alcoholic beverages, 
controlled drugs, or dangerous drugs 
to be placed in the possession of 



6-8 

Change lf> 



6-32 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-34 



any person, except in small quantities for use in 
treatment of patients (see chap. 21 ) . 

6-32. Knowledge of Official Directives 

( 1 ) Instructions set forth in this manual are 
but a portion of the general instructions with 
which officers of the Dental Corps must be famil- 
iar. They shall also study various other official 
publications such as the BUMED Instructions and 
Notices; U.S. Navy Regulations; Manual for 
Courts-Martial, United States, 1969, and the JAG 
Manual; Bureau of Naval Personnel Manual; and 
other current orders and instructions. 

6-33. Publication of Professional Articles 

{ 1 ) Dental Corps officers are encouraged to 
contribute to professional literature. They shall 
be guided by Navy Regulations, Navy Public 
Affairs Regulations, and current directives relat- 
ing to preparation and publication requirements. 

6-34. Participation in Civilian Professional 
Activities 

(1) Officers of the Dental Corps shall make 
every effort to establish and maintain the highest 
standards of ethical and professional practice, to 
keep themselves informed in all fields of dentis- 
try, and to improve their professional abilities. 
When practicable, they should attend profes- 
sional meetings of dental societies, seminars, 
clinics, lectures, study courses, and other similar 
means of acquiring additional knowledge. 

(2) Dental officers who intend to appear as 
essayists or clinicians before any organization or 
meeting shall, at the earliest practicable date, offi- 



cially notify the commandant of the naval district 
where they are on duty of the date or dates, 
place, sponsoring organization, and the hotel or 
other address where they may be located during 
the occasion. If they intend to appear in a naval 
district other than the one in which they are on 
duty, an information copy shall be supplied to 
the commandant of the naval district to be 
visited. In all instances article 20-6 shall be 
observed and information copies shall be for- 
warded to Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 
(Dental Division ) . 

(3) Dental officers should inform BUMED, by. 
official letter, of special incidents of interest, such 
as: certification by a specialty board; completion 
of a course of instruction or training not previ- 
ously reported to the Bureau; membership in an 
honor society; honorary or life membership in 
a professional society; appointment as editor, as- 
sociate editor, or contributor on the staff of a 
professional publication; and similar types of 
accomplishment, honor, or appointment. 

(4) Dental officers desiring teaching affilia- 
tions in civilian institutions shall comply with 
the following guidelines: 

(a) Approval must be requested by official 
letter and granted by BUMED. 

(b) Time spent teaching in civilian insti- 
tutions must be no more than one-half day every 
other week. 

(c) Such affiliations shall result in no 
cost to the Navy. 

NOTE— There are no articles 6-35 and 6-36. 



26 Mar 75 



6-9 

Change 84 



6-37 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 
Section V. DENTAL OFFICERS AFLOAT 



6-38 



Article 

Fleet Dental Officer 6-37 

Force Dental Officer 6-38 

Dental Officer in Ship 6-39 

Dental Officer in Aircraft Carrier 6—40 

Dental Officer in Tender or Repair Ship 6-^41 

Dental Officer in Hospital Ship 6-42 

Dental Officer in Transport — 6-43 

Dental Officer Embarked With Troops in Transport 6—44 

Commanding Officer With Dental Company 6-45 

6-37. Fleet Dental Officer (c) The fleet denta , officer mayi subject to 

(1) The fleet dental officer is the adviser to the the approval of the fleet commander, visit dental 
fleet commander on all matters pertaining to facilities of fleet shore-based activities to give or 
fleet dental matters. He shall, by means of in- obtain technical information or assistance, 
spections visits, and review of dental service re- (3) s . fjf j mpectionSt _ 

ports and reports of inspections, keep himself in- 
formed of all matters pertaining to the dental (a) When the fleet dental officer is directed 

service, dental personnel, and dental materiel of to inspect the dental organization of a ship or 

the fleet. In addition to these general responsi- shore-based activity he shall comment on the 

bilities, the fleet dental officer shall: efficiency of the dental organization and dental 

(a) Assist the fleet commander in preparing service. 

the dental aspects of operational and logistic <b) When the fleet dental officer visits a 

p| ans . fleet unit or activity, he shall do so on an advi- 

(b) Coordinate dental services administered sor Y and constructive basis with a view toward 
in subordinate units of the fleet, conferring with possible improvement of the dental service, 
force dental officers as necessary to insure maxi- . , . , , 
mum coordination. . (4) Outline of InspecUon.—When making an 

. .. inspection, the fleet dental officer shall be guided 

C> Advise the fleet commander regarding b % e a , isions of artide (^ m ° as ap . 

establishment, expansion, or reduction of dental nlkable 
facilities in ships of the fleet and the adequacy of 

fleet-supporting shore-based dental facilities. (5) Written Reports. — 

(d) Recommend to the fleet commander, for (a) Following each inspection, the fleet den- 
submission to the Bureau, information, observa- tal officer shall make a written report to the fleet 
tions, and recommendations on matters under commander, via the commanding officer of the 
the Bureau's purview which would improve den- ship or activity concerned and the administrative 
tal service to the fleet. chain of command, or to the appropriate ad- 

(e) Promote professional interest by the ministrative commander, if the inspection was 
timely dissemination of information to dental conducted as part of an annual administrative in- 
officers of the fleet; and by arranging meetings spection. 

of officers of the Dental Corps within the fleet, (b) Following each visit, the fleet dental 

when practicable, for discussion of appropriate officer shall make a written report to the fleet 

subjects. commander, via the commanding officer of the 

,t. , ,. TV7 , . ship or activity concerned and the administrative 

(2) Inspections, When Made— ch £ n of CQm ^ nA 

(a) The fleet dental officer shall, when di- 
rected by the fleet commander, make inspections 

of dental facilities of ships of the fleet and of 6-38. Force Dental Officer 

dental facilities of fleet shore-based activities as (1) The duties of the force dental officer shall 

required. , be similar to those of the fleet dental officer inso- 

(b) The fleet dental officer shall, when prac- far as they relate to his organization. 

ticable, make limited inspections of dental facili- (2) The duties of the force dental officer, Fleet 

ties in ships of the various groups and compo- Marine Force, shall be similar to those of the 

nents of the fleet and of dental facilities of fleet fleet dental officer insofar as they relate to his 

shore-based activities, as required. organization. 



6-10 

Change 84 



26 Mar 75 



6-39 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-45 



6-39. Dental Officer in a Ship 

( 1 ) The head of the dental department of a 
ship is designated the dental officer and shall be 
the senior officer of the Dental Corps attached 
for duty. In his absence, his dttties shall be per- 
formed by the next senior dental officer attached 
for duty and on board. The responsibilities and 
duties of a head of department are prescribed in 
Navy Regulations and by the commanding 
officer. 

(2) The primary responsibility of the dental 
officer is to maintain the dental health of the 
personnel of the ship. The dental officer and his 
assistants will provide the dental treatment 
necessary to achieve this objective. Other parts 
of this responsibility include: 

(a) Conducting dental examinations when 
practicable on personnel who report for duty to 
determine need for dental treatment and to ver- 
ify their dental records. 

(b) Instructing ship's personnel in preven- 
tive dentistry and instituting any measures re- 
quired to control dental disease. 

(c) Treating personnel from other com- 
mands who may be dependent upon him for 
dental service. 

<d) Preparing and submitting required re- 
ports on dental treatment. 

(e) Performing the duties of a division 
officer when assigned as such by the command- 
ing officer. The division dental officer shall be 
responsible for carrying out the requirements of 
chapter 10, section 5, of U.S. Navy Regulations. 
The dental division shall include all personnel 
assigned duty with the dental department. 

(f) Providing professional advice to the 
commanding officer concerning proper action to 
be taken to obtain non-Navy dental treatment 
under the provisions of the BUMEDINST 
6320.32 series. 



6-40. Dental Officer in Aircraft Carrier 

(1) The provisions of article 6-39 shall apply 
to the dental officer in an aircraft carrier. 

(2) In addition, he shall be responsible for 
squadron personnel when embarked. 

(3) He shall take special measures to assure 
that dental records of squadron personnel accom- 
pany the squadron when detached from the ship. 



6-41. Dental Officer in Tender or Repair Ship 

(1) In addition to compliance with article 
6-39, the dental officer in a tender or repair ship 
shall make advance arrangements and just alloca- 
tion of time for the personnel from other ships 
dependent on him for dental care. 

6-42. Dental Officer in Hospita 1 Ship 

(1) The dental officer in a hospital ship shall 
be the Chief of the Dental Service. 

(2) His duties are dependent upon the current 
employment of the ship and, besides the applica- 
ble responsibilities assigned by article 6-54, may 
include those of a dental officer in a tender or 
transport. 

6-43. Dental Officer in Transport 

(1) The provisions of article 6-39 shall apply 
to the dental officer in a transport. 

(2) The dental officer in a transport shall, in 
addition: 

(a) Provide emergency and routine dental 
treatment to passenger personnel who are eligi- 
ble for dental treatment in accordance with arti- 
cle 6-98, if a troop dental officer is not aboard. 

(b) Schedule the use of dental department 
facilities of the ship so that troop dental officers 
may provide emergency and routine dental treat- 
ment to troop personnel. 

6—44. Dental Officer Embarked. With Troops in 
Transport 

(1) The senior dental officer embarked with 
troops in a transport shall: 

(a) Report to the dental officer of the trans- 
port upon embarkation and arrange for the use 
of the facilities of the dental department. 

(b) Be responsible for the dental health of 
the embarked troops while they are aboard the 
transport. 

(c) Advise the troop commander regarding 
the availability of dental treatment for embarked 
troops. 

(d) Establish a duty schedule for other 
troop dental officers. 

(e) Advise the troop commander regarding 
the assignment of troop dental enlisted person- 
nel to duties in the dental department of the 
ship. 

6-45. Commanding Officer With Dental Com- 
pany, FMF 
( 1 ) See article 6-49. 

NOTE-There is no article 6-46. 



26 Mar 75 



6-11 

Change 84 



6-47 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 6_50 

Section VI. DENTAL OFFICERS ASHORE 

Article 

Director, Dental Activities, and District Dental Officer 6-47 

Staff Dental Officer of Advanced Base 6—48 

Commanding Officer of Dental Activity 6—49 

Officer in Charge of Dental Activity 6-50 

Dental Officer in Shore Station 6-5\ 

Dental Officer in Training Center or Recruit Depot 6-52 

Dental Officer in Shipyard 6-53 

Chief of the Dental Service in Hospital 6-54 

Chief of the Dental Service in Naval Dispensary 6-55 

Dental Officer in Naval Aviation Unit 6-56 

Dental Officer in Mobile Dental Unit 6-57 

Dental Officer in Research Activity or Facility 6-58 



6-47. Director, Dental Activities, and District 
Dental Officer 

(1) Directors of dental activities and district 
dental officers are recommended by the Chief, 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, and detailed 
by the Chief of Naval Personnel from the 
officers of the active list of the Dental Corps, 

(2) They shall: 

(a) Advise and assist the commandant 
concerning all professional, technical, and ad- 
ministrative matters relating to the dental serv- 
ice of all shore (field) activities under his 
area coordination. 

(b) Visit dental facilities as necessary in 
coordinating dental matters within the district. 

(c) Represent naval interests in civilian 
dental societies and associations, dental schools, 
and other agencies within the district. 

(d) Direct and supervise Naval Reserve 
dental programs assigned in coordination with 
the Deputy Chief of Staff for Naval Reserve 
utilizing the specialized services available under 
the Assistant Chief of Staff for Naval Reserve 
and Training. 

(e) Examine information copies of dental 
reports to provide guidance and appropriate 
corrective action to cognizant dental facilities. 

(f) Keep the dental officers in the district 
informed of continuing education courses which 
may be appropriate and available. 

(g) Make recommendations concerning 
dental personnel needed for operation of the 
mobile dental unit within the district and pre- 
pare the operating schedules as required. 

<h) Maintain liaison with BUMED, and 
with fleet units and Marine Corps units lo- 
cated within the district to advise and assist 
dental officers in coordinating dental support 
thereto, as required. 

(i) Participate in the formulation of the 
dental aspects of mobilization plans. 



(j) Administer the program for non-Fed- 
eral dental treatment under BUMED Instruc- 
tion 6320.32 series. 

(k) Assist immediate superiors in the con- 
duct of command inspections, as requested. 



6-48. Staff Dental Officer of Advanced Base 

(1) The provisions of article 6-47 shall ap- 
ply, where pertinent, to dental officers serving 
on the staff of advanced bases. 



6-49. Commanding Officer of Dental Activity 

(1) The commanding officer of a dental ac- 
tivity is detailed as such by the Navy Depart- 
ment from the officers of the active list of 
the Dental Corps. 

(2) The commanding officer is charged with 
the direction of the professional and command 
functions of the activity. He shall be guided 
by the naval regulations and instructions gov- 
erning commanding officers. 

(3) In the event of the incapacity, death, 
or absence of a commanding officer of a dental 
activity, he will be succeeded by an officer 
of the Dental Corps next in rank and regularly 
attached and on board, until relieved by com- 
petent authority or until the regular command- 
ing officer returns. 



6-50. Officer in Charge of Dental Activity 

(1) The officer in charge of a dental activity 
is detailed as such by the Navy Department 
from the officers of the active list of the Den- 
tal Corps, 

(2) The officer in charge of a dental activity 
shall be guided, where pertinent, by the pro- 
visions in article 6-49(2 ) . 



6-12 

Change 49 



17 Feb 69 



6-51 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-54 



(3) Unless otherwise directed by the Secretary 
of the Navy, in the event of incapacity, death, or 
absence of'an officer in charge of a dental activity, 
the assistant officer in charge shall succeed him. 

6-51. Dental Officer in Shore Station 

( 1 ) The head of the dental department of a 
shore station is designated the dental officer and 
shall be the senior officer in the Dental Corps 
attached for duty. In his absence, his duties shall 
be performed by the next senior dental officer 
regularly attached to and serving on board for 
duty. 

(2) In addition to those general duties pre- 
scribed in U.S. Navy Regulations and by the 
commanding officer for the head of a department, 
the dental officer shall: 

(a) Be responsible for maintaining the den- 
tal health of the personnel attached to the shore 
station. 

(b) Conduct dental examinations on all per- 
sonnel, if practicable, when they report for duty 
to determine their requirements for dental treat- 
ment and to verify their dental records. 

(c) Be responsible for the instruction of 
station personnel in preventive dentistry and in- 
stitute any measures required to control dental 
disease. 

(d) Be responsible for the treatment of per- 
sonnel from other commands who may be de- 
pendent upon him for dental service. 

(e) Supervise the performance of duty of 
all personnel assigned to the dental department. 

(f ) Conduct a program of inservice training 
for all personnel on duty in the dental depart- 
ment on appropriate subjects for improving their 
knowledge and increasing their efficiency. 

(g) Provide professional advice to the com- 
manding officer concerning proper action to be 
taken to obtain non-Navy dental treatment under 
the provisions of the BUMEDINST 6320.3.2 
series. 

6-52. Dental Officer in Training Center or 
Recruit Depot 

(1) The provisions of article 6-51 shall apply 
to the dental officer in a training center or recruit 
depot. 

(2) The dental officer in a training center or 
recruit depot in addition shall insure that: 

(a) Each recruit is given the type of dental 
examination prescribed by current instructions as 
soon as practicable after arrival at the training 
center, or, in any event, within 60 days of entry 
into the Navy or Marine Corps. 

(b) A notation of every dental condition is 
made in the Dental Record (see art. 6-108). 



(c) Every effort is made to complete as much 
dental treatment as possible before the recruit is 
transferred. 

(d) Priority is given to dental treatment of 
defects which may interfere with the perform- 
ance of military duties. 

(e) Insofar as possible, only emergency treat- 
ment is provided those recruits who are to be 
discharged from the service prior to completion 
of recruit training. It is important that recruits 
in this category do not have teeth extracted in 
preparation for prosthetic treatment and then be 
discharged from the service prior to the time 
dentures are provided. 

6-53. Dental Officer in Shipyard 

(1) The provisions of article 6-51 shall apply 
to the dental officer in a shipyard. 

(2) The dental officer in a shipyard shall, in 
addition: 

(a) Make every effort to provide dental care 
for personnel of ships which are dependent upon 
the facilities of the shipyard. 

(b) Provide dental repair service to dental 
equipment of ships present as required. 

(c) Provide working space, if available, for 
dental officers afloat, if their dental facilities be- 
come untenable due to ship's overhaul procedures. 

6-54. Chief of Dental Service in Hospital 

( 1 ) The senior dental officer attached for duty 
in a hospital shall be the chief of the dental 
service. He shall have the same status in his 
relation to the commanding officer, and to the 
executive officer, as other chiefs of service on the 
hospital staff. 

(2) The primary function of the dental service 
is to treat patients, and all other activities, except 
essential training, shall be minimized. 

(3) The chief of the dental service shall: 

(a) Provide dental care for patients and 
personnel of the staff and for such other per- 
sonnel listed in article 6-98 as are dependent 
upon the hospital for dental care. 

(b) Provide care for diseased or traumatized 
conditions of the oral region, mandibular or max- 
illary fractures, cysts and tumors of dental origin, 
cysts and tumors involving the teeth and sur- 
rounding structures, and closing of maxillary 
antral openings of dental origin. He shall consult 
with medical officers whenever the interest of 
patients so requires, particularly when mutual 
professional fields are involved. 

(c) Act in an advisory capacity to the com- 
manding officer in all matters relating to dentistry 
and the dental service. 



6-13 
Change 50 



6-55 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-58 



(d) Supervise the performance of duty of all 
personnel assigned to the dental service. 

(e) Conduct a program of inservice training 
for all personnel on duty in the dental service. 

( f ) Conduct dental intern and residency pro- 
grams, when authorized, in accordance with 
current BUMED instructions. 

(g) Participate only in those staff meetings 
which are pertinent to the efficiency of the 
dental service. . 

6-55. Chief of Dental Service in Naval 
Dispensary 

{ 1 ) The provisions of article 6—54, where ap- 
propriate, shall apply to the chief of the dental 
service in a naval dispensary. 

6-56. Dental Officer in Naval Aviation Unit 

(1) The provisions of article 6-51 shall apply 
to the dental officer in a naval aviation unit 
(fleet aircraft squadrons, composite squadrons, 
air transport squadrons, etc.). He shall make all 
reports in accordance with current directives. 

(2) The dental officer in a naval aviation unit 
shall, in addition, report to the dental officer of 
the station where the aviation unit is based, for 
the purpose of integration with the dental de- 
partment of the station. Personnel of these units 
shall receive dental treatment on the same basis 
as personnel of the station providing the dental 
facility. 

6-57. Dental Officer in Mobile Dental Unit 

( 1 ) The senior dental officer ordered to a 
mobile dental unit is responsible to the officer 
exercising operational control of the unit 
(usually the district commandant with the advice 
of the district dental officer) for conforming to 
the operating schedule and carrying out his 
policies and orders. 



(2) In general, the dental officer of a mobile 
dental unit shall examine and treat the person- 
nel of each station visited by the unit with a 
view to accomplishing the greatest good for the 
greatest number within the period of time 
allotted. 

(3) Upon reporting to the commanding officer 
or officer in charge of an activity designated in 
the operating schedule, the dental officer shall 
consider himself under the military command of 
such officer until departure of the unit. 

(4) Upon assuming charge of the unit, the 
dental officer shall check equipment and supplies 
and take steps necessary to remedy any deficien- 
cies. 

(5) Upon completion of an operating sched- 
ule, the dental officer shall submit a brief report 
to the commandant on accomplishments, prob- 
lems, and any recommendations that would im- 
prove the dental service provided by the mobile 
dental unit. 

(6) The provisions of article 6-51 shall apply 
to a dental officer in a mobile dental unit insofar 
as they may be applicable to the activity for 
which the unit is providing dental support. 

6-58. Dental Officer in Research Activity or 
Facility 

( 1 ) A limited number of dental officers with 
research ability or training may be assigned to 
research facilities. 

(2) In addition to the policy and general 
duties prescribed in chapter 20, dental officers 
assigned to research facilities shall: 

(a) Conduct scientific investigations related 
to problems in dentistry and the allied sciences 
or as may be prescribed by the commanding 
officer. 

(b) Act in an advisory capacity to the com- 
manding officer, through the chain of command, 
on all dental and oral research matters. 



6-14 

Change 50 



6-59 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-62 



Section VII. DENTAL OFFICERS WITH MARINE CORPS 

Article 

Dental Officer on Staff of Commandant of U.S. Marine Corps 6-59 

Dental Officer on Staff of Commanding General, Fleet Marine Force 6-60 

Commanding Officer of Force Dental Company 6-61 

Dental Officer in Marine Corps Support Establishment 6-62 



6-59. Dental Officer on Staff of Commandant 
of U.S. Marine Corps 

(1) The Dental Officer, U.S. Marine Corps, is 
a member of the special staff of the Commandant 
of the Marine Corps and advises the Commandant 
and his staff on all matters pertaining to dental 
services. In coordination with appropriate mem- 
bers of the Commandant's staff, he shall: 

(a) Determine requirements for, receive, re- 
view, and make recommendations concerning 
utilization of dental support assigned the Marine 
Corps. 

(b) Initiate action as appropriate to obtain 
dental personnel and material requirements to 
meet Marine Corps needs. 

(c) Plan and formulate landing-force and 
field- dental procedures, doctrines, and programs. 

(d) Survey dental organizations attached to 
the Marine Corps Supporting Establishment in 
coordination or conjunction with the Inspector 
General, Marine Corps, and the Inspector Gen- 
eral, Dental. 

(e) Keep the Assistant Chief for Dentistry 
and Chief of the Dental Division informed on 
all matters relative to the dental support to the 
Marine Corps. 

(f) Review dental reports submitted by 
Fleet Marine Forces and Marine Corps Support- 
ing Establishments. 

6-60. Dental Officer on Staff of Commanding 
General, Fleet Marine Force 

{ 1 ) The force dental officer of a Fleet Marine 
Force is a member of the special staff of the 
force commander and as such advises the force 
commander relative to the efficient employment 
of force dental companies. He shall insure that 
recommendations are provided for adequate den- 



tal service in all appropriate instructions and 
plans. He is responsible for the inspection of 
dental units attached to the Force. 

6-61. Commanding Officer of Force Dental 
Company 

( 1 ) The dental officer in command of a force 
dental company, in his status as a member of the 
special staff of the division, aircraft wing, or 
force troops, to which attached, shall advise the 
commander on all dental technical, professional, 
and administrative matters pertaining to dental 
health. The commanding officer of a dental com- 
pany shall: 

(a) Insure that maximum dental treatment 
is provided consistent with assigned duties, in 
accordance with BUMED directives. 

(b) Conduct such field training as to insure 
unit readiness to support appropriate Fleet Ma- 
rine Force units under field conditions. 

(c) Insure that records are kept and re- 
quired reports are submitted. 

(d) Coordinate the operations of the force 
dental company with the overall plans, proce- 
dures, and operations of the command to which 
attached. 

(e) Coordinate with the medical officer of 
the command to which attached for the tempo- 
rary integration of dental personnel to assist in 
the care, treatment, and evacuation of casualties 
in combat and disaster. 

6-62. Dental Officer in Marine Corps Support 
Establishment 

( I ) The Dental Officer in a Marine Corps Sup- 
port Establishment is a member of the Com- 
manding General's Special Staff. His duties are 
similar in character to those duties required of 
the dental officer in any shore station. 



6-15 

Change 63 



6-63 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-67 



Section VIII. DENTAL TECHNICIANS 

Article 

Establishment of Dental Technician Rating, Group XI Dental 6-63 

Authorized Strength of Dental Technician Rating, Group XI Dental 6-64 

Entry Into Dental Technician Rating, Group XI Dental - 6-65 

Training of Dental Technician Rating, Group XI Dental 6-66 

Advancement in Dental Technician Rating, Group XI Dental 6-67 

Assignment and Duties of Enlisted Dental Personnel 6-68 



6-63. Establishment of Dental Technician Rat- 
ing, Group XI Dental 

( 1 ) The Dental Technician Rating, Group XI 
Dental, was established as a separate occupation- 
al group in the rating structure by the Secretary 
of the Navy on 12 December 1947, effective 2 
April 1948, at which time dental technicians of 
the Navy were authorized to wear the dental 
rating badge. 

(2) The Dental Technician Rating, Group XI 
Dental, is comprised of personnel trained to as- 
sist naval dental officers in providing dental care 
for the personnel of the Navy and Marine Corps. 
This group consists of the single general service 
rating of dental technician. Dental recruit, 
dental apprentice, and dentalman are general ap- 
prenticeships which lead to the dental technician 
rating. 

6-64. Authorized Strength of Dental Technician 
Rating, Group XI Dental 

( 1 ) Eleven percent of the authorized strength 
of the Hospital Corps shall be in Group XI Den- 
tal. The authorized strength of the Hospital 
Corps is determined by the Chief of Naval Per- 
sonnel, within personnel allocations authorized 
by the Chief of Naval Operations. 

(2) The Hospital Corps (see art. 9-3) in- 
cludes enlisted dental technicians. 

6-65. Entry Into Dental Technician Rating, 
Group XI Dental 

(,1 ) Candidates for the Dental Technician Rat- 
ing, Group XI Dental, must be qualified in ac- 
cordance with current BUPERS and BUMED 
directives. Candidates are procured from the fol- 
lowing sources: 

(a) Applicants for enlistment in a dental 

rate 

(b) Quotas of recruit trainees at naval 
training centers 

(c) Volunteer applicants (strikers) from 
within the naval service. 

( 2 ) Completion of a basic course of instruction 
at a class A naval dental technician school is a 



prerequisite for assignment to Dental Technician 
Rating, Group XI Dental, except in time of 
national emergency. Waivers may be granted for 
certain Reserves or inductees who have had pre- 
vious training equivalent to the basic course. 

(3) Qualifications for entrance to a class A 
naval dental technicians school are contained in 
current BUPERS and BUMED directives. 

6-66. Training of Dental Technician Rating, 
Group XI Dental 

( 1 ) Enlisted men receive their initial training 
in dental technology in the class A school. 

(2) Completion of the class A school is nor- 
mally a prerequisite for dental technicians to 
apply for specialized or advanced training in the 
class B and C schools. 

(3) Information regarding schools available 
for training enlisted men in dental technology 
and related fields may be found in articles 6-139 
through 6-144C. 

(4) In addition to the training provided in 
basic, specialized, and advanced dental tech- 
nicians schools, enlisted dental personnel, up to 
and including dental technician, first class, should 
receive organized inservice training and instruc- 
tion, in accordance with current BUMED direc- 
tives. 

( 5 ) Officers of the Medical Service Corps at- 
tached to dental activities, dental service warrant 
officers, and dental technicians may be utilized 
as instructors in the inservice training programs. 

6-67. Advancement in Dental Technician Rating, 
Group XI Dental 

( 1 ) Enlisted dental personnel shall be exam- 
ined for advancement in accordance with cur- 
rent BUPERS directives. When examinations for 
advancement are prepared locally, the member- 
ship of the examining board shall, when prac- 
ticable, consist of at least one of the following: 
a dental officer, a Medical Service Corps officer 
assigned to a dental activity, or a dental service 
warrant officer. 

(2) Enlisted dental personnel should prepare 
themselves for advancement in accordance with 



6-16 

Change 50 



6-68 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-68 



the Bureau of Naval Personnel Manual, the 
Manual of Qualifications for Advancement, and 
current BUPERS directives. 

(3) Enlisted dental personnel who have a 
designated technical specialty will be given tech- 
nical examinations for advancement as prescribed 
in the Manual of Qualifications for Advancement, 
and current directives. 

6-68. Assignment and Duties of Enlisted Dental 
Personnel 

(1) Assignment. — Enlisted dental personnel 
are assigned to naval dental activities, dental de- 
partments of ships and stations, and dental serv- 
ices of hospitals and dispensaries, as technical 
assistants to dental officers. They are asigned to 
such duties as may be indicated by their special 
qualifications and by current requirements for 
dental care. They may be assigned duty with 
dental companies, detachments, and other units 
of the Marine Corps. 

(2) General Duties. — Members of the dental 
rating group shall be qualified to perform the 
following duties: 

(a) Keep dental appointment and office 
records. 

(b) Prepare dental records including dental 
charts, under the direction of dental officers. 

<c) Prepare routine and special reports and 
forms. 

(d) Keep precious metal records and pre- 
pare reports in connection therewith. 

(e) Perform oral prophylactic treatments 
under the supervision of dental officers. 

(f) Perform preventive dentistry treat- 
ments and instruct- patients in oral hygiene. 

(g) Render dental first aid. 

(h) Expose and process dental X-ray films, 
as prescribed by written or verbal order of 
a dental officer. 

(i) Prepare materials and medications util- 
ized by dental officers. 

(j) Sterilize and sharpen instruments. 

(k ) Provide preventive maintenance of den- 
tal equipment. 

(1) Maintain cleanliness of dental spaces. 

(m) Perform such other duties in caring for 
dental patients and dental department facilities 
as may be directed by those in authority. 

(3) Dental Recruit (DR). — A dental recruit, 
when enlisted, will be sent to a naval training 
center with other recruits for indoctrination and 
basic training. Upon completion of recruit train- 
ing and if considered to have satisfactory apti- 
tude, the individual will be assigned to a class 
A school for the Basic Course for Dental Tech- 
nician, General. 



(4) Dental Apprentice (DA). — Dental ap- 
prentices are personnel in training for advance- 
ment to dentalman. They shall perform ele- 
mentary routine duties as dental operating room 
and clerical assistants. 

(5) Dentalman (DN). — Dentalmen are per- 
sonnel in training for advancement to the rating 
of dental technician, third class. In addition to 
acting as dental operating room assistants, they 
shall perform duties such as equipping dental 
cabinets, cleaning and maintaining dental equip- 
ment, preparing trays for impressions, boxing and 
pouring impressions, polishing simple prosthetic 
appliances, and performing routine clerical 
duties. 

(6) Dental Technician, Third Class (DT3). — 
Dental technicians, third class, shall perform 
various types of dental clinical and clerical duties 
such as assisting dental officers in the treatment 
of patients, performing prophylactic treatments 
under the supervision of dental officers, rendering 
dental first aid, and carrying out dental depart- 
ment administrative assignments. As junior petty 
officers, they may assist with dental property 
records and may be placed in charge of dental 
supplies issue rooms. 

(7) Dental Technician, Second Class (DT2). 
— Dental technicians, second class, shall perform 
duties commensurate with their rate. They shall 
render dental first aid, perform dental prophy- 
lactic treatments under the supervision of dental 
officers; perform routine clerical, property, and 
clinical duties; take charge of dental watch sec- 
tions; act as mate of the day; and supervise and 
instruct lower rated men in their duties. They 
may be assigned duty as instructors in dental 
technician schools. 

(8) Dental Technician, First Class ( DTI ) . — 
Dental technicians, first class, shall perform duties 
commensurate with their rate. They may be 
placed in charge of a dental ward, record office, 
property section, or dental prosthetic laboratory. 
They may be assigned duty as instructors in den- 
tal technician schools. They may prepare watch, 
quarter, and station bills; instruct and supervise 
lower rated men; perform clinical duties; render 
dental first aid and administer dental prophy- 
lactic treatments under the supervision of dental 
officers. They may serve as mate of the day or 
assistant chief of the day. When eligible, they 
may apply for appointment as a commissioned 
officer in the Medical Service Corps or in any 
other available Navy program. 

(9) Chief Dental Technician (DTC). — Chief 
dental technicians shall perform duties commen- 
surate with their rate. They may be placed in 



10 Feb 75 



6-17 
Change 83 



6-68 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-68 



charge of a dental ward, record office, property 
section, or dentaj prosthetic laboratory. They may 
be assigned duty as instructors in dental tech- 
nician schools. They may serve as chief master 
at arms. They may prepare watch, quarter, and 
station bills; detail enlisted personnel with a 
view to their most efficient employment; and 
instruct lower rated men. They may supervise 
certain technical procedures, render dental first 
aid, and perform dental prophylactic treatments 
under the supervision of dental officers. When 
eligible, they may apply for appointment as a 
commissioned officer in the Medical Service Corps 
or in any other available Navy program. 

(10) Senior Chief Dental Technician (DT 
CS). — Senior chief dental technicians shall be 
assigned duties commensurate with their rate. 
They may be assigned duties greater in scope and 
of greater responsibility than those of a chief 
dental technician. They may be utilized in the 
larger dental facilities. When eligible, they may 
apply for appointment as a commissioned officer 
in the Medical Service Corps or in any other 
available Navy program. 

(11) Master Chief Dental Technician (DT 
CM). — Master chief dental technicians shall be 



assigned duties commensurate with their rate. 
They may be assigned duties greater in scope 
and of greater responsibility than those of a 
senior chief dental technician. They may be 
utilized in the larger dental facilities where their 
capabilities and advanced experience as adminis- 
trative and technical assistants are required to 
provide a more efficient dental service. When 
eligible, they may apply for appointment as a 
commissioned officer in the Medical Service 
Corps or in any other available Navy program. 

(12) Specialty Assignments. — Dental techni- 
cians trained and designated in dental specialties 
should be assigned to duty involving their tech- 
nical specialty. They may, when needed, how- 
ever, be assigned to the general duties required 
of all dental technicians. 

(13) Qualifications. — The qualifications for 
performance of duties of dental technicians by 
rate or rating shall be in accordance with Manual 
of Qualifications for Advancement, Manual of 
Navy Enlisted Classifications, and other direc- 
tives. 



6-18 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



6-69 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-73 



Section IX. DENTAL SERVICE WARRANT OFFICERS, MEDICAL SERVICE CORPS 
OFFICERS, AND NURSE CORPS OFFICERS IN DENTAL FACILITIES 



Dental Service Warrant Officers 6-69 

Duties of Dental Service Warrant Officers 6-70 

Appointment of Medical Service Corps Officers 6-71 

Assignment and Duties of Medical Service Corps Officers in Dental Facilities 6-72 

Assignment of Nurse Corps Officers in Dental Facilities 6-73 



6-69. Dental Service Warrant Officers 

(I) The warrant officer category "Dental 
Service Warrant 818" was established on 15 No- 
vember 1954 for Hospital Corps warrant officers 
assigned to Dental Corps facilities (originally 
P.L. 379, 83d Congress, now codified by act ap- 
proved 10 Aug. 1956, 10 USC 555). Note— Orig- 
inal appointment to warrant officer grade W-l 
was discontinued on 1 July I960. 

6-70. Duties of Dental Service Warrant Officers 

( 1 ) Dental service warrant officers are nor- 
mally assigned to the following nonprofessional 
duties: 

(a) Serve as administrative officers in den- 
tal facilities. 

(b) Serve as personnel officers in dental 
facilities. 

(c) Serve as finance officers in dental fa- 
cilities. 

(d) Supervise and perform clerical proce- 
dures. 

(e) Supervise dental prosthetic laboratories. 

(2) Dental service warrant officers shall be 
thoroughly familiar with dental property ac- 
counting and personnel management. They shall 
be accountable for all equipment and stores in 
their charge, shall exercise personal supervision 
over the condition and economical expenditure 
thereof, and report any deficiencies directly to 
the dental officer. When attached to a unit or an 
activity going into or out of commission, they 
shall personally supervise the checking and test- 
ing of all dental equipment. 

(3) When officers of the Medical Service 
Corps are assigned to duty in dental facilities, 
dental service warrant officers may serve as as- 
sistants to such officers. 

6-71. Appointment of Medical Service Corps 
Officers 

( 1 ) Chief dental service warrants, dental serv- 
ice warrants, chief dental technicians, and dental 
technicians, first class, when eligible, may take 
examinations for appointment to the grade of 
ensign in the Medical Service Corps as set forth 
in current directives. 



6-72. Assignment and Duties of Medical Service 
Corps Officers in Dental Facilities 

{ 1 ) Assignment. — Medical Service Corps offi- 
cers are assigned to dental facilities to supervise 
nonprofessional administrative procedures so that 
dental officers can devote more time to profes- 
sional duties. They normally are assigned as: 

(a) Administrative officers in large dental 
facilities. 

(b) Administrative officers to dental offi- 
cers on staffs of major commands. 

(c) Executive Assistant to the Inspector 
General, Dental. 

(d) Instructors in naval dental technicians 
schools and in the inservice training programs of 
dental facilities. 

(2) Duties. — The duties of Medical Service 
Corps officers require that they keep informed on 
regulations, policies, and instructions pertaining 
to the nonprofessional support of dental facil- 
ities. They shall: 

(a) Manage administrative functions for 
dental activities and facilities including budget- 
ing, accounting, property procurement and dis- 
tribution and preparation of required records, 
reports, and returns. 

(b) Assist in dental service planning and 
logistics duties on major staffs. 

(c) Assist the Inspector General, Dental, 
and designated assistant inspectors general in the 
nonprofessional administrative aspects of surveys 
of dental activities and facilities. 

(d) Act as supervisor of the inservice train- 
ing program in dental facilities and act as an in- 
structor in dental department administration at 
dental facilities and dental technicians schools. 

6-73. Assignment of Nurse Corps Officers in 
Dental Facilities 

{ 1 ) Where feasible, officers of the Nurse Corps 
should be assigned to the oral surgery branch of 
teaching hospitals. 

(2) The Bureau considers that such assign- 
ments directly benefit the patients through the 
promotion of high professional standards of oral 
surgical treatment, and permit maximum profes- 
sional utilization. 



6-18a 
Change 50 



6 _74 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 6-74 

Section X. CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES IN DENTAL FACILITIES 

6-74. General Information (2) Care should be taken to assure that the 

employment of civilians does not interfere with 
( 1 ) Instructions for the employment of civil- the duties, rotation, and training of naval per- 
ian personnel are contained in chapter 10. sonnel. 



6-1 8b 

Change 50 



6-75 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-78 



Section XI. NAVAL DENTAL CLINICS 

t; ir u Article 

establishment 6-75 

Mission 6-76 

Organization 6—77 

Commanding Officer g_ 78 

Executive Officer 6-79 

Heads of Departments ._ 6-80 

Administrative Officer 6-81 

6-75. Establishment 6-77. Organization 

(1) Authority. — U.S. naval dental clinics are (1) A sample organization chart for a U.S. na- 
established by authority of the Secretary of the val dental clinic is shown on the following page. 

j . ( 2 ) Individual activity organization charts 

(2) Command Relationships. — U.S. naval den- shall follow the format prescribed in current 
tal clinics are under the command and primary BUMED directives. 

support of BUMED, and the area coordination (3) The commanding officer shall be the sen- 

of the naval district commandant or fleet com- ior officer of the Dental Corps attached for duty 

mander or the subdelegated area coordinator in and so assigned. 

whose area the clinic is located. Clinics are not R 7 o p„ mvv , nvi j- ~ ffi „ „ 

self-sustaining activities and receive necessary lo- ^ Commandln ^ 0fflcer 
gistic support from nearby activities. d) Professional Duties. — 

(3) Justification. — Establishment of a U.S. na- ( a ) The commanding officer is charged with 
val dental clinic is indicated when: tne direction of the dental service and the other 

(a) Better dental support can be provided to professional functions of the clinic. He is respon- 
the operating forces and to shore (field) activi- si ble for the treatment of all dental patients de- 
ties of the Department of the Navy for which pendent on the clinic for care. Complicated sur- 
the dental activity is responsible. gical operations and special forms of treatment 

(b) An activity, such as a naval station, is sha11 

not be undertaken without his knowledge 

required to support and be responsible for dental an d approval. He shall require prompt informa- 

treatment of personnel in numerous ships and tion regarding all patients presenting unusual 

stations without dental facilities, symptoms or whose condition is unsatisfactory. 

(c) A separate dental activity will furnish a (b) The commanding officer shall: 

more effective means for BUMED to discharge (D Provide for periodic conferences on 

its responsibility in providing dental support to professional matters. When practicable, qualified 

fleet units and shore (field) activities. military and civilian personnel shall be invited 

6-76. Mission to P artici P ate in these conferences, if they can 

provide information pertinent to the practice of 
(1) To provide a complete dental service to naval dentistry. 
Navy and Marine Corps shore (field) activities, (2) Provide for indoctrination and train- 
units of the operating forces, and other author- ing of personnel to maintain and increase profes- 
ized personnel in the geographical area. sional proficiency. 



6-19 
Change 50 



rS 

CO 



NOTES 
Functions Provided By 



(Title of Other Field Activity) 



Title of Field Activity 



Commanding Officer 

Executive Officer 
Administrativ e Officer 



Policy Boards and Committees 



Periodontics 
Department 



Endodontics 
Department 



I 



SAMPLE 
DENTAL CLINIC 
ORGANIZATION CHART 



Special Assistants 



Operative Dentistry 
Department 



Oral Diagnosis 
Department 
1 



Oral Surgery 
Department 



Patient Examination 
Division 



Appointment and Records 
Division 



Clinical 
Division 



Central Sterilization 
Division 



Preventive Dentistry 
Department 

J 



Clinical 
Division 



Patient Education 
Division 



Radiography 
Division 



Prosthodontics 
Department 
_ J 



Administrative 
Department 









Removable Denture 
Division 



Fixed Partial Denture 
Division 



Laboratory 
Division 



Date. 



Approved 



(Title of Approving Officer) 



Title of Activity Assigned Command Responsibility 



Title of Field Activity 



CHART NO. 1 



6-79 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-80 



(3) Require rotation of duty within the 
command as far as practicable for officers and 
dental technicians (see art. 6-25). 

(4) Establish cooperative and cordial rela- 
tionships with civilian professional organiza- 
tions. 

(5) Make the facilities of the clinic avail- 
able for the professional use of dental officers at- 
tached to other activities or ships whenever prac- 
tical. 

(6) Maintain an adequate professional li- 
brary of standard textbooks and current periodi- 
cals. 

(7) Prepare supporting code logistic 

plans. 

(2) Military Authority and Duties. — 

(a) The dental officer detailed to command, 
by competent authority, has authority over all 
officers or other persons attached to the com- 
mand, whatever their rank and whether they are 
of the line or staff corps. 

(b) The commanding officer shall: 

(1) Direct the dental service and other 
professional functions of the activity, and exer- 
cise military jurisdiction in conformity with es- 
tablished methods of organization. He shall be 
guided by the naval regulations and instructions 
governing commanding officers. 

(2) Require compliance with U.S. Navy 
Regulations, orders and instructions of the Secre- 
tary of the Navy, the Chief of the Bureau, and 
other competent authority. He shall require obe- 
dience to Federal, State, and local laws as they 
may apply to the administration of the com- 
mand. Instructions and Notices published by the 
commanding officer constitute the regulations of 
the command. 

(3) Administer disciplinary matters and 
keep records thereof. 

(4) Exert every effort to maintain his 
command in a state of readiness for mobiliza- 
tion. 

(5) Be responsible to the commandant of 
the district in which his activity is located, or 
the commander of the naval base, when a com- 
ponent thereof, for the execution of tasks, in 
case of emergencies, disasters, or defense plans. 

(6) Make necessary inspections of the 
clinic to determine whether it is adequately 
manned and equipped, and that all departments 
and facilities are well managed and maintained. 

(3) Administrative Duties.— The commanding 
officer shall: 

(a) Be responsible for the administration of 
the clinic so that it may effectively carry out its 
assigned mission. To accomplish this requires 
the administration of personnel so that the 
professional capabilities of dental officers and 



dental technicians may be effectively utilized, 
and so that the personnel assigned to clerical, 
fiscal, and property functions will effectively 
support and expedite dental care. 

(b) Detail an officer to be in charge of each 
professional department who, as head of depart- 
ment, will have professional cognizance of the 
dental care given in his department. 

(c) Detail Medical Service Corps officers or 
dental service warrant officers as administrative 
officers to supervise the personnel of the clerical, 
fiscal, and property functions of the clinic. The 
administrative officer will be assigned sufficient 
dental technicians and civilian personnel to assist 
him in his functions. 

6-79. Executive Officer 

(1) Officer Detailed as Executive Officer. — An 
officer being detailed as executive officer shall be 
a member of the Dental Corps and, in relation to 
the other Dental Corps officers of the command, 
next in rank to the commanding officer. See U.S. 
Navy Regulations, article 1353. 

(2) Professional Duties— The executive officer 
shall: 

(a) Aid the commanding officer in every 
way possible to efficiently accomplish the mis- 
sion of the clinic. In general, his duties embrace 
the supervision of all professional departments. 

(b) Be responsible for coordinating the 
functions of the various professional depart- 
ments. He may be assigned as the head of a 
professional department. 

(c) Keep the commanding officer advised of 
the condition of patients, particularly if any 
unusual condition is observed. He shall make ar- 
rangements for the proper emergency and post- 
operative care of patients during all hours. 

(d) Coordinate the professional training 
programs of the clinic. 

(3) Military Authority and Administrative 
Duties. — 

(a) The dental officer detailed as such by 
competent authority shall serve as executive 
officer. His orders shall be regarded as proceed- 
ing from the commanding officer. 

(b) The executive officer shall keep himself 
fully informed regarding policies of the com- 
manding officer. He shall carry out the adminis- 
trative duties assigned to him by the command- 
ing officer. 

6-80. Heads of Departments 

(1) The number and designation of profes- 
sional departments will be determined by the 
commanding officer in the light of local condi- 
tions. 

(2) The head of a department shall: 



6-21 
Change 32 



6-81 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 6-85 

(a) Assign patients and coordinate their 6-81. Administrative Officer 

care to accomplish the greatest amount of dental (1 ) The senior Medical Service Corps officer 

treatment for the greatest number. or dental service warrant officer regularly at- 

(b) Insure that acceptable standards of tached to the dental clinic shall serve as the ad- 
professional care are maintained. ministrative officer. 

(c) Advise the executive officer regarding serious, < 2 > Th * administrative officer shall: 

, i j- - x z ( a ) Keep the commanding officer and the 

very serious, or other unusual conditions of patients. . S . , <■ 

' „ „ . . . „ . , executive officer informed of the effectiveness of 

(d) Participate in staff conferences and pro- the administrative organization. 

vide consultant services as requested. < b ) Be responsible to the commanding 

(e) Collaborate with other departments to officer for the organization, supervision, and ad- 
expedite the dental care of patients. ministration of the staff departments. 

(f) Participate in and conduct appropriate (c) Keep himself informed of the laws, reg- 
portions of the clinic training program. ulatiotis, policies, and instructions applicable to 

. , . . j . - the administrative management of the dental 

(e) Assure the adequacy, security, mainte- ... , , . . . 6 ., , . . 

xs , . , V • j clinic and be in a position to provide admmistra- 

nance, and economical use of property assigned [iye counsd tQ fhe pr of ess ional departments, 

to the department. (d) Coordinate the work of the staff depart- 

(h) Assure that prescribed records, reports, ments and provide counsel as necessary for 

and returns are prepared and submitted. efficiency and high morale. 

Section XII. FLEET MARINE FORCE DENTAL COMPANIES 

Article 

Establishment 6-82 

Organization 6-83 

Mission 6-84 

Command Relationships - 6-85 



6-82. Establishment 

(1) Force dental companies were established 
by the Commandant of the U.S. Marine Corps to 
provide a flexible, mobile dental service for the 
Fleet Marine Force. The initial table of organiza- 
tion for force dental companies was approved by 
the Commandant on 17 November 1954. 

6-83. Organization 

(1) The force dental company is commanded 
by a dental officer. The company is composed of 
dental officers and dental technicians in sufficient 
strength to support a Marine division, a Marine 
aircraft wing, or force troops. 

(2) Each dental company is organized into a 
headquarters and service platoon, a clinic pla- 
toon, and a prosthetic platoon. There may be 
one or more dental companies in each Fleet Ma- 
rine Force. 



6-84. Mission 

(1) The mission of the force dental company 
is to support combat effectiveness by maintain- 
ing the dental health of the command. 

6-85. Command Relationships 

(1) Force dental companies, organic to a Fleet 
Marine Force, are responsive to directives of the 
force commander. When attached to a Marine 
division, aircraft wing, or force troops, dental 
companies will be under the command to which 
attached. 

(2) The commanding officer of a dental com- 
pany, when attached to a division, aircraft wing, 
force troops, or other major Fleet Marine Force 
element, will be a member of the special staff of 
the command. 



6-22 

Change fyl 



6-86 



Where To Find 

Waivers of Dental Defects - 

6-86. Where To Find 

(1) Following is a resume of subjects and 
applicable articles relating to dental standards: 



Articles 

Annual physical 15-9(5), 15-45(5)fd) 

Antarctica 15-31(3)(n) 

Appointment, males 15-9(8) 

Aviation: 

Class 1, service group 1 15-62(8) 

Flight training candidates 15-67(l)(g) 

Diving 15-30(l)(f) 

Enlistment, reenlistment, induction; 

males 15-27-2-5 

General information 15-9(1) — (3) 

Nuclear power 15-29A(l)(c) 

Officer candidates 15-9(9) 

Promotion, officer 15-9(4) 

Steward applicants 15-54 

Submarine 15-29(2)(f) 

Transfer to ship or station with no dental 

officer 15-9(6) 

Women 15-9(7) 



6-87. Waivers of Dental Defects 

(1) When, in the opinion of the dental exam- 
iner and the commanding officer or the officer in 
charge of the examining facility, a waiver of any 
disqualifying defect(s) is warranted, a recom- 
mendation to that effect may be submitted on the 
Standard Form 88 for consideration. 

(2) Defects which may be waived are those 
which, although disqualifying in accordance with 
naval physical standards, will not interfere with 



6-87 



Article 
6-86 
6-87 

the examinee's ability to perform the duties in the 
prospective grade or rate. 

(3) The recommendation for waiver shall be en- 
tered on the reverse side of the Standard Form 88. 
The defect(s) shall be fully described. 

(4) In the case of a physical examination inci- 
dent to assignment of a Navy or Marine Corps 
reservist to active duty, exclusive of active duty 
for training, the commanding officer or officer in 
charge is authorized, upon the recommendation of 
the dental examiner, to grant a conditional waiver 
for any defect(s) which in all probability will not 
interfere with the member's performance of active 
duty. The conditional waiver carries with it the 
authority to consider the member physically quali- 
fied for active duty prior to final review of the 
records in the Navy Department. When granted, 
the member shall be so advised and the conditional 
waiver shall be reported on the reverse side of the 
Standard Form 88. The reporting procedure is 
identical to that applicable to a recommendation 
for waiver. 

(5) There is a difference between a waiver and a 
conditional waiver. The recommendation for 
waiver is applicable to a candidate for appoint- 
ment, enlistment, or reenlistment in any status. On 
the other hand, a conditional waiver is considered 
only when an individual, already a member of the 
Naval Reserve or the Marine Corps Reserve except 
Fleet Reserve or Fleet Marine Corps Reserve, has 
been examined incident to assignment to extended 
active duty (other than training duty) and has 
been found not to meet established physical 
standards. 

NOTE. — There are no articles 6-88 through 6-97. 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 
Section XIII. DENTAL STANDARDS 



6-23 
Change 56 



\ 



6-98 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-98 



Section XIV. DENTAL EXAMINATION AND TREATMENT 



Availability of Dental Treatment 

Dental Examinations 

Specifications for Conducting Dental Examinations 
Dental Classification of Individuals 

Dental Treatment 

Preventive Dentistry Programs 

Dental Prosthetic Treatment 

Inscription on Dentures for Identification 

Refusal of Dental Treatment 

Dental Treatment by Other Than Naval Personnel 

6-98. Availability of Dental Treatment 

(1) Dental treatment shall be made available 
at naval and Marine Corps activities having den- 
tal treatment facilities to the following: 

(a) Members of the Navy and Marine Corps 
when on active duty, and Canadian Armed Forces 
personnel when on active duty in the United 
States. 

(b) Members of the Fleet Reserve and the 
Fleet Marine Corps Reserve when on active duty, 

(c) Members on the retired lists of the Navy 
and Marine Corps when on active duty. 

(d) Members of the Naval and Marine 
Corps Reserve serving on active duty or active 
duty for training in excess of 30 days. 

(e) Members of the Army and Air Force, 
provided that such members are either on active 
duty in localities where their own dental services 
are not available, or are assigned to detached 
duty with the Navy. 

(f) Members of the Coast Guard, and com- 
missioned corps of the Public Health Service and 
of the Environmental Science Services Adminis- 
tration when such members are serving on active 
duty with the Navy under orders issued by com- 
petent authority, or are on active duty in locali- 
ties where their own dental facilities are not 
available. 

(g) Such other persons as are hospitalized in 
naval hospitals, in accordance with the law. 

(h) Dependents of uniformed service per- 
sonnel residing outside the United States, and in 
areas within the United States that have been 
specifically designated or authorized to provide 
dental care for dependents, in accordance with 
current directives. 

<i) Retired members of the uniformed serv- 
ices entitled to retired, retainer, or equivalent 
pay. 

(j) Dependents of retired members of uni- 
formed services personnel, entitled to retired, re- 
tainer, or equivalent pay, residing outside the 
United States and in areas within the United 



Article 

g_ 98 

g_ 99 

6_ 100 

6-I0I 

6^02 

6-102 A 

6_103 

6-104 

6-105 

6-106 

States that have been specifically authorized to pro- 
vide such care, in accordance with current directives. 

(k) Eligible survivors of deceased members 
residing outside the United States and in areas 
within the United States that have been specifi- 
cally designated or authorized to provide dental 
care for dependents, in accordance with current 
directives, 

(I) Civil personnel injured in a naval shore 
station, 

(m) Veterans' Administration patients when 
hospitalized in naval hospitals, 
(n) Prisoners of war. 

(2) Priority in the rendering of dental treat- 
ment shall be given to members in categories (a) 
through (g). Dental care to other eligible and 
authorized beneficiaries is subject to the availa- 
bility of space and facilities and the capabilities 
of the professional staff. 

(3) Treatment of members of the Naval and 
Marine Corps Reserve serving on active duty for 
training of 30 days or less and civilian personnel 
injured in a naval activity shall be limited to 
emergency measures. 

(4) Treatment of Veterans' Administration pa- 
tients shall be limited to treatment adjunctive to 
medical treatment of the conditions for which 
they are hospitalized. 

(5) Treatment of persons in category (g) 
shall be administered only as an adjunct to inpa- 
tient hospital care. Adjunctive dental care is that 
dental care which in the professional judgment 
of the attending physician and dentist is required 
in the treatment or management of a medical or 
surgical condition other than dental and which 
may be anticipated to exert a beneficial effect on 
the primary medical or surgical condition or its 
sequelae. The primary diagnosis must be specific 
so that the relationship between the primary con- 
dition and the requirement for dental care in the 
treatment of the primary condition is clearly 
shown. Dental care to improve the general health 
of the patient is not necessarily adjunctive dental 
care. 



31 Oct 73 



6-25 
Change 80 



6-99 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-100 



(6) Nothing in this article shall preclude the 
rendering of emergency dental treatment to any 
person when such treatment is necessary and de- 
manded by the laws of humanity or the principles 
of international courtesy. 

(7) Receipt of payment by any dental officer 
or enlisted person from anyone for any dental service 
in a naval dental activity is prohibited. 

(8) The foregoing is subject to the limitations of 
article 6-103, which relates to dental prosthetic 
treatment. 

6—99. Dental Examinations 

(1) All dental examinations should be performed, 
when possible, by dental officers of the Navy or the 
Naval Reserve, even though the latter may not be 
serving on active duty. When a dental officer is not 
available, dental examinations of persons, other than 
applicants for admission to the U.S. Naval Academy 
as midshipmen, and candidates for flight training, may 
be performed by naval medical officers. (See article 
15-9 (2)(a).) 

(2) Dental examinations of persons in the naval 
service and candidates for enlistment or appointment 
therein shall be conducted by officers of the Dental 
Corps when such examinations are required by the 
instructions in chapter 1 5, section IV, and as specified 
below. The examining officer shall be guided in the 
recording of dental examinations, as well as in the use 
of the Dental Record, by instructions in sections XIV 
and XV of this chapter. 

(3) Each officer of the Dental Corps shall famil- 
iarize himself with the contents of chapter 15, section 
IV, and such other portions of this manual which refer 
to dental examinations of naval personnel and the stan- 
dards therefor. (See ch. 6, sec. XIII, and ch. 15, sec. I.) 

(4) When the results of dental examinations are 
required to be entered on Standard Form 88, the 
instructions for so doing shall be followed. Care shall 
be taken to indicate in each case whether or not the 
examinee meets the dental standards for which the 
examination is being done. Disqualifying dental defects 
shall be entered in detail. 

(5) Dental examinations of naval personnel shall 
be made at appropriate times to ascertain the need for 
dental treatment. Dental defects discovered when con- 
ducting such an examination shall be recorded in 
Standard Form 603, the Dental Record. 

(6) When practicable, a dental examination shall 
be conducted for each member who reports aboard 
a ship or station for duty, to ascertain the need for 
dental treatment and to verify dental records. 

(7) Dental examinations of deceased personnel 
for the purpose of identification shall be accomplished 
accurately and with as little facial disturbance as 
possible. 

(8) The dental examination of each person who 
reports for, or returns to, extended active duty in the 



Navy or Marine Corps shall be a type 2 examination, 
as described in article 6—100. 

(9) Naval and Marine Corps recruits shall be pro- 
vided a type 2 dental examination (see 6-100) in- 
cluding a panoramic radiographic evaluation. 

(10) Panoramic radiographs shall be retained in the 
Dental Folder (DD Form 722-1) as a permanent part 
of the Health Record. Identifying data shall include 
the individual's full name (surname first), social 
security number, and date of exposure. To orient 
these radiographs, a lead letter "R" shall be taped to 
the external surface of the X-ray cassette in such a 
position so as to identify, upon exposure and subse- 
quent development, the image of the right side of the 
patient's dentition. 

(1 1 ) Full-mouth intraoral, periapical , and posterior 
bitewing radiographs shall be retained in the Dental 
Folder (DD 722-1). Standard mounts for the serial 
mounting of bitewing radiographs are to be used. 
Cardboard serial mounts can be obtained through the 
Navy Supply System. Bitewing radiographs shall be 
mounted serially with the concave surface of the iden- 
tifying "dimple" toward the observer. Indicate the date 
immediately below the films. Other intraoral and extra- 
oral radiographs of specific dental conditions or 
sequellae of dental diseases and conditions should be 
retained until it is determined that their usefulness in 
followup examinations is no longer indicated. 

(12) The dental examination of each person being 
separated from the Navy or Marine Corps shall be a 
type 3 examination, as described in article 6—1 00, and 
shall be recorded on the Standard Form 88 only. 

6-100. Specifications for Conducting Dental 
Examinations 

(1) The following are the specifications for con- 
ducting standard types of dental examinations: 

Type 1, Ideal Examination.— Mouth-mirror and 
explorer examination; adequate natural or artificial 
illumination; full-mouth intraoral, periapical and pos- 
terior bitewing radiographs; when indicated, percus- 
sion, thermal, and electrical tests, transillumination, 
and study models. 

Type 2, Routine Examination. -Mouth-mirror 
and explorer examination; adequate natural or artifi- 
cial illumination; posterior bitewing radiographs; peri- 
apical radiographs, when indicated. 

Type 5, Modified Routine Examination- -Mouth- 
mirror and explorer examination; adequate natural 
or artificial illumination. 

Type 4, Screening Examination. -Mouth-miiwi 
and explorer or tongue-depressor examination; avail- 
able illumination. 

(2) It shall be the professional responsibility of 
the dental officer to determine the type of examina- 
tion which is appropriate for each patient. The 
dental officer shall prescribe the number and type 
of dental radiographs to be exposed during exam- 



6-26 

Change 84 



26 Mar 75 



6 101 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-101 



ination and treatment and must insure that all 
current radiation safety standards are met to pro- 
vide maximum shielding of individuals from radia- 
tion sources. Protective lead aprons are to be 
used for patients to reduce the amount of radia- 
tion received. 

(3) Posterior bitewing radiographs shall be re- 
tained and mounted serially. See article 6-99(1 1). 



6—101. Dental Classification of Individuals 

(1) The following standard dental classification 
of individuals shall be used whenever it is necessary to 
classify personnel for purposes of urgency or priority 
of dental treatment, or for availability for transfer, etc.: 
(a) Class 1. -Individuals requiring no dental 
treatment. 



26 Mar 75 



6-26a 
Change 84 



6-102 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-102A 



(b) Class 2. — Individuals requiring routine 
but not early treatment of conditions; such as: 

(1) Moderate calculus. 

(2) Prosthetic cases not included in class 

4, 

(3) Caries — not excessive nor advanced. 

(4) Periodontal diseases — not extensive 
nor advanced. 

(5) Oral conditions requiring corrective 
or preventive measures. 

(c) Class 3. — Individuals requiring early 
treatment of conditions; such as: 

(1) Extensive or advanced caries. 

(2) Extensive or advanced periodontal di- 
seases. 

(3) Pulpal or apical infection (root canal 
therapy ) . 

(4) Chronic oral infections. 

(5) Heavy calculus. 

(6) Cases requiring removal of one or 
more teeth or other surgical procedures not in- 
cluded in class 5. 

(d) Class 4. — Individuals requiring essential 
prosthetic appliances, including: 

(1) Individuals with insufficient teeth to 
masticate the service ration. 

(2) Other individuals in need of an appli- 
ance essential to their duty. 

(e) Class 5. — Individuals requiring emer- 
gency dental treatment for conditions such as: 

(1) Injuries. 

(2) Acute oral infections (parietal and 
periapical abscesses, Vincent's infection, acute 
gingivitis, acute stomatitis, etc.). 

(2) When recording the dental classification 
of an individual in a record, form, or in corre- 
spondence, the standard type of dental examina- 
tion, as denned in article 6-100, shall also be 
recorded, in order that the value of the classifica- 
tion as related to the comprehensiveness of the 
dental examination will be apparent. 

( 3 ) To facilitate recognition of the five dental 
classifications of patients, a standard color code, 
utilizing a strip of appropriately colored cello- 
phane tape, shall be affixed to the Dental Folder, 
DD 722 1, on the tab over the word "FORM" so 
that it will be readily visible when filed. 



Dental class Color tape 

I White 

2 Green 

3 Yellow 

4 Dark Blue 

5 Red 



(a) The color coding shall be accomplished 
initially only by a dental officer. To give value to 
the classification, a type 1 (Ideal Examination) 
or type 2 (Routine Examination) shall be con- 
ducted when establishing the dental classification. 



(b) In the course of treatment, the color 
shall be changed as the dental classification is 
modified. 

6-102. Dental Treatment 

( 1 ) Dental treatment may be rendered only by 
dental officers, with the following exceptions: 

(a) Oral prophylaxes and preventive den- 
tistry applications of cariostatic agents may be 
administered by dental technicians and civilian 
dental hygienists under the supervision of a den- 
tal officer. 

(b) When a dental officer is not available, 
emergency dental treatment may be administered 
by dental technicians or by personnel of the med- 
ical department. 

(2) Orthodontic treatment by naval dental of- 
ficers other than minor tooth movement, is not 
authorized except at naval dental facilities 
having an established orthodentic capability 
approved by BUMED, and then only to provide: 

( a ) continuation of active orthodontic treat- 
ment for dependents who relocate to reside with 
their sponsors on active duty in an area where 
dependent dental care is authorized, or 

(b) limited treatment essential to mainte- 
nance of oral health for active duty personnel, if 
it is relatively simple so as to preclude any com- 
plications due to untimely transfer, release from 
active duty, discharge, and similar reasons. 

(3) Treatment of dental diseases, disabilities, 
and injuries of Navy and Marine Corps personnel 
shall be completed whenever possible. When it is 
not possible to complete all treatment, priority 
shall be given to treating those conditions which 
are most likely to interfere with the performance 
of duties. 

(4) The dental officer shall notify the medical 
officer when diseases or any other conditions re- 
quiring medical care or consultation are ob- 
served. 

(5) Whenever, in his opinion, it is necessary 
to place dental patients on the binnacle list or 
sicklist, the dental officer shall notify the medical 
officer in order that the entries in the Health 
Record may be made in accordance with chapter 
16, section IX. 

(6) The care of a patient admitted to the 
sicklist, because of dental disabilities, shall be the 
joint responsibility of the dental officer treating 
the patient and the ward medical or dental 
officer. 

6-102A. Preventive Dentistry Programs 

( 1 ) All dental activities shall have a preven- 
tive dentistry program which shall contain, as a 
minimum, the following elements: 



10 Feb 75 



6-27 

Change 83 



6-103 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-103 



(a) Topical Fluoride Application. — All 
Navy and Marine Corps personnel shall receive 
a topical fluoride treatment annually and prior 
to deployment or transfer to activities, or areas, 
where dental support is other than maximum. 

(b) Navy Periodontal Screening Examina- 
tion (NPSE).— 

(1) NPSE's shall be conducted annually 
for all active duty personnel with 4 or more 
years of active service. 

(2) The NPSE consists of two parts, the 
Navy Periodontal Disease Index (NPDI) and 
the Navy Plaque Index (NPI). Scores for these 
indexes should be determined in accordance with 
article 6-157B and recorded in the SF 603 (art. 
6-118). 

( 3 ) The NPDI score must be determined 
by a dental officer before the NPI score. 

(c) Plaque Control Program. — 

(1) Plaque control instruction shall be 
given through individual or small group sessions. 
These sessions shall include, as a minimum: 

(a) Education regarding the relation- 
ship between plaque, caries and periodontal di- 
sease. 

(b) Demonstration of interproximal 
plaque removal techniques. 

(c) Demonstration of sulcular methods 
of tooth cleansing with a tooth brush. 

(d) Instruction in the use of plaque 
disclosing media. 

(2) Recipients of plaque control instruc- 
tion shall possess a suitable plaque control arma- 
mentarium. 

(3) Navy Plaque Index scores shall be 
determined at appropriate intervals (in accord- 
ance with article 6-157B and recorded in the 
SF 603 (art. 6-118)). 

(d) Children's Program. — 

( 1 ) The program shall consist, at a mini- 
mum, of providing the following for each eligi- 
ble child (SECNAVINST 6320.8 series) on an 
annual basis: 

(a) An oral health examination. 

(b) A prophylaxis. 

(c) A topical fluoride application of 
aqueous fluoride solution. 

(d) A lecture and demonstration on 
plaque control. 

(e) Dental health education materials. 

(f) A preventive dentistry kit. 

(2) The program shall not be permitted 
to interfere with dental services for active duty 
members or emergency care. 

(3) Additional dental treatment shall not 
be performed in connection with this program 
unless the patient is eligible under article 
6-98(1) (h). 



(e) Systemic Fluorides. — 

(1) Dental activities located ashore shall 
detrmine the source of the base water supply 
and its fluoride content. 

(a) If the water supply has been ad- 
justed to contain optimum fluoride levels, fre- 
quent reports on the fluoride level shall be ob- 
tained. 

(b) If the water supply is fluoride de- 
ficient or contains higher than optimum fluor- 
ide levels, efforts shall be directed toward proper 
adjustment where feasible. 

( 2 ) When adjustment of the fluoride con- 
tent of the home water supplies is not feasible, 
prescriptions for suitable systemic fluoride sup- 
plements shall be offered to parents of children 
under 17 years of age. 

(f) Mouth Guards. — All dental activities 
with limited or full prosthetic capabilities shall 
offer to provide protective mouthpieces for all 
active duty personnel engaged in sports involv- 
ing body contact. 

(2) A dental officer shall be appointed as the 
preventive dentistry officer at each dental activ- 
ity to which more than one dental officer is 
assigned. Where only one dental officer is as- 
signed, he shall serve as the preventive dentistry 
officer. The preventive dentistry officer shall 
formulate, supervise, and be responsible for exe- 
cution of all aspects of the preventive dentistry 
programs. 

(3) Dental officers with advanced training in 
preventive dentistry, wherever assigned, shall 
be available for consultation regarding establish- 
ment of preventive dentistry programs and for 
evaluation of existing programs. 

6-103. Dental Prosthetic Treatment 

(1) Except for minor repairs or adjustments, 
dental prosthetic treatment, which includes the 
fabrication of crowns, inlays, bridges, and den- 
tures shall be furnished only at activities author- 
ized by the Bureau to provide such treatment. 

(2) Dental prosthetic treatment is authorized 
for persons in categories (a) through (k) of 
article 6-98(1), only when such treatment is 
deemed necessary by the dental officer for the 
restoration of extensive loss of masticatory func- 
tion or the replacement of anterior teeth for es- 
thetic reasons. 

( 3 ) Dental prosthetic treatment is furnished to 
Veterans' Administration patients hospitalized in 
naval hospitals when such treatment is clearly 
adjunctive to the medical treatment for which 
the veteran is hospitalized^ 

(4) Dental officers on duty at activities where 
no prosthetic facilities are available shall insure 
that all oral surgical and operative treatment has 



6-28 

Change 78 



30 Jan 73 



6-107 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-108 



Section XV. THE DENTAL RECORD AND OTHER STANDARD FORMS 



Article 

Purpose of Standard Form 603 6-107 

General Instructions for Preparation, Distribution, and Disposition of Standard Form 603 6-108 

Dental Folder, DD Form 722-1 6-109 

Custody of Standard Form 603 6-110 

Recovery of Lost Standard Form 603 6-111 

Special Entries in Standard Form 603 - 6-112 

Recording D.ntal Examinations 6-113 

Recording Dental Operations and Treatments 6-114 

Designations and Abbreviations for Use on Standard Form 603 6-115 

General Characteristics of Markings on Dental Charts 6-116 

Differential Characteristics of Markings on Dental Charts 6-117 

Illustrations of Markings on Dental Charts 6-118 

Recording of Dental Treatment on Chronological Record of Medical Care, Standard Form 600 6-119 

Consultation Sheet, Standard Form 513 6-120 

Doctor's Progress Notes, Standard Form 509 ." , , 6-121 

6-107. Purpose of Standard Form 603 , ... 

/i\ tl ct- uni ■ i ( a ) Tne original prepared at recruit training 

A a } Provides: centers fof recruits shall be Iaced {a the DD 6 

(a) An aid to diagnosis, treatment plan- 722-1, Dental Folder, after the original examina- 

n.ng and practice management tion. Entries for dental treatment accomplished 

b) A valuable means of identification. for a recmk dufi thfi h fining period 

(O A record of the initial examination of shal] be made on f he { ^ The J ? 

a member which shows missing teeth, existing tQ remaIn in the DD ?22 _ « * 
restorations, diseases, and other abnormalities. 

(d) A record of diseases and other abnor- 
malities which occur after the initial examina- 
tion, (b) For persons, other than recruits, who 

(e) A chronological record of dental treat- report for or return to extended active duty, the 
merit received during the individual's period of original is to remain in the DD 722-1. 
military service. 

(f) A protection to the Government against 

false or fraudulent claims and a protection of < c > Only an original SF 603 shall be prepared 

veteran benefits for the individual, when dental records are lost or destroyed and 

(g) A basis for dental statistical informa- sha U be placed in the DD 722-1; it shall be 
"on. prominently marked "REPLACEMENT." 

■(h) A means for facilitating the appraisal W) One DD 722—1 shall be prepared to en- 

of physical fitness. close all SF 603's established for the depend- 

SUSflH Dl5 P° S,tl0n of Stand " shall be typed in the Service Number block. A 

n , D , . VT_„, separate file, arranged alphabetically, shall be 

U) Preparation of SF 603.— maintained for dental records of dependents 

(a) An original shall be pre- (3) Disposition oj SF 603. ~ 

pared for each individual who reports for, or (a) The SF 603 shall accompany Navy and 

returns to, extended active duty. Marine Corps personnel from activity to activity 

, (b) An C1 ?"* inal sha11 be Prepared to during their entire period of military service, 

replace a lost SF 603. The dental officer shall assure that the Dental 

(c) An original shall be prepared at Folder (DD 722-1) with the SF 603, current per- 

the time the initial examination or dental treat- iapical and bite-wing X-rays, and other pertinent 

™*"'; s Provided to a dependent (see art. 6-98 records are forwarded to the medical officer for 

(l)(h)). Boxes 1 through 4 of section I need inclusion in the Health Record Jacket whenever 

not be completed. Boxes 8 through 11 of section an individual is transferred 

II should reflect the name and information on (b) When personnel are transferred, the med- 

the dependents sponsor. The sponsor's military ical officer or medical department representative 

service number and social security number shall shall see that the current Dental Record (SF 603) 

mn , m i^* f c f"T 11 is indude d before the Health Record is trans- 

(2) Distribution of SF 603.— ferred (see.art. 16-20). 



6-29 
Change 69 



6-108 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-109 



(c) Should an SF 603 or DD 722-1 not be 
included in the Health Record Jacket when it 
is transferred, the dental officer shall forward 
them to the individual's new duty ship or station. 
When this is not possible, the SF 603 shall be 
removed from the DD 722-1 and forwarded to 
the Bureau with a letter explaining the circum- 
stances and advising what action is being taken 
to assure that SF 603 s are included in the Health 
Records when individuals are transferred. The 
DD 722-1 may be disposed of locally in these 
instances. 

(d) The SF 603 of a dependent shall not 
be included in the medical Clinical Record of the 
dependent at the time the dependent is trans- 
ferred from the area of the facility providing 
dental treatment. 

(e) The SF 603 of a dependent shall not 
be included in or transferred with the sponsor's 
record at the time of transfer or change of duty 
stations. 

(f) All dependent's SF 603's and roentgeno- 
grams shall be disposed of in accordance with 
the disposal instructions in paragraph 6600(2)(b) 
of SECNAVINST 5212.5B. 

(4) Entries, — Details regarding entries on the 
SF 603 are as follows: 

(a) SECTION I, DENTAL EXAMINA- 
TION.— 

Box 1, PURPOSE OF EXAMINATION. 
— An X shall be placed in the appropriate space. 
In the space OTHER (Specify), indicate "Naval 
Academy," "Reenlistment," "Fleet Reserve," etc. 

Box 2, TYPE OF EXAMINATION. — 
The type of examination as listed in article 
6-100 shall be indicated by an X in the appro- 
priate space. 

Box 3, DENTAL CLASSIFICATION. — 
The dental classification as listed in article 
6-101 shall be indicated by an X in the appro- 
priate space. 

Box 4, MISSING TEETH AND EXIST- 
ING RESTORATIONS.— The dental chart shall 
be completed in accordance with article 6-117 
and appropriate data shall be entered in the 
spaces for REMARKS, PLACE OF EXAMINA- 
TION, DATE, and SIGNATURE OF DENTAL 
OFFICER COMPLETING THIS SECTION. 

Box % DISEASES, ABNORMALITIES, 
AND X-RAYS.— The dental chart shall be com- 
pleted in accordance with article 6-117. The ap- 
propriate data shall be placed in the spaces 
indicated A, B, C, D, E, DATE, PLACE OF 
EXAMINATION, and SIGNATURE. 

6-30 

Change 64 



(b) SECTION II, PATIENT DATA.— Ap- 
propriate data shall be placed in boxes 6, 7, 8,. 11 
(USN, USMC, etc.), 12, 13, and 14 (military serv- 
ice number and social security number). Boxes 
9 and 10 apply to examinations performed for 
Army and Air Force personnel, 

(c) SECTION III, ATTENDANCE REC- 
ORD.— 

Box 15, RESTORATIONS AND TREAT- 
MENT (Computed during service). — Markings 
appropriate to the dental treatment received shall 
be placed on the dental chart in accordance with 
the provisions of article 6-117. 

Box 16, SUBSEQUENT DISEASES AND 
ABNORMALITIES.— The chart shall be used to 
record dental defects, and diseases found during 
subsequent examinations. Entries shall be made 
in pencil and erased when treatment is accom- 
plished or when the condition no longer exists. 

Box 17, SERVICES RENDERED— En- 
tries shall be made in the columns designated 
DATE, DIAGNOSIS-TREATMENT, CLASS, 
and OPERATOR AND DENTAL FACILITY, 
as illustrated in article 6-118. The column 
CLASS shall conform with article 6-101 and be 
maintained up to date as the work progresses. 
The column OPERATOR AND DENTAL FA- 
CILITY shall contain the signature of the oper- 
ator and the name of the activity to which 
attached. 

(d) PATIENT'S LAST NAME— FIRST 
NAME— MIDDLE NAME.— The space provided 
in the lower right margin on the reverse of the 
SF 603 is for the patient's name as a convenience 
for filing. The last name shall be in CAPITALS, 
and no part of the name shall be abbreviated. 

(e) The entries on the dental charts in sec- 
tion I of the form shall not be altered after the 
initial examination. 

(f) When an enlisted person is advanced to 
commissioned or warrant rank, reenlists, or ex- 
tends an enlistment; or upon promotion of an 
officer or commissioning of a midshipman; the 
SF 603 shall be brought up to date by entering 
any unrecorded dental treatments on the chart 
in box 15 and any dental defects or diseases on 
the chart in box 16. 

(g) If an individual is appointed or enlisted 
with dental defects which have been waived, the 
defects shall be described fully on SF 603 under 
REMARKS in section I. 

6-109. Dental Folder, DD Form 722-1 

(DA Dental Folder (DD Form 722-1) shall 
be prepared (see art. 16-29) for each individual 
on active duty in the Navy or Marine Corps. 
The Dental Folder shall contain the SF 603 and 
other information pertinent to the dental health 
of the individual. 



6-110 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-111 



(2) When an individual is attached to a ship 
or station having a dental facility, his Dental 
Folder shall be placed in the custody of, and 
shall be the responsibility of, the dental officer. 
The individual's current duty station shall be 
entered in the designated space on the dental 
folder in order to facilitate the return of a lost 
or misplaced dental record. When practicable, 
verification of the Dental Record shall be con- 
ducted in conjunction with that of the Health 
Record , Service Record and Pay Record. 
Otherwise, verification should be accom- 
plished upon reporting, at the time of physical 
examination, and upon detachment. (See arts. 
16-3 and 16-18(3).) An initialed entry to the 
effect that the verification has been accomplished 
shall be recorded in the designated space on the 
Dental Folder. For an individual who has been 
transferred without his dental record, every effort 
shall be made to determine the present duty sta- 
tion, status, or location, and, if determined, it shall 
be forwarded. If the present duty station, status, 
or location cannot be determined, it shall be for- 
warded to BUMED with an explanatory letter 
of transmittal. 

(3) When an individual is attached to a ship 
or station to which no dental officer is attached, 
or is in transit, or is ordered to appear before 
a board necessitating a physical examination, his 
Dental Folder shall remain in his Health Record 
Jacket, DD Form 722. 



(4) The contents of the Dental Folder shall 
be removed and placed with the medical records 
in the Health Record Jacket only when the 
Health Record is being closed . 
After this is accomplished, the Dental Folder shall 
be destroyed. 

(5) A new Dental Folder shall be prepared 
when the existent folder has been damaged or 
because of deterioration is approaching the point 
of illegibility. The old folder shall be destroyed 
following replacement. 

6-110. Custody of Standard Form 603 

(1) Custody of the SF 603 shall be the same 
as that described for the Dental Folder in sub- 
articles 6-109(2), (3), and (4). 

(2) Custody of the SF 603 prepared for retired 
personnel not on active duty shall be the re- 
sponsibility of the individual. 

(3) For details regarding the Health Record 
Jacket, DD Form 722, and the Health Record, 
see chapter 16. 

6-111. Recovery of Lost Standard Form 603 

(1) In the case of recovery of a lost SF 603, 
entries shall be made in the recovered record 
of any data recorded in a replacement record, 
and the replacement record shall be destroyed. 



6-30a 

Change 69 



o 





6-112 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-115 



6-112. Special Entries in Standard Form 
603 

(1) When dental treatment is refused by the 
patient, appropriate entries shall be made in the SF 
603 and signed by the dental officer. 

<2) In cases involving dental injuries incurred 
due to own misconduct, or not in line of duty, a 
notation to that effect shall be made in the SF 
603, signed by the dental officer, and, when consid- 
ered appropriate, the circumstances reported to 
the commanding officer. (See art. 1703, Navy 
Regulations.) 

(3) Suitable entries shall be made in the SP 603 
whenever a member of the Navy or Marine Corps 
returns from a hospital or station, other than the 
permanent duty station, where dental treatment 
had been received but not recorded. Likewise, en- 
tries shall be made when it is learned that treat- 
ment has been received from civilian sources. 

(4) If it is determined that an individual is 
hypersensitive to a local anesthetic or any other 
substance, or has valvular or congenital heart dis- 
ease, a statement to that effect shall be entered in 
red pencil across the top of the SP 603 and on the 
outside of the DD 722-1, Hypersensitivity to a 
drug or chemical shall also be recorded on the 
NAVMED 6150/3, the SF 601, and the SF 600 which is 
retained in the Health Record. Examples: HYPER- 
SENSITIVE TO PROCAINE. MITRAL STENOSIS. 

6-113. Recording Dental Examinations 

(1) It is very important that the charted record 
of dental examinations be in exact conformity with 
the provisions set forth in articles 6-115 through 
6-117 and unquestionably accurate. The Veterans' 
Administration depends upon the SP 603 for accurate 
data when adjudicating the claim of a veteran for 
a service-connected dental disability. The SP 603 
is extremely valuable when other means of identifi- 
cation fail. 

(2) Any peculiarities or deviations from normal 
are particularly valuable for identification purposes 
and should be recorded under REMARKS. Such 
abnormalities as erosion, abrasion, mottled enamel, 
hypoplasia, rotation, irregularity of alignment and 
malocclusion of teeth, denticles, Hutchinson's teeth, 
fractures of enamel or teeth, abnormal interdental 
spaces, mucosal pigmentation, leukoplakia, dias- 
tema, hypertrophied frenum labium, torus palatinus 
and torus mandibularis, embedded foreign bodies, 
and descriptions of unusual restorations or appli- 
ances are, when noted, especially useful in this con- 
nection. Malocclusion should be simply and clearly 
described. Dentures and other removable dental 
appliances also should be described under 
REMARKS. 

(3) When all teeth present are free of caries and 
restorations, special effort shall be made to discover 
and record any abnormalities, however slight. If 



no caries, restorations, or abnormalities are found, 
an entry to that effect shall be made under RE- 
MARKS. 

6-114. Recording Dental Operations and 
Treatments 

(1) AH dental restorations shall be charted on 
the dental chart in section III of SP 603 in accord- 
ance with the instructions set forth in article 6-117 
and illustrated in article 6-118. When the spaces 
in section III of the SP 603 have been filled by the 
recording of dental operations and treatments, the 
SF 603A, Dental-Continuation, shall be used for 
additional entries. 

(2) Authorized abbreviations covering the opera- 
tions and treatments shall be entered in section III 
in the spaces under SERVICES RENDERED. Such 
entries shall be complete, accurate, and brief, in 
accordance with the provisions of articles 6-115 
through 6-118. 

6-115. Designations and Abbreviations 
for Use on Standard Form 603 

(1) For purposes of brevity and exactness, the 
following numerical designation of teeth shall be 
used in keeping the SF 603 : 



Tooth Designation 

Right maxillary third molar 1 

Eight maxillary second molar 2 

Right maxillary first molar 3 

Right maxillary second bicuspid 4 

Right maxillary flrst bicuspid- 5 

Right maxillary cuspid 6 

Right maxillary lateral Incisor 7 

Right maxillary central Incisor 8 

Left maxillary central incisor 9 

Lett maxillary lateral incisor 10 

Lett maxillary cuspid 11 

Left maxillary first bicuspid 12 

Left maxillary second bicuspid 13 

Left maxillary first molar 14 

Left maxillary second molar 16 

Left maxillary third molar 16 

Left mandibular third molar 17 

Left mandibular second molar 18 

Left mandibular flrst molar 19 

Left mandibular second bicuspid 20 

Left mandibular first bicuspid 21 

Left mandibular cuspid 22 

Left mandibular lateral incisor 23 

Left mandibular central incisor.- 24 

Right mandibular central incisor 26 

Right mandibular lateral incisor 26 

Right mandibular cuspid 27 

Right mandibular first bicuspid 28 

Right mandibular second bicuspid 29 

Right mandibular first molar 30 

Right mandibular second molar 31 

Right mandibular third molar . 32 



(2) A deciduous tooth shall be indicated by plac- 
ing a "D" around tooth number. If both perma- 
nent and deciduous teeth are present, place a "D" 
in location of deciduous tooth and enter the appro- 
priate tooth number Inside the "D." 



6-31 

Change Ip8 



6-116 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-117 



(3) The following designation of tooth sur- 
faces shall be used in connection with recording 
restorations of defective teeth: 

Surface Designation 

Facial (labial and buccal) F 

Lingual L 

Occlusal O 

Mesial M 

Distal D 

Incisal I 

(4) Combinations of the designations shall be 
used to identify and locate caries, operations, or 
restorations in the teeth involved; for example, 
8-MID would refer to the mesial, incisal, and dis- 
tal aspects of a right maxillary central incisor; 
22-DF, the facial and distal aspects of a left man- 
dibular cuspid; 3-MODF, the mesial, occlusal, 
distal, and facial aspects of a right mandibular 
first molar. 

(5) The use of abbreviations and acronyms is 
not mandatory but it is desirable in view of the 
limited space available in the SF 603 for record- 
ing treatment rendered. In addition to the follow- 
ing authorized abbreviations, well known medi- 
cal, dental, and scientific signs and symbols such 
as Rx,c, Island FLO-, may be used in recording 
dental treatment. 

Abscess Abs. 

All Caries Not Removed ACNR 

All Caries Removed ACR 

Alveolectomy Alvy. 

Amalgam Am. 

Anesthetic (thesia) Anes. 

Apicoectomy Apcy. 

Base ■ B 

Camphorated paramonochlorophenol CMCP 

Cement Cem. 

Complete Denture CD 

Crown Cr. 

Curettage Cur. 

Drain Dm. 

Dressing Drs. 

Equilibrate (ation) Equil. 

Eugeno! Eug. 

Examination Exam. 

Extraction (ed) Ext. 

Fixed Partial Denture (bridge) FPD 

Fracture Fx. 

Gingivitis Gvtis. 

Gutta Percha GP 

Mandibular Man. 

Maxillary Max. 

Navy Periodontal Disease Index NPDI 

Navy Plaque Index NPI 

Necrotizing Ulcerative Gingivitis NUG 

Pericoronitis Pecor. 

Periodontitis Pdtis. 

Plaque Control Instructions PCI 

Point(s) Pt(s). 

Porcelain Pore. 

Post Operative Treatment POT 

Prophylaxis Pro. 

Reline Rel. 

Removable Partial Denture ■ RPD 

Repair(ed) Rep. 

Root Canal Filling RCF 



Root Canal Therapy RCT 

Scaled(ing) Scl. 

Self Preparation SP 

Silicate Sil. 

Surgical Surg. 

Suture(s)(d) Su. 

Temporary Temp. 

Treatment(ed) Tr. 

Varnish Varn. 

6-116. General Characteristics of Markings on 
Dental Charts 

(1) Chart markings have been standardized so 
that the original dental condition, treatment 
needed, and treatments completed may be readily 
identified. This facilitates efficient continuity of 
treatments and may establish identification in cer- 
tain circumstances, 

(2) Dental recordings shall be made in black 
or blue-black ink on all charts of the SF 603, 
except that entries on the chart in box 16 shall be 
made in pencil. 

6-117. Differential Characteristics of Markings 
on Dental Charts 

(1) Markings shall be made on examination 
chart MISSING TEETH AND EXISTING RES- 
TORATIONS as follows: 

(a) Missing Teeth.— Draw a large "X" on 
the root or roots of each tooth that is not visible 
in the mouth. 

(b) Edentulous Mouth. — Inscribe crossing 
lines, one extending from the maxillary right 
third molar to the mandibular left third molar 
and the other from the maxillary left third molar 
to the mandibular right third molar. 

(c) Edentulous Arch. — Make crossing lines 
each running from the uppermost aspect of one 
third molar to the lowermost aspect of the third 
molar on the opposite side. 

(d) Amalgam Restorations. — In the diagram 
of the tooth, draw an outline of the restoration 
showing size, location, and shape, and block in 
solidly. 

(e) Nonmetalic Permanent Restorations 
(Includes Oxyphosphate Cements). — In the dia- 
gram of the tooth, draw an outline of the restora- 
tions showing size, location, and shape. 

(f) Gold Restorations. — Outline and in- 
scribe horizontal lines within the outline. If made 
of chrome alloy, the same applies except indicate 
in the REMARKS section that the crown is made 
of chrome alloy. 

(g) Combination Restorations. — Outline, 
showing overall size, location, and shape; parti- 
tion at junction of materials used and indicate 
each as in subarticles 6-117(1) (d) and <e) above. 

(h) Porcelain Facings and Pontics. — Outline 
each aspect. 



6-32 

Change 63 



6-117 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-117 



(i) Acrylic Resin Facings and Pontics. — 
Outline. 

(j) Porcelain Post Crowns. — Outline each 
aspect of the crown; outline approximate size and 
position of the post or posts. 

(k) Acrylic Resin Post Crowns. — Outline 
each aspect of the crown; outline approximate 
size and position of the post or posts. 

(1) Porcelain Jacket Crowns. — Outline each 
aspect. 

(m) Acrylic Resin Jacket Crowns. — Outline 
each aspect. 

(n) Fixed Partial Dentures (Bridges). — 
Outline each aspect showing overall size, loca- 
tion, teeth involved, and shape; partition at junc- 
tions of materials; and indicate each as above 
except that gold shall be shown by the inscrip- 
tion of the diagonal instead of horizontal lines in 
both abutments and pontics. If made of chrome 
alloy, the same applies except indicate in the RE- 
MARKS section that the fixed partial denture is 
made of chrome alloy. 

(o) Removable Appliances. — Place a line 
over numbers of replaced teeth and describe 
briefly in remarks. 

(p) Root Canal Fillings. — Outline each 
canal filled on the diagram of the root or roots of 
the tooth involved and block it in solidly. 

(q) Apicoectomy. — Draw a small triangle 
on the root of the tooth involved, apex away 
from the crown, the base line to show the approx- 
imate level of root amputation. 

(r) Drifted Teeth. — Draw an arrow from 
the designating number to the tooth that has 
moved, the point of the arrow to indicate the ap- 
proximate position to which it has drifted. Under 
REMARKS note the relationship of the drifted 
tooth in respect to occlusion. 

(2) Markings on examination chart DI- 
SEASES, ABNORMALITIES, AND X-RAYS 
shall be made as follows; 

(a) Caries. — In the diagram of the tooth af- 
fected, draw an outline of the carious portion, 
showing size, location, and shape, and block in 
solidly. 

(b) Defective Restoration. — Outline and 
block in solidly the restoration involved. 

(c) Impacted Teeth. — Outline all aspects of 
each impacted tooth with a single oval. The long 
axis of the tooth should be indicated by an arrow 
pointing in the direction of the crown. 

(d) Abscess. — Outline approximate size, 
form, and location. 

(e) Cyst. — Outline the approximate form 
and size in relative position on the dental chart. 

(f) Periodontitis. — Inscribe a horizontal 
continuous line on the external aspect of root or 
roots involved in a position approximating the 
extent of gingival recession or gingival hyperpla- 



sia. Indicate pocket depth by a second continuous 
line in relative position to the line indicating the 
gingival tissue level. 

(g) Extraction Needed. — Draw two parallel 
vertical lines through all aspects of the tooth in- 
volved. 

(h) Fractured Tooth Root. — Indicate frac- 
ture with a zigzag line on outline of tooth root. 

(3) Markings on the chart RESTORATIONS 
AND TREATMENTS shall be made as follows: 

(a) Carious Teeth Restored. — In the dia- 
gram of the tooth involved draw an outline of 
the restoration showing size, location, and shape, 
and indicate material used as specified in subarti- 
cle 6-117(1); that is, amalgam restorations 
would be outlined and blocked in, silicate cement 
restorations outlined only, etc. When a temporary 
restoration is placed, either ACR or ACNR 
§hould also be recorded. 

(b) Extractions. — Draw a large "X" on the 
root or roots of each tooth extracted. 

(c) Root Canal Fillings. — Outline each canal 
filled on the diagram of the root or roots of the 
tooth involved and block in solidly. 

(d) Apicoectomy. — Draw a small triangle on 
the root of the tooth involved, apex away from 
the crown, the base line to show the approximate 
level of root amputation. 

(e) Fixed Partial Dentures and Crowns. — 
Outline and fill in as specified in subarticle 
6-117(1). If made of chrome alloy, it should be 
so indicated. 

(f) Removable Appliances. — Place a line 
over numbers of replaced teeth and give a brief 
description under REMARKS. When a prostho- 
dontic appliance has been fabricated (in part or 
entirely) by another activity, the name of the lab- 
oratory shall be recorded immediately after the 
record of insertion. Examples: 

(1) 2, 4, 5, 7, 12 & 14-Max. RPD. — Ticon- 
ium frame fabricated by Naval Dental Clinic, 
Washington, D.C. 

(2) Max. & Man. CD— Case fabricated by 
U.S.A. Area Prosthetic Laboratory, Alameda, 
Calif. 

(g) Unrecorded Operations and Conditions. 
— Operations performed by other than naval den- 
tal officers subsequent to the original examina- 
tions shall be indicated by the dental officer dis- 
covering the condition just as if they had been 
done by a naval dental officer. Appropriate en- 
tries shall be made indicating the nature of the 
treatment and adding the abbreviation "Civ." or 
other abbreviation as the case may be. The date 
entered shall be the date of discovery. Operations 
known to have been performed by naval dental 
officers whose identity is not recorded shall be 
noted similarly except that the abbreviation 
"NDO" shall be used. The date entered shall be 



6-33 
Change 63 



6-118 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-121 



the date the operation is discovered. Teeth which 
are shown as missing' in the chart MISSING 
TEETH AND EXISTING RESTORATIONS 
and which have erupted subsequently, shall be 
accounted for by an entry in the following man- 
ner: "I, 32, eruption noted," with date and signa- 
ture of dental officer making the notation. Other 
conditions of comparable importance should be 
recorded in a similar manner. « 

(4) Markings on the chart SUBSEQUENT DI- 
SEASES AND ABNORMALITIES shall be as in- 
dicated for the chart DISEASES, ABNORMALI- 
TIES, AND X-RAYS. 

6-118. Illustrations of Markings on Dental Charts 

(1) See illustrations on the following three 
pages. 

6-119. Recording of Dental Treatment on Chron- 
ological Record of Medical Care, Stand- 
ard Form 600 



(1) Entries of dental treatment shall be made 
on the SF 600 when the patient is on the sicklist, 
and when treatment is related to the condition 
for which the patient is admitted. Such entries 
shall be made and signed by the dental officer. 
Notes concerning conditions of unusual interest 
and of medical or dental significance may be 
made when appropriate. 

6-120. Consultation Sheet, Standard Form 513 

(1) The SF 513 may be used by dental officers 
requesting a medical consultation on a dental pa- 
tient. The SF 513 is to be included in the patient's 
clinical record. 

6-121. Doctor's Progress Notes, Standard Form 
509 

(1) The SF 509 may be used by dental officers 
for posting information on the progress made by 
a patient during hospitalization. This form is to 
be included in the patient's clinical record. 



6-34 

Change 63 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



Standard Form 603 

Rev. November 1953 
Bureau ol the Budiict 
Circular A— 32 (Rev.) 



HEALTH RECORD 



DENTAL 



SECTION 1. DENTAL EXAM 


NATION 






1. PURPOSE OF EXAMINATION 


2. TYPE OF EXAM. 


3. DENTAL CLASSIFICATION 


X | INITIAL | | SEPARATION 


| OTHER (Spaetly) 


x M H |,| |< 


l-l Ul 1*1 Mxl. 



MISSING TEETH AND EXISTING RESTORATIONS 




4 S 6 T • 9 19 II li II 14 T\8 ,_ 

K 31 30 29 |Vj> Sr !6 Si .-.4 2} 22 Jl {0 19 IS IT' 




REMARKS 

Chrome alloy Max. RPD with 
acrylic teeth replacing 
4,5,12,13, & 14. 



PLACE OF EXAMINATION 

NTC, Or Undo, Fla. 



□ ATE 

24 Aug 70 




Captain, DC, USN 



DISEASES, ABNORMALITIES. AND X-RAYS 




CALCULUS 



ODER ATE 



l 2 J * i 6 7 S 9 10 II 15 13 H II 16 r 




INDICATE X.RAYS USED IN THIS EXAMINATION 



FULL MOUTH 
PERIAPICAL 



POSTERIOR 
BITE-WINGS 



OTHER (Specify) 



PERIODONTOCLASIA 

"^GENERAL 



LOCAL 

Incipient | | moderate) X I severe 

C, STOMATITIS (Specify) 



GINGIVITIS 



VINCENT'S 



DENTURES NEEDED 
(Include dentures nteded alter Indicated extractions) 



ABNORMALITIES OF OCCLU SION— REMARKS . - 

7,8,9, & 10 overbite approximately 
10 mi. 

7 overlaps 8 by 2 mm. 

15 & 16 tilted meaially so only 
distal cusps in occlusion. 



DATE 

24 Aug 70 



PLACE OF EXAMINATION 

NTC Orlando, Fla. 



ATU^OF, 

C. B. Smil 



INS THIS SECTION 

rptain, DC, USN 



SECTION II. PATIENT DATA 



ft. SEX 

M 


7. RACE 

Cau 


8. GRADE, RATING. OR POSITION 

SR 


a. ORGANIZATION UNIT 


10. COMPONENT OR BRANCH 


11. SERVICE.DEPT.. OR AGENCY 

USN 


.12. PATIENT'S LAST NAME-FIRST NAME— MIDDLE NAME 

DOE, John Joseph 


13. DATE Op BIRTH (DAY-MONTH-YEAR) 

1 Aug 52 


14. IDENTIFICATION NO. 

SSN 111-22-3333 



DENTAL 
Standard Form 603 

60 J— 102-01 



6-35 

Change 63 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



ECTION III. ATTENDANCE RECORD 



I. RESTORATIONS AND TREATMENTS (Completed during lervlde) 



16. SUBSEQUENT DISEASES AND ABNORMALITIES 






|7, SERVICES RENDERED 



Dl AO NO SIS— TREATMENT 




OPERATOR AND DENTAL FACILITY 



1SEP70 



2-Ext. Aries. 



NTC Orlando, Fla 



7SEP70 



Gvtls. Tr., Scl,, PCI 



NTC Orlando, Fla 



9SEF70 
10CT70 



Fro-SnFg, Top-SnFj, PCI 



30-0-deep, ACR, Ca(0rO?, ZttOE. Anes. 



NTC Orlando , Fla 



NTC Orlando, Fla 



. 9007 70 



30-0-ZnOEB - F-Varn.-Am.. 31-MO-Varn. 



^'.£.-7%^ NTC Orlando, Fla 



Cem.B. . Am. . Anes , 



140CT70 



29- M QP-A m . 



"NDO" 



7sL£Lj&gf~3Kl£ Orlando, Fla 



23OCT70 



32-Sur g.Ext. , Su.. . Anes.. 



<X. >L^<JU. NTC Orlando, 
(;,.:/!<■ NTC Orlando, 



25OCT70 



32-POT 



_FlA 



27OCT70 



32-Alveolar osteit i s , S u, re mo ved 



Bu g, D rs, 



i 



XfiXr NTC Orlando, Fla 



2BOCT70 



32-POT, Eug. Drs. 



£{-ttLCn<f NTC Orlando, Fla 



J0OCT70 



L6NOV70 



J3£lPQX_ 



8 -RCT, CMCP. Anes 



0, JiLmgt. 



NTC Orlando, Fla 



17NOV70 



8-RCT, CM CP 



19NOV70 



8-RCT, CMCP 




NTC C 
L_STC 
NTC Orlando, 



20NOV70 



30NOV7Q 



8-RCF, GP gt . , Apcy. , Cur. , Anes. 



NTC Orlando, Fla 



8- Pore. .Tarkpf fir. 



PCI 



NTC Orlando, Fla 



5JAN71 



Abs. incised, drn. . labial anterior 



man, area 23,24,25,26 penicillin 250 mg 



6JAN71 



q.l.d. x 10 days 



23 to 26 POT 



^4*^>-NDC Norfolk, Va. 



NDC N or f o lk , ya , 




i u 

- S- 

tn p 

Z <-< 

> o 

I a 
□ 



7JAN71 



23 to 26 POT 



14JAN71 



15JAN71 



23 to 26 Ext., Alvy. , Su.. Anes. 



Norfolk. Va. 



23 to 26 POT 



NDC Norfolk. Va. 



■Al ^A- NDC Norfolk . Ya, 



17JAN71 



23 to 26 POT. Su. removed 



Norfolk, Va. 



1MAR71 
8MAR71 



22,23,24,25.26.27 - FPD Ins.. PCI 



Norfolk, Va. 



7-Ext. . Anes . 



Norfolk, Va. 



12MAR71 



Max. RPD f tooth added) 



Norfolk, Va, 



16MAR71 



9-D-Ca (0H)2-Resln, Anes., 15-L-Am. 



9-M-S11 



'Civ. 



Norfolk. Va. 



6JUL71 



17-Eruptlon noted 



■^NDC Norfolk, Va. 



17 Pecor. Tr. 



v JTOC Nor fo lk, Va. 



2AUG71 



Exam, (t ype 2). Pro-SnF 2j To p-SaF g 



Norfolk. Va. 



# U.B. ODVCftNMEHT PHIHTIK3 OFFICE t 19 (S — 7**-BJH 



6-36 

Change 63 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



Stindtrd Form 603-A 
December 1958 
Bureau of the Budget 
Circular A-32 (Rev.) 



HEALTH RECORD 



DENTAL — Conti nuation 



SECTION III. ATTENDANCE RECORD 



IS. RESTORATIONS AND TREATMENTS (Com/Jierod dun'nfj lervioe) 




2 S 3 5 T 7 9 9 To ~l H H 14 15 ~ 

32 3 1': . : " '! ST 2t 25 24 21 22 21 20 19 It IT - 




16. SUBSEQUENT DISEASES AND ABNORM ALITIE 




I 2 5 A 5 I T ft 9 10 ll 12 15 II 15. If r 

J2 Jl JO 23 28 2' 2« 25 2« 23 22 21 20 H t« IT Z 




REMARKS 



REMARKS 



17. SERVICES RENDERED 



30AUG72 



31AUG72 



DIAGNOSIS— TREATMENT 



NUG Tr .-ultrasonic Scl ■ 



(Saline irrigation q.2 h. x 24 hrs.) 



NOG Tr. -continue Irrigation 



OPERATOR AND DENTAL FACILITY 



C '■ C P3S Saratoga 



fH.C". /g^ USS Saratoga 



2SEP72 



Exam, (type 2), PCI 



7SEP72 



Reinforce PCI 



cr . r .. 



USS Saratoga 



USS Saratoga 



40CT72 



60CT72 



30-RCT, establish drn. 



30-RCT 



g . f*. - y^g- USS Saratoga 



C C &*-<L USS Saratoga 



80CT72 



20OCT72 



30-RCF, Ag.Pts. 



a. c 



30-Gold Cr. . PCI 



USS Saratoga 



a*OUSS Saratoga 



<ZZj&. /°kJt Mayport, Fla 



1/1 

Pi 

, Ch 
5 O 
S S" 

Us 
?<-■ 

>o 
s to 



1JUN73 



SP-SnF2, Top-SnF?, PCI 



9AUG74 



Exam 



^S3pI 



ft!*; 



PCI 



27ADG74 



Pro-SnF2, Top-SnF2 



Jfg >Ext, , An es. 



23DEC74 



Max. RPD Rep. 



Max. bilateral Fx. 



ort, Fla. 



May port, Fla, 



8.9.10-avulsed 



^.cc,F^iwi7 



3,6,11,15-Fx. 



Key W est, Fl a 



25DEC24 



Skeletal fixati on of Max. Fx. 



3. 6. 8.9. 10.11.15. 16-Ext. . Alvy., 



O^ iPWi t ^ Key West 



Su. . General Anes, 



Fla 



2.6.DEC74 



POT 



, K a y W es t, Fla 

[Art . VPaM)Ui*~ Key West, Fla 



27DEC74 



POT 



cn 

Z r- 1 



> to 



Z W 
, LJ 

O W 



3JAN75 



POT, Su. , removed 




Key West. Fla 



5JAN75 



POT 



Key West. Fla 



14FEB75 



23MAY75 



Max. CD , Man.FPD Rep. 
Max. CD rellned 



Key West. Fla 



£j fey West. Fla 



5AUG75 



Exam, (type 2) 

NPDI fC9 fOl . HPI f6) I14T7 



Pro-SnF 2 , Top-SnF2, PCI 



Key West, Fla 



DENTAL — Conlinution 
Ninn<turcl Korm 603-A 

601-202 



6-37 
Change 63 



< 



( 



o 

\ 



6-122 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-125 



Section XVI. DENTAL OFFICER TRAINING 



Article 

Naval Dental Internships 6-122 

Basic Course of Indoctrination for Dental Officers 6-123 

Postdoctoral Fellowship Program 6-124 

Graduate Program at Naval Dental School 6-125 

Naval Residency Training 6-126 

Short Postgraduate Continuing Education Courses in Naval Facilities '. 6-127 

Training in Staff and Administrative Schools of the Armed Forces — 6-128 

Training in Civilian Universites 6—129 

Selection and Submission of Requests for Training 6-130 

Correspondence Courses 6-131 

Audiovisual Resources : 6-132 



6-122. Naval Dental Internships 

(1) Rotating dental internships of 12 months' 
duration are conducted at naval graduate train- 
ing hospitals. The training program is designed 
to advance the knowledge and broaden the clini- 
cal experience of the recently graduated career 
dental officer. 

6-123. Basic Course of Indoctrination for 
Dental Officers 

(1) All newly appointed dental officers, except 
those who have received indoctrination training 
prior to reporting for active duty, will be ordered 
to designated dental facilities for basic indoctri- 
nation. Such training is designed to familiarize 
new dental officers with the conduct of dental 
practice within the Navy. 

6-124. Postdoctoral Fellowship Training 

(1) Postdoctoral fellowships are available to 
dental officers of the Regular Navy in the clinical 
fields of endodontics, oral medicine, oral surgery, 
periodontics, preventive dentistry, and prostho- 
dontics. Fellowships are also available in the 
fields of research and oral pathology. 

(2) A postdoctoral fellowship is a 12-month 
inservice period of academic study, clinical train- 
ing, or research in a selected area of dentistry. 

(3) The program is designed to accomplish one 
or more of the following objectives: 

(a) To provide the young dental officer an 
opportunity for self-evaluation of his competency 
to specialize. 

(b) To provide inservice training for the 
junior dental officer for further development of 
his full potential as a dentist and to qualify him 
to serve in billets not requiring board trained or 
certified personnel. 



(c) To provide the opportunity for the den- 
tal officer to develop interests, proficiency, and 
motivation for further training. The Postdoc- 
toral Fellowship Program often serves as a pre- 
requisite for advanced, graduate, or postgraduate 
training. 

(d) To provide an opportunity for the more 
experienced or more senior officer to develop 
further in his clinical abilities. 

(e) To provide senior dental officers an op- 
portunity to evaluate junior dental officers for 
further training. 

(4) Candidates are selected by the BUMED 
Dental Training Committee on a competitive 
basis determined by the qualifications of the can- 
didates. A prerequisite for selection is a tour of 
sea or foreign shore duty. Other considerations 
include a demonstrated interest in a specialty as 
evidenced by clinical practice, participation in 
correspondence courses, continuing education 
courses, or previous application for similar 
training. 

(5) Completion of a postdoctoral fellowship 
will in no way preclude future assignment to a 
course at the Naval Dental School, naval resi- 
dency training, or a long graduate or postgrad- 
uate course at a civilian university. 

6-125. Graduate Program at Naval Dental 
School 

(I) Graduate courses at the Naval Dental 
School, Bethesda, Md., emphasize basic sciences, 
theory, and practice in clinical dentistry, dental 
research, naval dental administration, manage- 
ment, and leadership. Dental officers of the Regu- 
lar Navy who will have completed a tour of duty 
at sea or in areas considered foreign shore for 
rotational purposes before the convening date "f 



6-30 
Change 68 



6-126 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-129 



the next class are eligible to apply for these 
courses. For dental officers who are selected to 
continue specialty training in the Navy, the 
successful completion of a graduate course at the 
Naval Dental School is equivalent to a first-year 
residency in the specialty in which they were 
enrolled. The course in General Dentistry is not 
intended to be a path for advancement toward 
specialty training, but is fitted to the needs of 
the committed generalist. A graduate of the 
course in General Dentistry is considered to have 
accomplished all the long-term formal training 
requisite to a successful career in general dentis- 
try. Completion of a graduate course at the Naval 
Dental School may, in some instances, be con- 
sidered a suitable prerequisite for a long course 
at a civilian university. Applications for specific 
courses at the Naval Dental School should be 
made in accordance with article 6-130. 

6-126. Naval Residency Training 

(1) Residency training is available to a limited 
number of Regular Navy applicants who have 
met certain prerequisites or requirements for 
specialized training. Dental officers who are 
currently in first-year Navy residencies or gradu- 
ate courses at the Naval Dental School will 
ordinarily continue in second and/or third year 
programs without having to reapply. However, 
preceptors must submit Professional Performance 
Data Sheet, NAVMED 1611/1, in accordance 
with BUMEDINST 1520.13 series. Candidates 
who have previously successfully completed a 
graduate course in Endodontics, Oral Pathology, 
Prosthodontics, Periodontics, or Oral Medicine 
at the Naval Dental School, Bethesda, Md., may 
apply for any possible vacancies in second-year- 
level residency training at selected naval dental 
facilities. The Graduate Course in General Den- 
tistry at the Naval Dental School is intended for 
the dedicated generalist, but completion of this 
course does not preclude a dental officer from 
applying for further advanced training. In ex- 
ceptional cases completion of a postdoctoral 
fellowship in Periodontics will suffice as a pre- 
requisite for first-year-level residency training in 
that specialty. Applicants for the 3-year sequen- 
tial Oral Surgery residency programs conducted 
at several naval graduate training hospitals must 
have scholastic records indicative of the ability 
to pursue advanced education and a sincere 
interest and aptitude for the specialty. Successful 
completion of the graduate course in General 
Dentistry or in Oral Surgery does not meet the 
requirement of having fulfilled the first year of 
training in Oral Surgery, but completion of 



either of these courses is considered a suitable 
prerequisite for a 3-year sequential residency 
program in Oral Surgery. Successful completion 
of a postdoctoral fellowship in Oral Surgery is 
not a prerequisite, but is highly desirable, Appli- 
cations should be submitted in accordance with 
article 6-130. 

6-127. Short Postgraduate Continuing Educa- 
tion Courses in Naval Facilities 

(1) Continuing education courses in various 
branches of dentistry are available to dental 
officers of the Regular Navy, and to active duty 
Reserve dental officers on a space-available basis, 
at the Naval Dental School and at the Naval 
Dental Center, San Diego, Calif. Dental officers 
may obtain information regarding the availabil- 
ity of continuing education courses from district 
dental officers. Applications shall be submitted in 
accordance with article 6-130. 

6-128. Training in Staff and Administrative 
Schools of the Armed Forces 

(1) Officers of the Dental Corps are eligible 
for assignment to duty under instruction at the 
Industrial College of the Armed Forces, Washing- 
ton, D.C.; Armed Forces Staff College, Norfolk, 
Va.; Naval War College, Newport, R.I.; and the 
Marine Corps Development and Education Com- 
mand, Quantico, Va. A board is convened in the 
Bureau of Naval Personnel to select candidates 
for this training. Selections are based on the serv- 
ice records of eligible officers; therefore, applica- 
tions are not required. 

6-129. Training in Civilian Schools 

(1) Graduate and postgraduate courses of 1 to 
3 academic years' duration are available in lim- 
ited numbers to dental officers of the Regular 
Navy. Candidates for these courses are selected 
from applicants who have outstanding aptitude 
for the specialty concerned and have an under- 
graduate and dental school scholastic record in- 
dicative of ability to pursue advanced education; 
i.e., at least a "B" average. Whenever possible, 
the candidate should also have completed at least 
1 year of professional endeavor since graduation 
from dental school, such as a postdoctoral fellow- 
ship or a graduate course at the Naval Dental 
School. Officers with exceptionally high scholastic 
records and who have outstanding professional 
competence may also be selected for such train- 
ing. Programs in oral surgery, oral pathology, 
oral medicine, prosthodontics, maxillofacial pros- 
thetics, periodontics, and endodontics are avail- 



6-40 

Change 68 



6-130 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-130 



able. Dental officers may also be trained in special 
areas not normally available within the naval 
service such as orthodontics, public health den- 
tistry, oral roentgenology, operative dentistry, 
research, dental education, basic sciences, and 
allied dental sciences. For candidates approved 
for such training, the Navy will pay tuition and 
fees, except the original application fee, by sepa- 
rate fiscal year contracts. Dental officers in civilian 
programs will be reimbursed for personal funds 
expended for necessary textbooks, instruments 
and supplies, thesis preparation costs, etc., within 
the limits defined by BUMED in its final approval 
letter. No Navy funds are available to support 
research projects that may be a part of courses 
in civilian institutions. 

(2) Continuing education courses at civilian 
institutions of less than 1 month's full-time dura- 
tion are available to all dental officers, provided 
commanding officers can spare their services 
during the period of instruction. Authorization 
orders may be issued for attendance at approved 
courses so that leave for this purpose will not be 
necessary. Tuition for officers at other than 
BUMED command activities will be paid from 
training funds of BUMED, and travel and per 
diem will be allowed to the extent that funds 
permit. The costs for attendance of officers at 
activities under the command of the Chief, 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, will be paid by 
using resources included for this purpose in the 
local operating budgets under the Operations and 
Maintenance, Navy, Medical Support, account. 
Requests from officers at BUMED commanded 
activities, therefore, will be approved and funded 
locally. Dental officers may obtain information 
regarding the availability of continuing educa- 
tion courses from district dental officers. 

6-130, Selection and Submission of Requests 
for Training 

(1) Applications for dental internships must 
be submitted prior to 1 December of the appli- 
cants' senior year in dental school. Dental stu- 
dents who are not members of the Ensign 1925 
Program should apply through a Navy recruiting 
station. Dental student members of the Ensign 
1925 Program should apply according to the 
instructions issued by BUMED. Selection is made 
by a board convened in BUMED early each 
January. 

(2) Dental officers of the Regular Navy who 
will have completed a tour of duty at sea or in 
areas considered foreign shore for rotational pur- 
poses before the convening date of the next class 
are eligible to apply for advanced training. Those 
who apply should request the appropriate insti- 
tution to forward predental and dental school 



scholastic record transcripts, and any other tran- 
scrips of scholastic records, so as to be received 
in the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery (Code 
611) well in advance of the date specified for 
application (applicant must pay any procurement 
costs). Each candidate for graduate courses at the 
Naval Graduate Dental School and for post- 
doctoral fellowships conducted at various naval 
facilities should include with his application (a) 
a first and second choice of the type of training 
desired in the discipline of his choice, i.e., he may 
request a postdoctoral fellowship or a graduate 
course in Prosthodontics, etc., in the order of his 
choice, and (b) a statement concerning his back- 
ground, interest, and reasons for requesting such 
training, consistent with his known abilities and 
career plan. Second choices in a discipline outside 
the primary interest will be accepted but are not 
encouraged. If a second choice is not indicated the 
candidate will not be considered for training in 
a program other than that requested. Applicants 
will not be considered in instances where assign- 
ment to training would make it necessary to 
significantly prolong or shorten a normal tour of 
duty. Disapproval does not preclude submission 
of an application for the same or for other train- 
ing at a later date. Officers presently in training 
in a dental specialty need not apply for continua- 
tion; i.e., second and/or third year level of 
training. Candidates are referred to NAVMED 
P-5093, Dental Officer Education Programs, and 
BUMEDINST 1500.9 series, Navy Medical De- 
partment Formal Schools Catalog, for detailed 
information relative to advanced training. 

(3) Applications for full-time training in civil- 
ian institutions must be submitted via the chain 
of command so as to be received in the Bureau 
of Medicine and Surgery, Code 611, not later than 
1 August preceding the year training will com- 
mence. Submission 1 year in advance enables 
those officers selected to meet application dead- 
lines established by civilian universities. 

(4) Applications for postdoctoral fellowships, 
graduate courses at the Naval Graduate Dental 
School, and residency training at naval facilities 
also must be submitted via the chain of command 
so as to be received in the Bureau of Medicine 
and Surgery, Code 611, prior to 1 August, preced- 
ing the year training will commence. 

(5) Requests for short postgraduate continuing 
education courses at the Naval Graduate Dental 
School and civilian universities should be sub- 
mitted to BUMED, and requests for courses at 
the Naval Dental Center submitted to the Com- 
mandant, Eleventh Naval District (Code 37). 
These requests should be submitted via official 
channels so as to be received at least 4 weeks 
before the* convening date of the course. When 



6-40a 
Change 73 



6-130 MANUAL OP THE MEDIC 

there is insufficient time to submit a request by 
letter, a message request may be submitted with 
information copies to the appropriate district or 
fleet commands. 

(6) To obtain uniformity in requests and sup- 
porting data, the following letter forms shall be 
used depending upon the type of instruction 

desired: 

(a) Graduate Program, Naval Graduate Den- 
tal School, National Naval Medical Center, Be- 
thesda, Md, f 20014, consisting of the following 
courses: 

Graduate Course in General Dentistry 
Graduate Course in Endodontics 
Graduate Course in Oral Pathology 
Graduate Course in Periodontics 
Graduate Course in Prosthodontics 
Graduate Course in Oral Medicine 

From: (Name of applicant) 

To: Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 

Via: Commanding Officer 

Subj: Graduate instruction 

Encl: (1) Statement of Motivation 

1. It is requested that I be considered for assignment to 
the next graduate class in (discpline) at the Naval 
Graduate Dental School, National Naval Medical Cen- 
ter, Bethesda, Md. My second choice is (See 6-130(2)(a) 
above.) (If there is no second choice, add the sentence, 
"I have no second choice") My present duty assignment 
commenced on (date). 

2. Transcripts and a letter of recommendation (have 
been fare being) forwarded. A statement of motivation, 
enclosure (1) is also provided. 

3. If this request is approved, I hereby agree not to 
resign during the course and to serve in the Navy for 
at least 1 year plus any unfulfilled minimum service 
requirement after the completion of the course. 

(Signature) 

Copy to: 

(District commandant or type commander) 

(b) Postdoctoral Fellowship. — 

From: (Name of applicant) 

To: Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 

Via: Commanding Officer 

Subj: Postgraduate instruction 

End: (1) Statement of Motivation 

1. It is requested that I be considered for assignment to 
postdoctoral fellowship training in (discipline) com- 
mencing in (month and year). My second choice is (See 
6~130(2)(a) above.) (If there is no second choice, add 
the sentence "I have no second choice") 

2. Transcripts and a letter of recommendation (have 



DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 6-130 

been/are being) forwarded. A statement of motivation, 
enclosure (1) is also provided. 



(Signature) 

Copy to: 

(District commandant or type commander) 

(c) Long Courses of Instruction at Civilian 
Universities. — 

From: (Name of applicant) 

To: Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 

Via: Commanding Officer 

Subj: Advanced education 

Encl: (1) Statement of Motivation 

1. It is requested that I be considered for assignment to 
a long course in (discipline) at a civilian institution for 
the period (month and year to month and year). (If the 
candidate would accept a Navy course in the same disci- 
pline, he may add the sentence "I would accept a gradu- 
ate course, (or a residency, or a postdoctoral fellowship) 
in the same specialty.") 

2. Transcripts and a letter of recommendation (have 
been/are being) forwarded. A statement of motivation, 
enclosure (1) is also provided. 

3- If this request for a course in a civilian institution is 
approved and I am assigned to such training, I agree not 
to resign during the course and to serve in the Navy for 
2 years for the first year and 1 additional year for any 
period in excess of 1 year, plus any previously unful- 
filled minimum service requirement after completion of 
the course. 

(Signature) 

Copy to: 

(District commandant or type commander) 

If the request is approved, BUMED will instruct 
the applicant to apply to one or more civilian 
schools and when accepted submit a letter to 
BUMED as shown in the following example. 
Officers should not apply to civilian schools for 
admission until instructed to do so by BUMED. 

From: (Name of applicant) 

To: Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 

Via: Commanding Officer 

Subj: Advanced (or Graduate) education 

Ref: (a) (Letter from BUMED approving your re- 
quest to apply to a civilian school for a long 
course) 

Encl: (1) Copy of letter of acceptance from (name of 
institution) dated ( ) 

1. Reference (a) approved my request to apply for a 
long course at a civilian institution. 

2. I have applied to the (school and location) and have 
been accepted for (an advanced/ graduate) course in (dis- 
cipline) for the period (month, day, and year, to month, 

day, and year) at a total cost of ($ ), enclosure 

(1). Final approval for subject course is hereby re- 
quested. t 



6— 10b 

Change 73 



6-130 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-130 



3. An itemized statement of the cost by {semester and/ or 
academic year) is as follows: 

a. 19 

Tuition $ 

Textbooks , 

Fees 

Instruments and supplies 

Thesis preparation costs <if any) . . 

b. 19 

Tuition $ 

Textbooks 

Fees 

Instruments and supplies 

Thesis preparation costs (if any) . . 

Other 

Total $ 

4. I understand that tuition and fees, except for my 
original application fee, will be paid by the Navy by 
separate fiscal year contracts and that I will be reim- 
bursed for personal funds expended for necessary text- 
books, instruments and certain supplies, thesis prepara- 
tion costs, etc., within the limits defined by BUMED in 
my final approval letter, I also understand that no Navy 
funds are available to support research projects that may 
be a part of my course of instruction at (name of insti- 
tution). 

(Signature) 

Copy to: 

(District commandant or type commander) 

(d) Residency Training in a Naval Fa- 
cility. — 

From: (Name of applicant) 

To: Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 

Via: Commanding Officer 

Subj: Residency training 

Encl: (1) Statement of Motivation 

1. It is requested that I be considered for assignment to 
(first, second, or third year) level of residency training 
in (discipline), commencing in (month and year). (If 
applicable, the following statement should he included: 
"I completed a (graduate /postgraduate course in (disci- 
pline) at the Naval Graduate Dental School in (year).") 

2. Transcripts and a letter of recommendation (have 
been/are being) forwarded. A statement of motivation, 
enclosure (1) is also provided. 

3. If this request is approved, I hereby agree not to 
resign during the course and to serve in the Navy 1 
year for the first year of training and 1 additional year 
for any period in excess of 1 year, plus any unfulfilled 
minimum service requirement after completion of the 
course. 

(Signature) 

Copy to: 

(District commandant or type commander) 

(e) Short Postgraduate Continuing Educa- 
tion Courses at Civilian Universities. — 



From: (Name of applicant) 

To: Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 

Via: Commanding Officer 

Subj: Continuing education course 

1. It is requested that I be assigned to a continuing edu- 
cation course in (course) to be held at (school and loca- 
tion) during the period (day and month to day and 
month). I have determined that a vacancy exists for 
this course. 



2. The total cost of the course is {_ 
for tuition. 



-), which is 



(Signature) 



Copy to: 

(District commandant or type commander) 

(f) Short Postgraduate Continuing Educa- 
tion Courses at the Naval Graduate Dental 
School. — 

From: (Name of applicant) 

To: Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 

Via: (1) Commanding Officer 

(2) (District commandant or type commander) 

Subj: Continuing education course 

1. It is requested that I be assigned to a continuing edu- 
cation course in (course) to be held (location) during the 
period (day and month to day and month). 

(Signature) 

(g) Short Postgraduate Continuing Educa- 
tion Courses at the Naval Dental Center, San 
Diego. — 

From: (Name of applicant) 

To: Commandant, Eleventh Naval District (Code 37) 
Via: Commanding Officer 

Subj: Continuing education course 

1. It is requested that 1 be assigned to a continuing edu- 
cation course in (course) to be held (location) during the 
period (day and month to day and month). 

(Signature) 

Copy to: 

(District commandant or type commander) 

(!) Dental Officer Service Training Agree- 
ment. — 

(a) A dental officer assigned to training is 
required to remain on active duty for a definite 
period of time. Active duty requirements follow- 
ing training (other than internships and post- 
doctoral fellowships) are: 

(1) Graduate /Post graduate Long Course 
in a Civilian Institution. — Two years for the first 



6-40c 
Change 73 



6-131 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-132 



year and 1 additional year for any period in 
excess of 1 year, with a maximum of 3 years. 
(No reduction for prior military service is allowed 
under paragraph (c) below.) 

(2) Graduate/Postgraduate Courses, Naval 
Graduate Dental School. — One year. 

(3) Residency Training in a Naval Facil- 
ity. — One year for the first year and 1 additional 
year for any period in excess of 1 year, with a 
maximum of 2 years. (A reduction for prior mili- 
tary service is allowed under paragraph (c) 
below.) 

(4) Postdoctoral Fellowship. — No service 
obligation. 

(b) Separate Obligations. — 

(1) The periods of active duty for which 
a dental officer is obligated to serve under resi- 
dency and similar training programs may not 
. e served concurrently. 

(2) Dental officers who previously partici- 
pated in the Navy Dental Scholarship Program 
can discharge up to 3 years of a 5-year service 
obligation while undergoing Navy residency or 
similar training. Those participants with a 4-year 
scholarship service obligation can discharge up 
to 2 years of their obligation while undergoing 
Navy residency or similar training. 

(3) Any obligation incurred while under- 
going Navy residency or similar training is in 
addition to the obligation incurred by participat- 
ing in a scholarship program, and this additional 
obligation must be served after the residency or 
similar training is completed and the basic 
scholarship obligation or recomputed scholarship 
obligation (paragraph (2) above) is fulfilled. 

(c) Credit for Prior Unobligated Military 
Service. — A dental officer's period of obligated 
service for Navy training received under para- 
graph (a) (3) above shall be reduced in the 
amount of time he has served as an active duty 
military dental officer in an unobligated status 
before beginning his initial period of residency 
or similar training, except that no reduction shall 
be made in an amount that would result in a re- 
maining obligation of less than 1 year. When 
calculating credit for prior unobligated military 
service authorized in this paragraph, time served 
under the Military Selective Service Act, as 
amended, shall be considered unobligated time. 
A dental officer's period of obligated service for 
civilian training received under paragraph (a) 



(1) above may not be reduced by reason of prior 
unobligated active duty military service. 

(d) Recomputation of Prior Service Obliga- 
tion. — A dental officer's obligation for training 
received prior to 13 January 1972 may be recom- 
puted in accordance with the provisions of 
BUMEDINST 1520.18 series. 

(e) Release From Active Duty. — A resigna- 
tion or request for retirement or release from 
active duty received from an officer who is per- 
forming a period of obligated service under this 
instruction will not be favorably considered, ex- 
cept for the convenience of the Government. 

6-131. Correspondence Courses 

(1) A wide variety of correspondence courses 
is available to dental officers. These courses and 
instructions for enrollment are shown in the 
List of Training Manuals and Correspondence 
Courses, NAVPERS 10061, latest edition, and 
in Correspondence Course Program — U.S. Naval 
Dental Corps, NAVMED P-5081. Information on 
the courses may be obtained by writing to the 
Commanding Officer (Code E-43), Naval Gradu- 
ate Dental School, National Naval Medical Cen- 
ter, Bethesda, Maryland 20014. 

6-132. Audiovisual Resources 

(1) Films. — The requirements and responsibil- 
ities in the production, distribution, and procure- 
ment of medical, dental, and naval training films 
are specified in BUMEDINST 1551.1 series. 

(2) Exhibits. — The procedures for requesting 
construction and presentation of exhibits are pre- 
scribed in BUMEDINST 5722.1 series. 

(3) Training Course Manuals. — Dental Tech- 
nician Training Manuals can be obtained from 
the Navy Supply System. 

(4) Resources available on request from the 
Commanding Officer, Naval Graduate Dental 
School, National Naval Medical Center, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20014, are as follows: 

(a) Histopathological microscopic slide sets. 

(b) Dental training films (16mm and 8mm). 

(c) Dental videotapes in 1" and 2" sizes and 
videotape transfers on 16mm film. 

(d) Lecture sets with color transparencies. 

(e) Lists of educational materials available 
from sources other than the Naval Graduate Den- 
tal School. 



6-40d 

Change 73 



6-133 CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 6-134C 

Section XVII. DENTAL RESEARCH 

Article 

Policy 6- 133 

Objectives - 6_ 134 

Facilities 6-1 34A 

Personnel 6-1 34B 

Projects 6-1 34C 

Reports 6-1 34D 

Experimentation on Personnel 6-134E 

Trials of Commercial Items 6-1 34F 



6-133. Policy 

(1) The fundamental policy of BUMED 
is to encourage and support research and devel- 
opment in the field of dentistry which is di- 
rected toward the solution of problems affecting 
the health, safety, selection, efficiency, and com- 
bat effectiveness of personnel of the Department 
of the Navy and other branches of the DoD. 

(2) The direction of dental research facilities 
shall be done by the Naval Medical Research 
and Development Command in coordination with 
the Dental Division. 

(3) Although there shall be no fixed appor- 
tionment of basic and clinical or applied research, 
the staffs of naval dental research facilities are 
particularly well qualified to understand and 
solve clinical dental research problems affecting 
naval personnel. 

6—134. Objectives 

(1) The first objective of naval dental re- 
search is to develop dental health programs that 
support specific operational requirements as pro- 
mulgated by the Chief of Naval Operations. 

( 2 ) The second objective is to provide applied 
or clinical research support to the patient care 
programs of the naval Dental Corps. It must 
give direct assistance to the naval Dental Corps 
in its primary mission of preventing and remedy- 
ing those dental defects which interfere with 
the performance of official duties. 

(3) The third objective is to conduct basic 
research studies to support the clinical or applied 
studies. 

6-134A. Facilities 

(1) The Naval Dental Research Institute, 
Naval Base, Great Lakes, 111., is established as 
the prime dental research center. This activity, 
which is under the command and support of the 
Commanding Officer, Naval Medical Research 
and Development Command, has a dental officer 
as Commanding Officer. Other dental research 



facilities are maintained at the Naval Graduate 
Dental School and the Naval Medical Research 
Institute, Bethesda, Md., and in certain naval 
medical research facilities. 

( 2 ) Dental officers in ships and stations are en- 
couraged to engage in clinical research investi- 
gations compatible with their primary duty of 
treating patients. 

6-1 34B. Personnel 

{ 1 ) Dental research facilities may be staffed 
by dental officers, Medical Service Corps officers, 
dental service warrant officers, dental technicians, 
and civilians. Continuity in the basic science 
skills will ordinarily be provided by civilian 
scientists. 

(2) All dental officers are subject to rotation 
of duty assignments and since there are fewer 
research billets in ships and overseas than within 
the United States, it follows that a portion of 
research dental officers careers will be spent in 
nonresearch assignments. 

(3) The importance of maintaining continu- 
ity and productivity in research programs is 
recognized and will be given just consideration. 

6-134C. Projects 

(1) Dental research projects that support the 
objectives outlined in art. 6-134 are initiated by 
individual investigators who submit their pro- 
posals via official channels to the Commanding 
Officer, Naval Medical Research and Develop- 
ment Command for approval. However, BUMED 
may assign, via official channels, projects to any 
dental research facility when investigations are 
required for specific problems. 

( 2 ) The selection of a dental research project 
will depend on its importance to the Navy, the 
qualifications of the investigators, the available 
facilities and the special opportunities offered by 
the location, and environment of the particular 
establishment. 



26 Mar 75 



6-41 

Change 84 



6-134D 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-I34F 



6-134D. Reports 

( 1 ) Reference should be made to article 20-6 
for information on research reports and publi- 
cation of research articles. 

6-1 34E. Experimentation on Personnel 

( 1 ) Experimental studies of a dental nature in- 
volving persons in the Navy are forbidden, ex- 
cept when experimental design in each case has 
received prior approval of the Secretary of the 
Navy. Article 20—8 contains information on ob- 
taining approval for this type of study. 



6-1 34F. Trials of Commercial Items 

( 1 ) Authority to conduct clinical, laboratory, 
or field trials in Navy dental facilities of drugs, 
materials, or devices presented by commercial 
firms may be granted by BUMED provided 
specific scientific conditions are met. These con- 
ditions are listed in article 20—10. (This shall in 
no way interfere with the "user" tests on dental 
items performed for the Defense Medical 
Materiel Board.) 



6-42 

Change 80 



31 Oct 73 



6-139 CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 6-1 44 A 

Section XIX. NAVAL DENTAL TECHNICIANS SCHOOLS 

Article 

General Information : 6- 139 

Dental Technician, General (Class A School) 6- 140 

Dental Technician, General (Class B School) 6- 141 

Dental Technician, Prosthetic (Class C School) 6- 142 

Dental Technician, Prosthetic (Class B School) 6- 143 

Dental Technician, Maxillofacial Prosthetic (Class C School) 6- 144 

Dental Technician, Research Assistant (Class C School) 6-144A 

Dental Technician, Repair (Class C School) 6-I44B 



6-139. General Information 

(1) The training program for dental tech- 
nicians is divided into basic, specialized, and 
advanced training. Basic training is accomplished 
at class A service schools, specialized training 
at class C service schools, and advanced training 
at class B service schools. 

( 2 ) Qualifications for admission to the various 
courses in specialized and advanced training are 
listed in the Navy Medical Department Formal 
Schools Catalog, BUMEDINST 1500.9 series. 

6-140. Dental Technician, General (Class A 
School) 

( 1 ) Class A schools provide the basic training 
course for general technicians. Admission to the 
course is by approval of application or by direct 
recruitment. Any person in a naval rating except 
graduates of a class A school within another 
rating group may request admission to the course 
and a change of rating to the dental rating group. 
Such a request must include the recommendation 
of a dental officer, and must be addressed to the 
Chief of Naval Personnel via the Chief, Bureau 
of Medicine and Surgery. Successful completion 
of this training course is a prerequisite for fur- 
ther training and advancement in the dental 
rating group. 

6-141. Dental Technician, General (Class B 
School) 

(1) Upon advancement to dental technician, 
second class, the general technician becomes eli- 
gible for advanced training. This course is avail- 
able to selected general technicians but is not a 
prerequisite to eligibility for advancement in 
rating. The purpose of the advancd course is to 
train the general technician to perform effectively 
the administrative, clinical, and military duties 
required of him. 

6-142. Dental Technician, Prosthetic (Class C 
School) 

(1) The School for Dental Technicians, Pros- 



thetic (Class C), is designed to provide special- 
ized training necessary to qualify the dental 
technician, general, for the performance of duties 
in a dental prosthetic laboratory. 

6-143. Dental Technician, Prosthetic (Class B 
School) 

(1) After on-the-job training and upon ad- 
vancement to dental technician, second class, the 
prosthetic technician becomes eligible for the ad- 
vanced course of instruction in prosthetic lab- 
oratory procedures. 

(2) The purpose of this course is to develop 
the technician's skill in all prosthetic laboratory 
technics. Instruction is patterned to the needs of 
the individual technician in that particular at- 
tention is given to increasing his ability in those 
areas in which he may be deficient. This course 
is available to selected prosthetic technicians but 
is not a prerequisite to eligibility for advance- 
ment in rating. 

6-144. Dental Technician, Maxillofacial 
Prosthetic (Class C School) 

(1) Upon advancement to dental technician, 
second class, a technician who is a graduate of 
the Dental Technician, Prosthetic (Class C 
School) and who possesses a certain amount of 
artistic ability and normal color perception is 
eligible to apply for this course of specialized 
training. The purpose of this course is to ac- 
quaint trainees with the laboratory procedures 
in fabrication of maxillofacial appliances. 

6-144A. Dental Technician, Research Assistant 
(Class C School) 

( 1 ) The Dental Technician, Research Assistant 
(Class C School), provides specialized instruction 
in the basic knowledge and skills required to 
conduct dental research procedures. 



6-43 
Change ?3 



6-144B 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-144B 



6-144B. Dental Technician, Repair (Class C 
School) 

( 1 ) The course for Dental Technician, Repair, 



is designed to acquaint dental technicians with 
the procedures of installation, maintenance, and 
repair of equipment used in dental operating 
rooms and prosthetic laboratories. 



6-44 

Change 73 



6-145 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-146 



Section XX. PUBLICATIONS AND FILES IN DENTAL FACILITIES 



Official Publications 

Personal Copies of Official Publications 
Department Files 



6-145. Official Publications 

(X) All dental facilities should have office 
copies of certain publications. It should not be 
necessary for dental officers, when transferred, to 
transport voluminous files of official reference 
material from one naval activity to another. All 
copies of manuals and other publications, and 
files for correspondence and reports, shall, at all 
times, be kept up to date and ready for inspec- 



Number 



NAVMED P-117 



NAVMED P-5004 

NAVPERS 15791 

NAVPERS 10685 series 
NAVPERS 10686 series __ 
NAVPERS 10687 series 
NAVPERS 15018 



SECNAVINST 5216.5 
SECNAVINST 5215.1 : 
SECNAVINST 5210.11 



* If required and not readily available within the command. 



(2) Dental activities under the command of 
the Bureau will require additional publications 
pertinent to the administration of the activity. 

6-146. Personal Copies of Official Publications 

( 1 ) All dental officers should be familiar with 
certain publications which describe the basic 
duties and responsibilities of naval dental officers. 
Each dental officer should retain for personal use 



Article 

6-145 

6-146 

6-147 

tion. Dental officers, upon assuming charge or 
command of dental facilities, should determine 
if all required manuals and other publications 
are available. They should, if any be missing, 
submit requests for them. They should state in 
the request that the publications are for official 
use and are not available in the activity. The 
following guide is provided for establishing and 
maintaining libraries of official publications in 
all dental facilities: 



obtained 



■tterto BUMED (see 
BUMEDINST 5215.4 
series ) , 

avy Supply System. 



e FMSOINST 4400.12 
series. 



current copies of the U.S. Navy Medicine, 
NAVMED P-5088, which is forwarded to all 
dental officers on active duty. Dental offi- 
cers desiring to maintain a personal copy of 
official publications may do so at their own 
expense provided they are available from the 
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. 



Publications for official use in dental facilities afloat and ashore 



Item 



Manual of the Medical Department, U.S. Navy 



Le 



!S 

ss 

ies _ 



U.S. Navy Regulations* Ni 

Navy Department General Orders* D< 

Manual for Courts Martial, United States 1969* — D< 

Handbook of the Hospital Corps, U.S. Navy D< 

Bureau of Naval Personnel Manual* D< 

Dental Technician, Prosthetic D< 

Dental Technician, General D( 

Dental Technician, Repair D< 

Register of Commissioned and Warrant Officers of 
the United States Navy and Marine Corps and 

Reserve Officers on Active Duty* D< 

Navy Correspondence Manual D< 

Navy Directives System Dt 

Standard Subject Identification Codes Dt 

Federal Supply Catalog, DoD Section, Medical Se< 
Materiel , 



6-44a 

Change 60 



6-147 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-147 



6-147. Department Files 

(1) The files of dental facilities shall be ar- 
ranged in accordance with current instructions. 

(2) The commanding officer of a dental activi- 
ty or the dental officer of a ship, station, or 



service shall preserve all official correspondence 
in the files of the organization. 

(3) Disposition of dental records of dental 
facilities shall be in accordance with SECNAV 

Instruction P5212. 5 series. 



6-44b 

Change 60 



6-148 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-149 



Section XXI. REPORTS, RECORDS, AND CORRESPONDENCE 

Artie]* 

General Instructions 6_j4g 

Principal Reports Required From Dental Facilities 6-149 

Dental Service Report, DD Form 477 6-150 

Dental Service Report Equipment and Facilities Supplement, DD Form 477-1 6-151 

NAVMED— 952, Prosthetic Case Record 6-152 

NAVMED — 1298, Dental Appointments, Daily , 6-153 

NAVMED — 1299, Dental Examination and Treatment Record 6-154 

NAVMED — 1300, Precious Metal Issue Record 6-155 

NAVMED — 1301, Statement and Inventory of Precious and Special Dental Metals 6-156 

Audit Board for Precious and Special Dental Metals : 6-157 

Dental Health Questionnaire, NAVMED 6600/3 6-157A 

Navy Periodontal Screening Examination, NAVMED 6600/4 6-157B 

NAVMED 6620/1, Individual Dental Officer — Daily Dental Service Record 6-158 

Dental Records Retirement 6-159 



6-148. General Instructions 

( 1 ) Reports shall be prepared and for- 
warded by the dental officer of a ship, station, 
or other activity in accordance with chapter 
23 and other current directives. 

(2) Official correspondence with BUMED 
shall be forwarded via the commanding officer. 
Information copies of all official correspondence 
to BUMED shall be forwarded to the cognizant 
district or staff dental officer. 

(3) Sufficient supplies of the necessary blank 



forms shall be maintained. Forms shall be ob- 
tained from the Navy Supply System, unless 
otherwise directed. 

6-149. Principal Reports Required From Den- 
tal Facilities 

( 1 ) The following guide is provided for sub- 
mitting principal reports required from dental 
facilities. Training in the preparation of these 
reports shall be part of the inservice training 
program. 



Principal reports required from dental facilities 



Form No. 



Title 



To 



When 



Reference 



DD^77 __ 



DD-477-1 



SF 603- 



NAVSUP-154_ 



Dental Service Report 
(MED-6600-2). 

Dental Service Report, 
Equipment and Facilities 
Supplement (MED-6750 
-1). 

Dental Record 



Survey Request, Report and 
Expenditure (NAVSUP 
5040-7). 



BUMED 
(orig. 
only). 1 

do7_ 



Health 
Record . 



Retain 
original 
in local 
file. 1 



Quarterly Art. 6-150. 



1 January Art. 6-151. 



For each 

person enter- 
ing Navy or 
Marine Corps 
or when Dental 
Record is 
missing. 

As required 



Ch. 6, sec. XV. 



NAVSUP Manual 
vol. II paras. 
25155-25167 
& vol. Ill paras. 
35041-35050. 



'Send 1 copy to cognizant district or staff dental officer. 

2 Send 1 copy to the Field Branch, BUMED, 3500 South Broad St., Philadelphia, Pa. 19145. 



6-45 

Change 69 



6-150 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-150 



6-150. Dental Service Report, DD Form, 477 

(1) General. — The Dental Service Report (DD 
Form 477) is a quarterly statistical report. This 
reporting requirement is assigned report symbol 
MED-6600-2 and has been approved by the Chief 
of Naval Operations. 

(2) Who Submits.— 

(a) Navy and Marine Corps Facilities. — The 
responsible dental officer of each Navy /Marine 
dental facility and FMF dental company shall 
submit a DD 477. Where dental personnel of 
more than one command are combined and are 
using the same facilities, the responsible dental 
officer of the host command shall submit a consol- 
idated DD 477 and report the presence of 
"Other" dental officers in FART IV— RE- 
MARKS. Organizations from which a DD 477 is 
required will have an Electronic Accounting Ma- 
chine code number (EAM) assigned by the Bu- 
reau of Medicine and Surgery (Code 611). Or- 
ganizations having an EAM and whose personnel 
are temporarily or semipermanently integrated 
with the personnel of another dental organization 



shall have their procedures included in the host 
command's DD 477 and shall submit a negative 
report with a statement under REMARKS indi- 
cating the ship or station DD 477 on which the 
procedures are reported. Dental organizations not 
having an EAM number shall not submit nega- 
tive reports. 

(b) Mobile Dental Units. — A separate DD 
477 shall be submitted for all mobile dental units. 
Negative reports are required. 

(3) When and to Whom Submitted.— 

(a) The DD 477 report shall be submitted 
quarterly. The original shall be mailed to 
BUMED not later than the 10th day of the month 
following the quarter covered in the report. One 
copy, for information, shall be forwarded to the 
cognizant district or staff dental officer unless oth- 
erwise directed by competent authority. 

(b) Those dental facilities not having a cog- 
nizant district or staff dental officer shall submit 
the original only of the DD 477 direct to BUMED. 

(4) Instructions for Preparing DD Form 477. 
— Report shall be typewritten. 



254 3 10 04 24 DENTAL SERVICE REPORT 


REPORT 

MED-66C 


CONTROL SYMBOL 
0-2 




HEPOHTINO FACILITY A NO LOCATION 

Naval Station 

Blank, Maryland 12345 


PERIOD COVERED 

JUL 

AUG 1969 
SEP 



EAM Code Number. — Newly commissioned 
ships and shore activities with dental personnel 
shall request from BUMED (Code 61 1) assign- 
ment of an EAM code number. In the space to the 
left of the report title, enter the assigned 10-digit 
EAM code number. 

REPORT CONTROL SYMBOL.— Eater 
MED-6600-2. 



NAVY Square.— Enter X. 

REPORTING FACILITY AND LOCATION. 
— Enter name of ship or station, mailing address, 
and zip code number. 

PERIOD COVERED.— Enter the 3 months of 
the quarter covered and the year. When applica- 
ble, type INITIAL or FINAL and show inclusive 
dates. 



3 



PART I - DENTAL PROCEDURES 



General Instructions. — Enter the number of 
dental procedures accomplished for each category 
of personnel in the vertical columns. In horizon- 
tal lines 1 through 49, record only completed pro- 



cedures. Every effort should be made to avoid 
placing entries in MISCELLANEOUS lines for 
procedures covered by appropriate printed-line 
categories. Do not enter "O". 



6-46 

Change 61 



6-150 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-150 





AKMY 


NAVY- 
MARINE 


AIR FORCE 


DEPEND- 
ENTS 


ALL 
OTHER 


TOTAL 




— tr~ ; 1 — — 


A 


a 


c 


D 


E 


F 


0 



i 



Column A, ARMY. — ■Active duty Army per- 
sonnel. 

Column B, NAVY-MARINE Active duty 

Navy and Marine Corps personnel, 

Column C, AIR FORCE.— Active duty Air 
Force personnel. 

Column D, DEPENDENTS.— Authorized 
dependents of active duty, retired, or deceased 



personnel of the U.S. Armed Forces. 

Column E, ALL OTHER.— All personnel 
not included in A through D. 

Column F, TOTAL. — Total of entries A 
through E. 

Column G. — Leave blank, except that all 
hospitals shall make entries on lines 51 and 
52. 



A- OPERATIVE AND CROWN AND BRIDGE 
















|. AMALGAM fOn» IUf/tC*J 
































• . RAJE INTERMEDIATE 
















4. RE1IN 
















.1. ROOT CANAL FILLING (T..lA> 
















4. SILICATE 
















7. TEMPORARY OR IEDATIVC FILLING 
















4. 
















*. SOLD (Inlmy, toll) 
















10. BRIDGE 
















It. SOL D CROWN (All type*) 
















11. RCIIN CROHN 
















11. HEilN CROHN WITH METAL 
















14. OTHER CROWN1 
















II. CROHN OR RRIOSE REPAIR 
















MISCELLANEOUS 

















Instructions. — Only completed procedures 
should be entered. Intermediate procedures are 
not appropriate entries. 

Line 1. — Self-explanatory. 

Line 2. — Record as one restoration irre- 
spective of number of surfaces. 

Line 3. — Only one base intermediate shall 
be reported for each restoration irrespective 
of whether a single or a combination of base 
materials are used. 

Line 4. — Resin restorations, excluding 
crowns. Do not enter brand names. 

Line 5. — Record only the number of teeth 
that had root canal fillings completed. 

Line 6. — Self-explanatory. 

Line 7. — In addition to temporary or seda- 
tive filling, record pulp capping and root canal 
treatment. 

Line 8. — Leave blank. 



Line 9. — Self-explanatory. 

Line 10. — Record as unit irrespective of 
number of abutments or pontics. 

Line 11. — Record crowns for individual 
teeth. Do not enter bridge abutments. 

Line 12. — Record resin crowns that require 
processing. 

Line 13. — Record veneer crowns including 
porcelain fused to gold alloys. 

Line 14- — Porcelain crowns. 

Line 15. — Record all crown and bridge 
repairs, including recementation and replace- 
ment of facings. 

Line 16. — Insert heading, MISCELLANE- 
OUS, and include operative and crown and 
bridge procedures which are not described in 
the printed categories^ Also record such follow- 
up procedures as restorations polished. 



6-47 

Change 49 



6-150 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-150 



B. PROSTHODOHTICS 
















IT. DENTURE, RECONIT,, RELINE, REPAIR 
















IS. FULL DENTURE 
















10. PARTIAL. DENTURE 
















".OTHER MAXILLOFACIAL APPLIANCE! 
















2i. MISCELLANEOUS 

















Instructions. — Record all prosthetic cases 
inserted, even though fabricated elsewhere. 
(Facilities which fabricated prosthesis for 
other facilities shall report these cases in PART 
IV, REMARKS.) 

Line 17-19. — Self-explanatory. 

Line 20. — Include splints, obturators, skull 
plates, artificial eyes, protective mouth pieces, 
and appliances used in connection with perio- 



dontal, surgical, radiation, or plastic proce- 
dures, which are laboratory processed. 

Line 21. — Insert heading, MISCELLANE- 
OUS, and include prosthetic procedures not 
described in the printed categories. Also record 
such followup procedures as denture adjust- 
ments. Do not include individual procedures 
in the process of constructing an appliance. 



C. ORAL SURGERY 
















22. ABJCFW. INCISION AND DRAINAGE 
















22. ALVEOLECTOMY 
















2«. APICOECTOMY 
















25. BIOPSY 
















1«. C Y3T ECTOMY 
















27. FRACTURE MANDIBLE REDUCTION 
















2a. FRACTURE MAXILLA REDUCTION 
















I*. FRACTURE (00>*0 REDUCTION 
















10. ROOT RESIDUAL - REMOVAL 
















II. TOOTH REMOVAL 
















1*. T VJ MORA (Ml Ifpa*; EXCISION 
















•»- MISCELLANEOUS 
















•A. 
















u. 

































Line 22. — Self-explanatory. 

Line 23- — Record one alveolectomy only 
for each arch in which alveolectomy was per- 
formed. 

Lines 24-29. — Self-explanatory. 

Line 30. — Include also root removal, sinus. 



Line 31. — Include also impacted and surgi- 
cal removal. 

Line 32. — Self-explanatory. 

Line 33.— Insert heading, MISCELLANE- 
OUS, and include oral surgical procedures not 
described in the printed categories. 

Lines 34-36. — Leave blank. 



P. PERIODONTICS AND ORAL HYGIENE 
















• 7. EQUILIBRATION 
















H. OINOIVECTOMV 
















■ ». aiNSlVlTIS OR STOMATITIS TREATMENT 
















•S. PROPHYLAXIS 
















■ 1. SC ALINO fTartedbnMIJ 
















12. CARIES PREVENTION TREATMENT 
















». PLAQUE CONTROL INST 

















6-48 

Change 63 



6-150 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-150 



Line 37, — Include as a procedure the alter- 
ation of the occlusion to establish harmony 
in all excursions. 

Line 38. — Record one for each arch in 
which gingivectomy was performed, include al- 
so gingival flap removal and frenectomy. 

Line 39, — Include all treatment of mucosal 
ulcerations, gingivitis, periodontitis, (including 
the treatment of necrotizing ulcerative gingi- 
vitis), and therapeutically used dressings such as 
"pre-packing," not recorded elsewhere. 

Line 40. — Record all cases for which the 
removal of calculus and polishing by rubber 
cup with pumice or stannous fluoride special 



E. SADIODONTICS 

44. INTRA-OHAl HOE NTS 6NOC W AM 
40. EXTRA-ORAL ROENTGENOGRAM 



Instructions. — Do not record the taking 
of roentgenograms as sittings. 



pumice is accomplished in one appointment. 

Line 41. — Include as a procedure the re- 
moval of root surface concretions and/or plan- 
ing accomplished in one appointment. 

Line 42. — Report topical application of a 
cariostatic agent to teeth. Procedures reported 
on lines 40 and 42 should approximate each 
other at dental facilities other than those au- 
thorized to use self-preparation technique. 

Line 43. -Insert heading, PLAQUE CONTROL 
INST, and record 1 procedure for each sitting at which 
one or more of the following are performed: (a) patient 
education and motivation relating to plaque control, 
Kb) instruction in interproximal and sulcular tooth 
cleansing and (c) use of disclosing media. 

1 




Lines 44-45. — Self-explanatory. 



F, OTHKM 
















4«. EXAMINATIONS (Tfpmm I,1,4M» 
















4T. ORTHODONTIC TREATMENT 
















*»- FOIT OPERATIVE TREATMENT 
















«». MISCELLANEOUS 
















•«. 
















■ 1 . TOTAL PROCEDURES LINES 1 • SO 
















■a. TOTAi,MAk1*WiM&ktM SITTINGS 

















Line 46. — See article 6-100 for explanation 
of examination types. Also include consulta- 
tions. 

Line 47. — Leave blank, except for facilities 
with an authorized orthodontist and in unusual 
circumstances, which must be explained under 
REMARKS. 

Line 48. — Record those followup proce- 
dures which are rendered after surgical inter- 
vention; also include fracture treatment and 
sequestrum removal. 

Line 49.— Insert heading, MISCELLANE- 
OUS, and record other procedures not provided 
for in sections A through E. 

Line 50. — Leave blank. 

Line 51. — Enter totals of lines 1 through 
49. In addition, all hospitals shall enter in 
column G the total of all procedures accom- 
plished during the quarter on hospital inpa- 
tients. 



Line 52.— Report TOTAL SITTINGS on 
this line (revise form as shown). A sitting 
shall be recorded each time a patient is seated 
to receive an examination, a consultation, or 
any form of treatment or any combination 
thereof; exception: the taking of roentgeno- 
grams shall not be considered a sitting. Several 
procedures, will usually be accomplished during 
one sitting; therefore, line 51 (TOTAL PRO- 
CEDURES) will usually be greater than the 
total sittings entered on line 52. A patient 
counted as a sitting in one office who during 
the same appointment is seated in other offices 
shall be counted as a sitting by each office. 
Conversely, when a dental officer renders a 
consultation, etc., in an office other than the 
one to which he is assigned, he shall record 
on his DD 477 the procedures and a sitting 
as if they had occurred in his office. In addi- 
tion, all hospitals shall enter in column G the 
totals number of sittings of hospital inpatients. 



6-49 

Change 63 



6-150 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-150 



PART II - LABORATORY DATA 



A. TEETH REPLACED IH ITEM! » AMD U, PART 1 



HUMER 



B. PROSTHETIC APPUAHCES PROCESSED (Ti«m« unrfw P«rt ;. Stetltt B) 



I. ENTIRELY IN REPORTING FACILITY 



2. PARTLY IN OTHER FACILITY (Hmtf) 



1. ENTIRELY IH OTHER FACILITY <N—>9) 



C. CHROME-COBALT OH OTHER HOH-PEiCIOUS METAL APPLIANCES 



I, CAST LOCALLY DURING REPORTING PERIOD 



MAXIMUM MONTHLY POTENTIAL OUTPUT 



I 

PART II— LABORATORY DATA. 
— Leave blank. 



PART III • CLASSIFICATION OF ACTIVE DUTY PERSONNEL (At .m et JAM) I q uarter) 



MILITARY STREHGTH SERVED 



REPORTING FACILITY 



OTHER 



: NUMBER ;CLASS!F(ep : 



CL;.J 



■CL.- a- 



CL. 3 



CL. 4 



CL-: s : 



1. NAVY-MARINE 



3. AIR FORCE 



9. GRAND TOTAL 



■ ■ - ■ ■■ * ■■'-■<'■■■ 



t?T. iffi 
- ■ - 



P,4RT i/J Headings.— Change "month" to 
"quarter" as shown. 

MILITARY STRENGTH SERVED. — 
REPORTING FACILITY Column.— 
Report number of personnel attached to report- 
ing command, by categories in lines 1, 2, and 
3; and show TOTAL in line 4. 

OTHER Column. — Report number of 
personnel attached to other commands for 



whose routine dental care the reporting facility 
is responsible, by categories in lines 1, 2, and 
3; and show TOTAL in line 4. 

Line 5, GRAND TOTAL. -Record 
combined total of REPORTING FACILITY and 
OTHER military strength. 

If military strength served is classified, enter 
CLASSIFIED in appropriate space under column 
heading MILITARY STRENGTH SERVED. 

NUMBER CLASSIFIED.— Leave blank. 



PART IV— REMARKS 



1. TOTAL DENTAL OFFICER WORKDAYS DURING REPORTING PERIOD (325) 

2. DENTAL OFFICER WORKDAYS LOST DUE TO COLLATERAL DUTY ( 3) 

3. DENTAL OFFICER WORKDAYS LOST DUE TO ALL OTHER CAUSES (47) 

4. TOTAL DENTAL OFFICER DAYS WORKED (275) 

5. AVERAGE NUMBER OF PERSONNEL ATTACHED ( 21) 

CATEGORIES ON BOARD MORE THAN HALF OF THE QUARTER: 

DENTAL DENTAL DENTAL DENTAL OTHER OTHER 

OFFICER TECHNICIAN HYGIENISTS ASSISTANTS CIVILIANS PERSONNEL 



(5) (10) (1) (1) (1) Receptionist ( 1 ) Striker 

(1) MSC 



6. PROSTHESES CONSTRUCTED FOR OTHER FACILITIES: 

(Refers to items 9 through 20 including fabrication of partial denture frameworks.) 

7. TOTAL NUMBER OF DEPENDENTS AUTHORIZED DENTAL CARE (2540) 

8. OTHER: 

Copy to: (Cognizant district or staff dental officer.) 



6-50 

Change 59 



6-150 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-150 



PART IV— REMARKS.— ( Sample entries 
are shown in parentheses.) 

Item 1. — Insert heading shown and total. 
(Sample computation: 5 DQ's x 61 WD's = 
305 WD's; 1 DO x 20 WD's = 20 WD's. 
Total DO workdays: 325) 

Item 2. — Insert heading shown and total. 

Item 3. — Insert heading shown and total, 
which is to include annual leave, illness, TAD, 
equipment failures, etc. 

Item 4. — Insert heading shown, subtract 
items 2 and 3 from item 1, and insert re- 
mainder. 

Item 5. — Insert heading shown and total. 
It is recognized that the "Average Number 
of Personnel Attached" may not equal the sum 
of categories on board. 

a. Host commands which submit a con- 
solidated report shall include in this item the 
personnel of other commands who have contri- ' 
buted to the reported dental procedures. (Ref. 
MANMED art. 6-150(2) (a). The presence of 
these "other" persons should also be identified 
separately. ) 

b. The commanding officer of a FMF 
dental company shall include data on detach- 
ments whose dental procedures are incorpor- 
ated in his DD 477, 

c. The reporting of average number of 
personnel attached is unrelated to and shall 
not influence reported information concerning 
time worked and time lost, which shall con- 
tinue to be reported as items 1, 2, 3 and 
4 of the REMARKS section. 

d. The Average Number of Personnel 
Attached for each quarter should be computed 
in the following manner: 

( 1 ) Use only the nearest whole num- 



ber (no fractions) . 

(2) In the "categories on board" col- 
umns, record the number of all persons in 
each category who were attached for at least 
half of the reporting period. 

(3) Compute AVERAGE NUMBER 
OF PERSONNEL ATTACHED as follows: 

(a) Multiply the numbers of per- 
sons (all categories) attached throughout the 
entire quarter by the total number of days 
in the quarter. (Example: 20 x 91 = 1820) 

(b) Count the actual number of 
days attached for all who reported in, and 
for all who were detached during the quarter. 
(Example: 20^-22 + 8= 50) 

(c) Divide the sum of (a) and (b) 
by the total number of days in the quarter, 
and report. (Example: 

1820-50 

91 = 20.5^21) 

Item 6. — Insert heading shown. Naval den- 
tal facilities which fabricate prostheses or parts 
thereof for insertion at other facilities shall 
report here the number of such cases. (Dental 
facilities shall report in appropriate spaces of 
PART I prosthetic cases which are inserted 
at that facility, even though fabricated else- 
where.) 

Item 7. — This heading is to be inserted 
(and entry completed) only by dental shore 
facilities outside the U.S., and by affected den- 
tal facilities in the U.S. in areas designated 
"remote" in accordance with SECNAVINST 
6320.8 series. Estimate total if not known. 

Item 8. — This space may be used to report 
any circumstances which affect the accomplish- 
ment or efficiency of the dental facility and 
which are not included elsewhere on the report. 



0*T« 

W OCT 1969 



"'CO PRINTED NAME AND 9HAOI 

WALTER T. HATCH, CDR, DC, USN 



WW lut( 



DATE— NAME— GRADE—SIGNATURE. of the signing officer and the signature date 
— The report shall be signed by the senior shall be typed, 
dental officer present. The name and grade 



(5) PART V.— PROFESSIONAL ASSIGN- 
MENT AND UTILIZATION, DD Form -}77a. 
— There is no BUMED requirement for this 
part of the report; however, cognizant district 



or staff dental officers may require local sub- 
mission of the 477a for supplemental informa- 
tion. 



6-50a 
Change 49 



r 



6-151 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-151 



6-151. Dental Service Report Equipment and Facili- 
ties Supplement, DD Form 477-1 

(1) General. -The DD 477-1 Supplement is an 
annual report of dental spaces, equipment, prosthetic 
data, and utilities. 

(2) Who Submits. The responsible dental officer 
of each separate command having dental facilities and 
dental equipment (except field type equipment) shall 
submit a DD 477-1. Activities having only field type 
equipment are not required to submit a DD 477-1. 
Dental officers attached to fleet aircraft service squad- 
rons, mobile construction battalions, and other simi- 
lar units not having dental equipment (other than field 
type equipment) shall not submit a DD 477-1 . When a 
FASRON, or similar unit, is furnished dental operating 
facilities, the activity providing the support shall make 
an entry to that effect under REMARKS. Activities 
having operational control of mobile dental units shall 
prepare a separate DD 477-1 for each unit. 

(3) When and To Whom Submitted. - 

(a) The DD 477-1 shall be submitted as of 
1 January each year; the original shall be addressed to 
BUMED, one copy to the Naval Medical Materiel Sup- 
port Command, and one copy to the reviewing officer. 

(b) Those dental facilities not under a district 
or staff dental officer shall submit the original to 
BUMED and a copy to the Naval Medical Materiel 
Support Command. 

(c) If at any time during the year dental facili- 
ties undergo major alterations (new construction, 
alterations, DOR's, SHIPALTS, etc.) or equipment 
replacement, an up-to-date DD 477-1 shall be sub- 
mitted along with current photographs and blueprints 
or schematic plans depicting the present status. Photo- 
graphs should be 8" X 10" black and white, glossy 
prints; the date taken and area depicted should be re- 
corded on the reverse of each photograph. New activi- 
ties shall submit an initial DD 477-1, and photographs, 
at the time they become operational. 

(4) Instructions for Preparing. -Complete all appli- 
cable items on the form. Items not mentioned below 
are considered to be self-explanatory. 

(a) Heading. - 

(1) REPORT CONTROL SYMBOL. -Enter 
MED-6750-1. 

(2) REPORTING FACILITY AND LOCA- 
TION.- Insert name of ship or station and mailing 
address. 

(3) DATE OF REPORT. Enter 1 January 
and year. 

(b) Part I-DENTAL DEPARTMENT OR FA- 
CILITY SPACE. - 

(1) Items 1 through 15.- 

(a) Column A, NUMBER. - Give total 



number even if located in more than one building. 

(b) Column B, APPROXIMATE SIZE. 
-Indicate width and length. If rooms vary signifi- 
cantly, type data on blank sheet and attach; e.g.: 

3 DOR's 12'xl2' 

1 DOR 10' x 15' 

(c) Column C, ADEQUATE. -Entry in 
"NO" space is to be made only if rooms are too 
small for requirements or are insufficient in number. 

{d) Column D, REMARKS. -Enter sig- 
nificant collateral information; such as, "2 additional 
planned," "1 not equipped," "also used as classroom." 

(2) Item 16, CLINIC UNIT.-U one or more 
clinics are in use, in addition to size of each, note 
number of dental operating rooms in each clinic and 
whether or not a prosthetic laboratory is included. 
Designate as "M" clinics which are equipped and in a 
maintenance status; for example: 
Column A Column B Column D 

2 #1 34 x 160 20 days to 

10 DOR's "M" reactivate. 
#2 34x 180 
10 DOR's "DPL" 
(c) Part II-DENTAL EQUIPMENT. - 

(1) Column A, MAKE.- Enter name of 
manufacturer. 

(2) Column B, NUMBER ON HAND.-List 
total number on hand, including those in storage or 
installed in buildings that are not in use. 

(3) Column C, NUMBER IN USE. -Include 
all items in use, including those used occasionally. 

(4) Column D, CONDITION OF EQUIP- 
MENT. -Insert number of items by categories of new, 
excellent, good, fair, and poor. 

(5) Line 1, Column A. -Designate the manu- 
facturer and total number of operating units of each 
manufacture. If military model units are on hand, 
designate separately and suffix with the letter "M". 
For example, R-3, W-2M, SSW-3M, would indicate 3 
Ritter units, 2 Weber Military model units, and 3 S.S. 
White Military model units. 

(6) Line 8, STERILlZER.-lndicate in col- 
umn A type: autoclave, dry heat oven, or gas sterilizer. 

(7) Line 9, OTHER MAJOR EQUIPMENT. 
—List additional standard and nonstandard items 
carried as plant property, class 3. Air turbines are to 
be reported as separate items of equipment. Minor 
property need not be reported. 

id) Part III-PROSTHETIC DAT A.- 

(I) Line 1, POTENTIAL CASE CAPACITY 
PER MONTH. -Insert the total number of cases (in- 
cluding bridges, and partial and complete dentures 
only) that could be fabricated in 1 month. Do not in- 
clude crowns, inlays, or repairs. Estimate on the basis 
of a routine working month. 



26 Mar 75 



6-51 
Change 84 



6-152 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-156 



(2) Line 2, IS PROSTHETIC SERVICE 
PROVIDED TO OTHER ACTIVITIES. -Insert "Yes" 
or "No." 

(3) Line 3, ARE PRESENT PROSTHETIC 
FA CILITIES ADEQUA TE -If not, explain. 

(e) Part V REMARKS AND RECOMMENDA- 
TIONS. -In addition to providing the data required 
by the printed instructions in part V, list all projects 
that have been submitted for inclusion in future mili- 
tary construction programs. Indicate the priority and 
status of the projects. 

6-152. NAVMED 6630/1, Prosthodontic Work Re- 
quest and Prescription 

(1) The NAVMED 6630/1 shall be accomplished 
for each case processed in a dental prosthetic facility. 
It shall be retained in the dental activity in an alpha- 
betical file by name of patient until retired in accord- 
ance with SECNAV Instruction P5212.5 series. 

6-153. NAVMED 6600/5, Dental Appointments, 
Daily 

(1) The following is the standard procedure for 
using NAVMED 6600/5. Entries may be made with 
ink or pencil. 

(2) Procedure for a Dental A ctivity Having a Cen- 
tral Appointment Desk. - 

(a) The following is to be accomplished at the 
appointment desk: 

(1) ACTIVITY. -Give name of station, acti- 
vity, or ship (rubber stamp may be used). 

(2) DATE (on DATE line following ACTI- 
VITY). -Enter the date. 

(3) TREATMENT ROOM. -Indicate num- 
bers of rooms for which dental appointments are made. 

(4) DATE (on DATE line following TREAT- 
MENT ROOM).-No entry necessary unless sheet is 
used for more than 1 day. 

(5) NAME. -Enter family name, followed 
by given names or initials. 

(6) GRADE/RATE. -Abbreviate grade or 

rate. 

(7) REMARKS. —Use for any local purpose. 

(8) PHONE. -Patient' s phone number. 

(b) The following is to be accomplished in the 
rooms to which the patients are assigned for treatment: 

(1) ACTIVITY. -No entry necessary. 

(2) DATE (on DATE line following AC- 
TIVITY).— No entry necessary. 

(3) TREATMENT ROOM. -Number of 



treatment room. 

(4) DATE (on DATE line following the 
number of the TREATMENT ROOM). -The date for 
which appointments are made. 

(5) NAME. -Enter family name, followed 
by given names or initials. 

(6) GRADE/RA TE. -Abbreviate grade or 

rate. 

(7) REMARKS.— Use for any local purpose. 

(8) PHONE. -Patient's phone number. 

(3) Procedure for Dental Activity Having No Cen- 
tral Appointment Desk.-The procedure is the same 
as given in subarticle 6-153(2)(b), with such local 
modifications as may be preferred. 
NOTE - There is no article 6-154. 

6-155. NAVMED 6630/2, Precious Metal Issue 
Record 

(1) Entries should be made as indicated in appro- 
priate spaces on the NAVMED 6630/2 by activities 
having prosthetic dental facilities. 

(2) The total quantity of precious and special den- 
tal metals USED, as computed from the Precious 
Metal Issue Records, should balance with column 7, 
CASES DELIVERED, of the Statement and Inventory 
of Precious and Special Dental Metals (NAVMED 
6630/3) and should also balance with the total quan- 
tities used for cases delivered, as computed from 
NAVMED 6630/1, Prosthodontic Work Request and 
Prescription. 

(3) The Precious Metal Issue Records, when 
completed and audited, should be filed in sequence of 
numbers for cases. They shall be available for inspec- 
tion at any time until 2 years old, when they shall be 
destroyed locally. 

6-1 56. NAVMED 6630/3, Statement and Inventory 
of Precious and Special Dental Metals 

(1) NAVMED 6630/3 shall be prepared monthly 
only by activities having dental prosthetic facilities, in 
accordance with the following: 

(a) Front of Statement and Inventory.- 

(1) Entries may be typewritten or made by 
hand with black ink. 

(2) A CTIVITY. —Name of station, ship, or 
dental activity in capitals at the left, followed by city, 
State, or country in capital and small letters, as may 
be indicated for shore stations; or post office address 
for ships and foreign shore stations. 



6-52 

Change 84 



26 Mar 75 



6-154 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-157 



individual dental operating room appointment 
records. 

(e) A sheet for routing patients to various 
sections or rooms. 

(/) A source of data for the Dental Service 
Report, DD Form 477. 

(3) Dispose of in accordance with SECNAV 
Instruction P5212.5 series. In exceptional cases, 
such as transfer of an air group, construction bat- 
talion, etc., dental officers may forward current 
NAVMED-1299's in Dental Folders, DD Form 
722-1, to obviate the need for additional exami- 
nations of those patients under treatment. 

6-155. NAVMED-1300, Precious Metal Issue 
Record 

(1) Entries should be made as indicated in ap- 
propriate spaces on the NAVMED-1300 by activ- 
ities having prosthetic dental facilities. 

(2) The total quantity of precious and special 
dental metals USED, as computed from the Pre- 
cious Metal Issue Records, should balance with 
column 7, CASES DELIVERED, of the Statement 
and Inventory of Precious and Special Dental 
Metals (NAVMED-1301) and should also bal- 
ance with the total quantities used for cases 
delivered, as computed from NAVMED-952, 
Prosthetic Laboratory Records. 

(3) The Precious Metal Issue Records, when 
completed and audited, should be filed in se- 
quence of numbers for cases. They shall be avail- 
able for inspection at any time until 2 years old, 
when they shall be destroyed locally. 

6-156. NAVMED-1301, Statement and Inven- 
tory of Precious and Special Dental 
Metals 

(1) NAVMED-1301 shall be prepared month- 
ly only by activities having dental prosthetic 
facilities, in accordance with the following: 
(a) Front of Statement and Inventory.— 

(1) Entries may be typewritten or made 
by hand with black ink. 

(2) ACTIVITY.— Name of station, ship, 
or dental activity in capitals at the left, followed 
b*y city, State, or country in capital and small 
letters, as may be indicated for shore stations; or 
post office address for ships and foreign shore 
stations. 

(3) Column 3 plus column 4 will be the 
entry for column 5. 

(4) Column 6, MISCELLANEOUS, under 
EXPENDED.— Enter quantities used for tech- 
nique practice or for metals which may have 
been lost, etc. Explain on reverse side of form 
under "Explanation of expenditures of precious 
and special dental metals from column 6 on other 
side:." 



(5) The total for column 6 plus column 7 
is subtracted from column 5 and will be the entry 
for column 8. 

(6) Column 9 plus column 10 plus col- 
umn H plus column 12 is the total for the entry 
under column 13. 

(7) The entries under column 8 and col- 
umn 13 must be alike. 

(8) The dental officer responsible for the 
precious and special dental metals shall indicate 
the month and year and sign the STATEMENT. 

(9) The personnel of the audit board shall 
date and sign the INVENTORY. 

(b) Reverse of Form. — 

(1) Explanation of Expenditures of Pre- 
cious and Special Dental Metals From Column 6 
on Other Side. — Explain in detail the entries un- 
der column 6 on the front of the form. 

(2) Comment and Recommendation by 
Audit Board. — It is the responsibility of the audit 
board to make recommendations for improving 
the accounting methods. The board may make 
any other comment considered pertinent. 

(c) Instructions. — 

(1) The original NAVMED-1301 shall be 
filed in monthly sequence in the dental activity 
record files. They shall be available for inspec- 
tion ,at any time until disposed of in accordance 
with SECNAV Instruction P5212.5 series. 

(2) Copies shall not be sent to BUMED. 

(3) The total quantity of precious and 
special dental metals USED, as computed from 
the Precious Metal Issue Records, should balance 
with the totals of column 7, CASES DELIV- 
ERED, in the NAVMED-1301. 

(4) Precious and special dental metals car- 
ried in the Navy Stock Account shall not be 
taken up on the NAVMED-1301. 

6-157. Audit Board for Precious and Special 
Dental Metals 

(1) The audit board for the NAVMED-1301, State- 
ment and Inventory of Precious and Special Dental 
Metals, shall consist of three members, appointed by 
the commanding officer from among those on duty in 
the activity or facility. The members shall include at 
least one commissioned officer {a dental officer, when- 
ever possible) and two other members who may be 
commissioned officers or master/senior chief petty 
officers. The dental officer charged with the custody 
of the precious or special dental metals shall not be a 
member of the audit board. 

(2) The dental officer charged with the custody 
of precious and special dental metals shall pre- 
pare the STATEMENT, INVENTORY, and 
EXPLANATION portions of the NAVMED- 
1301 in advance of the meeting of the audit 
board. 

(3) The audit board shall: 

(a) Audit all records related to procurement. 



6-52a 
Change 57 



6-157A 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-159 



receipt, use, and disposition of precious and spe- 
cial dental metals, 

(b) Make a physical inventory of all pre- 
cious and special dental metals in the dental ac- 
tivity. 

(c) Reconcile the audit of the records and 
the inventory with the NAVMED-1301 sub- 
mitted by the dental officer. 

(d) Make any pertinent comment or recom- 
mendation on the reverse of the NAVMED-1301. 

(e) Date and sign the NAVMED-1301. 

(f) Submit the NAVMED-1301 to the com- 
manding officer for approval. 

6-157A. Dental Health Questionnaire, NAV- 
MED 6600/3 

(l)A NAVMED 6600/3 shall be filled out 
by/for each patient and reviewed by a dental 
officer prior to rendering dental care. It shall be- 
come part of the Dental Record and shall be 
maintained in the Dental Folder, DD 722-1, for 
reference and subsequent use in routing/treat- 
ment plan notations. 

6-157B. Navy Periodontal Screening Examina- 
tion, NAVMED 6600/4 

(1) Part I of form NAVMED 6600/4 provides 
instructions and space for scoring the results of 
the Navy Periodontal Disease Index examination. 



(2) Part II of form NAVMED 6600/4 provides 
instructions and space for scoring the results of 
the Navy Plaque Index examination. 

(3) The completed forms shall be maintained 
in the Dental Folder, DD 722-1, as a part of the 
dental record, 

6-158. NAVMED 6620/1, Individual Dental 
Officer — Daily Dental Service Record 

(1) This form is provided to individual dental 
officers to record dental procedures and services 
accomplished daily for the purpose of accumu- 
lating data for completion of the quarterly Den- 
tal Service Report (MED-6600-2) on DD Form 
477. Disposal of NAVMED 6620/1 's shall be ac- 
complished in accordance with SECNAV In- 
struction 5212.5 series. 

6-159. Dental Records Retirement 

(1) When a ship is decommissioned, or an ac- 
tivity is disestablished, all official correspondence 
and records shall be disposed of in accordance 
with SECNAV Instruction 5212.5 series. 

(2) When a ship is placed in a reserve status 
or an activity is placed in an inactive or mainte- 
nance status, all official records shall be processed 
in accordance with SECNAV Instruction 5212.5 
series and other current directives insofar as they 
apply to dental activities. 



6-52b 
Change 65 



6-T66 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-166 



Section XXII. DENTAL SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT 

Article 

Responsibility for Dental Supplies and Equipment 6-160 

Property Records 6-161 

Procurement of Dental Supplies and Equipment 6-162 

Disposition of Materiel 6-166 

Report of Defective or Excess Materiel 6-167 

Transfer of Custody of Property 6-168 

Transfer of Materiel Between Activities 6-169 

Dental Storerooms 6-170 

Custody of Narcotics and Precious and Special Dental Metals 6-171 

Issue of Dental Supplies and Equipment 6-172 

Dental Materiel for Naval Reserve Training Centers 6-173 

Operation, Care, and Maintenance of Dental Property 6-174 



6-160. Responsibility for Dental Supplies and 
Equipment 

(1) The dental officer in each dental facility 
shall be charged with custodial responsibility for 
all property assigned or received, and it shall be 
his responsibility to insure that inventories are 
conducted and records maintained as required 
by chapter 6, volume III, NAVCOMPT Manual, 
and current instructions. In U.S. naval hospitals 
and U.S. naval dispensaries, this is the responsi- 
bility of the commanding officer. 

6-161. Property Records 

(1) General, — The extent of property records 
maintained by dental facilities depends on the 
type of supply support received. 

(2) Supply Records. — 

(a) Capitalized activities operate under Navy 
Stock Fund accounting procedures and maintain 
cognizant symbol "L" material as a part of the 
retail system for medical and dental supplies 
under the management control of the Bureau of 
Supplies and Accounts. The dental shop store is 
placed under the dental officer for technical 
supervision. Stock records shall be maintained 
in accordance with BUSANDA Manual, volume 
II. 

(b) Noncapitalized activities do not operate 
under Navy Stock Fund accounting procedures, 
but maintain cognizant symbol "L" material out- 
side of the retail system in an end-use status. 
This type dental storeroom is under the direct 
management supervision of the dental officer. 
Stock records shall be maintained on NAVS- 
ANDA forms prescribed in BUSANDA Manual, 
volume II. Levels of supply and perpetual in- 
ventory record requirements shall be established 
in accordance with BUMEDINST 6700.14 series. 

(c) Satellite activities are noncapitalized 
activities that are assigned supply support from 
a nearby capitalized activity. Since these are 



considered consumer-type activities, they shall 
maintain no more than a 2 weeks' supply, and 
shall not maintain stock records. 

(d) Dental departments in ships shall main- 
tain stock records in accordance with BUSANDA 
Manual, volume III, and shall comply with the 
levels of supply .and perpetual inventory record, 
requirements of BUMEDINST 6700.14 series. 

(3) Plant Property Records. — 

(a) BUMED Managed Dental Activities. — 

(1) Activities assigned reporting responsi- 
bilities by NAVCOMPT Manual, volume 2, shall 
maintain plant property records and submit re- 
quired reports in accordance with NAVCOMPT 
Manual, volume 3, chapter 6. 

(2) Activities whose accounting functions 
are performed by another activity shall maintain 
records and files as prescribed by the command- 
ing officer of the activity performing the ac- 
counting function and the commanding officer 
of the activity served in accordance with NAV- 
COMPT Manual, volume 3, chapter 6. 

(b) Other Dental Facilities. — Dental serv- 
ices and dental departments shall maintain 
records as required by the commanding officer. 

6-162. Procurement of Dental Supplies and 
Equipment 

(1) All standard and nonstandard supplies and 
equipment shall be procured in accordance with 
current instructions issued by the cognizant au- 
thority. 

NOTE. — There ate no articles 6-163 through 6-165. 

6-166, Disposition of Materiel 

(1) Equipment on charge in the dental depart- 
ment shall not be disposed of or replaced unless 
by approved survey or transferred on an ap- 



6-52c 
Change 65 



6-167 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-172 



proved transfer voucher. A survey of large 
amounts of consumable supplies shall also be 
conducted when they have become unusable be- 
cause of deterioration, or lost as a result of pil- 
ferage, fire, etc. 

(2) All precious dental metal scraps, bench 
grindings, and sweepings of the silver, gold, and 
platinum group shall be disposed of in accord- 
ance with the procedures in the Defense Dispo- 
sal Manual (DSAM 4160.1). 

(3) Any precious metal taken from a patient's 
mouth shall be given to the patient. Should the 
patient decline to accept the precious metal, it 
shall be handled in accordance with current in- 
structions for the disposition of precious metal 
scrap. An entry of the action taken in each case 
shall be made in the Dental Record. 

6-167. Report of Defective or Excess Materiel 

(1) Any materiel found to be defective shall 
be reported as prescribed in the current joint 
FMSO & FLDBRBUMED Instruction. Excess 
property which cannot be returned to the supply 
system for credit shall be disposed of in accord- 
ance with the procedures in the Defense Dispo- 
sal Manual (DSAM 4160.1). 

6-168. Transfer of Custody of Property 

(1) When the dental property of a ship or sta- 
tion is transferred to a relieving dental activity 
representative, inventory of narcotics, precious 
and special dental metals, and alcohol is re- 
quired. 

(2) If a complete verification of the property 
inventory cannot be made before the departure 
of the transferring officer, a spot inventory of a 
random selection of other items shall be made as 
an indication of the reliability of property 
records. Gross discrepancies discovered through 
spot checks shall be considered sufficient cause to 
conduct a complete inventory of all items. A 
property survey shall be held for all items found 
to be missing. 

(3) The receiving officer shall make a com- 
plete inventory at the earliest practicable date 
and, in any event, within 20 days after taking 
charge (art. 0908.3, NAVREGS, 1948). He 
shall, in the event of any shortage, submit a re- 
quest to the commanding officer for a property 
survey to balance the records and be relieved of 
responsibility for the shortage. 

(4) Officers concerned will not be relieved of 
responsibility for the custody of equipment or 
supplies unless the expenditures have been au- 
thorized by competent authority. 



(5) If a dental officer is detached and no other 
dental personnel are attached, the commanding 
officer will designate the representative of the 
medical department, or, if there is no such repre- 
sentative, another officer, to accept the custody of 
the dental property. 



6-169. Transfer of Materiel Between Activities 

(1) Dental equipment or supplies transferred 
to other activities will be properly invoiced in 
the account in which carried and such invoices 
shall be used as expenditure documents to clear 
through the accounting records. 

(2) Equipment and supplies received from an- 
other activity shall be taken up on accounting 
records in the account in which received by 
means of invoices prepared by the transferring 
activity. 

6-170. Dental Storerooms 

(1) The dental officer of a ship shall take 
charge of and be responsible for the dental store- 
room, keeping the key in his own custody or in 
the custody of his representative. 

(2) Custody of dental storerooms at other ac- 
tivities is dependent upon the regulations gov- 
erning the stores account in which the material 
is carried. 



6-171. Custody of Precious and Special Dental 
Metals 

(1) Custodial responsibility for bulk supplies 
of precious and special dental metals shall be 
vested in a commissioned officer and all stores of 
these items shall be maintained in locked storage. 
Senior dental technicians, or civilian personnel, 
shall be permitted the custody of small working 
stocks of precious and special dental metals for 
further issuance to laboratory use. 

(2) All personnel having custody of precious 
and special dental metals shall insure that proper 
protection and preservation are maintained and 
accounting procedures are afforded this material 
in accordance with articles 6-156 and 6—157. 

6-172. Issue of Dental Supplies and Equipment 

(1) Dental supplies and equipment 
shall be issued for use on properly au- 
thenticated issue documents applicable 
to the stores account or end-use status 



6-52d 

Change 65 



6-173 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-174 



in which the material is carried at individual 
activities concerned. Issue documents utili2ed for 
this purpose shall be properly priced and cleared 
through accounting records as expenditures. 

6-173. Dental Materiel for Naval Reserve 
Training Centers 

(1) The initial outfitting list of dental materiel 
for Naval Reserve training centers is published in 
Bumed Instructions. Requirements for initial out- 
fitting and replenishment materiel shall be requisi- 
tioned from the Navy Supply System via the naval 
district or river command commandant. 

6-174. Operation, Care, and Maintenance 
of Dental Property 

(1) The responsible dental officer shall require 
all cognizant persons to properly discharge their 
responsibilities in connection with the care, conser- 
vation, and maintenance of Government property. 
All instructions, manuals, wiring diagrams, parts 
listings, and pictorials received with equipment shall 
be clearly labeled and retained as long as the equip- 
ment is in operation or on the ship or station in an 
operable status. 

(2) A preventive maintenance program should 
be established in each activity. This program 
should be administered by a dental repair techni- 



cian, if one is attached. The program should in- 
clude: 

(a) Periodic cleaning and lubrication of mov- 
ing parts. 

to) Protection of painted, plated, or other 
surfaces. 

<c) Adjustments, calibration, and necessary 
repairs. 

<d) Reporting defects and operational hazards. 

(3) Personnel operating or using dental equip- 
ment shall; 

(a) Familiarize themselves with instructions 
furnished by the manufacturer or other competent 
source before attempting to operate the equipment. 

(b) Operate the equipment within its rated 
capacity. 

(c) Comply with safety regulations for the op- 
eration of electrical equipment. 

(d> Properly secure the apparatus, when not 
in use. 

(e) Report promptly any defects, conditions 
which tend to Increase the hazards of operation, or 
need for repairs, adjustment, or calibration. (See 
arts. 0712, 0903.9, 1220, Navregs, 1948.) 

(4) When equipment requires repainting, such 
reflnishing shall be accomplished in the standard 
cream color (Hue 2ca, Color Harmony Manual of 
Container Corporation of America) or the original 
standard olive green, as determined by the senior 
dental officer. 



6-57 
Change 73 



r 



c 



o 



6-178 CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 6-182 

Section XXIV. PLANNING DENTAL FACILITIES 

Article 

Facility Planning 6-178 

Dental Officer's Responsibility . 6-179 

Commanding Officer's Responsibility 6-180 

BUMED Responsibilities 6-181 

Naval Facilities Engineering Command (NAVFAC) 6-182 

Dental Operating Rooms Ashore 6-183 

X-ray Exposure Room and Darkroom 6-184 

Oral Hygiene Treatment Room 6-185 

Prosthetic Laboratory 6-186 

Auxiliary Spaces 6-187 

Field Dental Facilities 6-188 

Dental Facilities in Ships 6-189 

Ship Alterations 6^190 



6-178. Facility Planning 

(1) Under the Naval Shore Facilities Planning 
and Programming System, the needs of a shore 
activity for dental treatment facilities are based 
upon and derived from the mission, base loading 
(authorized patient population) and assigned 
tasks of the activity as described in SECNAV 
Instructions or instructions of the superior-in- 
command, and/or in the Logistic Support Re- 
quirements (LSR) Reports, when specified and 
available (see OPNAVINST 4000.72 series). This 
data is then converted to quantity and type of 
facilities necessary to provide dental care. 
OPNAVINST 11010.1 series prescribed the 
policy for the Navy Shore Facilities Planning 
and Programming System. NAVFACINST 
11010.44 series outlines the detailed procedures 
whereby individual facilities are planned and 
programmed. NAVFAC P-80 provides facility 
planning factors and other planning data for 
guidance in computing quantitative facility re- 
quirements. 

6-179. Dental Officer's Responsibility 

(1) The dental officer at a shore activity is 
responsible to the commanding officer for rec- 
ommending necessary modifications to improve 
the efficiency of the dental treatment facility. He 
shall, in conjunction with the public works 
officer, develop dental facility requirements and 
submit them to the commanding officer for in- 
clusion in the Military Construction Program 
Objectives. 

6-180. Commanding Officer's Responsibility 

(1) The commanding officer shall determine 
the essential facilities required for accomplishing 
the mission, tasks, and functions of the command. 
He will initiate, and jointly with the Engineering 



Field Division of the Naval Facilities Engineering 
Command, prepare the Basic Facility Require- 
ments List (BFRL) for the activity using the 
planning factors and criteria in NAVFAC P-80 
and other directives. The proposed BFRL is then 
forwarded via the appropriate chain of command 
to Commander, Naval Facilities Engineering 
Command, for approval. The BFRL is the begin- 
ning reference point for all subsequent actions of 
the system. 

6-181. BUMED Responsibilities 

(1) BUMED will define operational require- 
ments and technical criteria applicable to the 
planning, design, operation, and maintenance 
of shore facilities in its area of technical and 
logistic responsibility and will ensure that ade- 
quate dental facilities are included in all planning 
documents which are developed in support of 
future programs and requirements. BUMED will 
maintain planning criteria to assist activities in 
determining dental facility requirements. 

6—182. Naval Facilities Engineering Command 

(NAVFAC) 

(1) In general, NAVFAC exercises lead re- 
sponsibilities for performance of activity item 
planning, military installation planning, and civil 
engineering. NAVFAC will apply operational re- 
quirements and technical criteria provided by 
BUMED to the planning and design of all dental 
facilities ashore. NAVFAC will develop the Mili- 
tary Construction Program Objectives, and via the 
Navy Military Construction Review Board, sub- 
mit the Annual Military Construction Program 
to the Chief of Naval Operations. The Chief of 
Naval Operations will review and approve such 
programs for further submission to higher 
authority and the Congress, as appropriate. 



n Feb n 



6-61 

Change 73 



6-183 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-188 



6-183. Dental Operating Rooms Ashore 

(1) The primary unit of planning for dental 
facilities is the dental operating room (DOR). 
There are several factors to be considered in de- 
termining the total number of DOR's that will 
be required at an activity, the most important 
of these being the number of personnel to be 
supported. DOR's should be provided for dental 
officers attached to activities not having dental 
facilities, such as fleet aircraft service squadrons 
and mobile construction battalions. 

(2) In planning for dental facilities, the specific 
number of DOR's is determined by the number 
of dental officers required to serve the authorized 
patient population. For planning purposes, the 
following criteria apply: 

Recruit training commands . .1 dental officer per 90 

recruit input per month. 

Hospitals 1 dental officer per 250 

operating beds. 

All other facilities 1 dental officer per 700 

authorized patient loading. 

(3) NAVFAC P-80 provides detailed instruc- 
tions for computing quantative DOR require- 
ments. 

(4) Additional DOR's may be programmed to 
support requirements for authorized internships, 
residencies, and postdoctoral fellowships. 

6-184. X-Ray Exposure Room and Darkroom 

(1) An X-ray exposure room and darkroom 
should be programmed regardless of the size of 
the activity with an additional X-ray exposure 
room and darkroom programmed in accordance 
with the planning factors in NAVFAC P-80. 

(2) Recruit training commands shall provide 
a panoramic radiographic capability to meet the 
requirements of recruit populations. 

6-185. Oral Hygiene Treatment Room (OHT) 

(1) OHT's are based on the authorized patient 
load. Determination of the specific number of 
OHT's required to support the authorized patient 
loading is outlined in NAVFAC P-80. 

6-186. Prosthetic Laboratory 

(1) A dental prosthetic laboratory may be 
established at an activity when authorized by 
BUMED. There are three categories of dental 
prosthetic laboratories which have been devel- 
oped to facilitate the provision of prosthetic care 
to the authorized patient population. These 
categories include the Dental Prosthetic Labora- 
tory (DPL), the Limited Dental Prosthetic Labo- 
ratory (LDPL, and the Area Dental Prosthetic 
Laboratory (ADPL). 



(a) The Dental Prosthetic Laboratory (DLP) 
provides a full prosthetic capability, with the 
necessary equipment and personnel assigned. 

(b) The Limited Dental Prosthetic Labora- 
tory (LDPL) provides the armamentarium to 
make impressions, pour models and casts, survey 
the case, select molds and shades, repair dentures, 
invest inlays and crowns, and insert finished 
dentures. The LDPL is supported by a DPL or an 
ADPL upon which it is dependent for the actual 
fabrication of the prosthetic appliance. The con- 
cept of the LDPL is to provide a limited pros- 
thodontic capability to smaller and more isolated 
activities that do not warrant the investment of 
equipment and personnel due to their limited 
base loading of personnel. 

(c) The Area Dental Prosthetic Laboratory 
(ADPL) provides a complete prosthetic labora- 
tory capability and a concentration of expensive 
specialized equipment and highly trained pros- 
thetic technicians. It provides laboratory support 
to several activities and is designed for production 
line fabrication of prosthetic appliances. The 
ADPL came into being to support the LDPL 
concept in order to absorb the additional denture 
fabrication workload. 

(d) When an orthodontist is assigned to an 
activity, the prosthetic laboratory providing serv- 
ice to the activity shall also provide laboratory 
support to the orthodontist. 

(2) The design and layout of the laboratory 
is a local determination based on the number of 
dental prosthetic technicians to be accommodated. 
BUMED will maintain planning criteria to assist 
activities in determining prosthetic laboratory 
requirements. 

6-187. Auxiliary Spaces 

(1) Adequate auxiliary spaces should be in- 
cluded in the planning of dental facilities. These 
spaces may include all or several of the following: 
dental officer's office, administrative and person- 
nel office, records and appointments office, 
property and accounting office, storerooms, linen 
rooms, utility rooms, cleaning gear closets, staff 
and patient toilets, locker rooms, duty rooms, 
conference room, lecture and training room, 
library, sterilizing rooms, recovery room, repair 
shop, etc. 

6-188. Field Dental Facilities 

(1) Fleet Marine Force. — Dental companies are 
separate force-level organizations commanded by 
an officer of the Navy Dental Corps and composed 
of Navy dental personnel and marines. The dental 
company is designed to support major Fleet 
Marine Force units. They are capable of provid- 
ing tailored detachments to support smaller FMF 



6-62 

Change 84 



26 Mar 75 



6-189 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-190 



units and also combine with other dental com- 
panies in providing maximum dental support 
where required. While in garrison, a dental com- 
pany is considered a tenant of the Marine Corps 
establishment at which it is located and depends 
entirely upon that activity's dental facilities for 
operating space, equipment, and supplies. When 
the company "mounts out," either for combat 
operations or for training exercises, its field 
equipment is utilized. 

(2) Mobile Construction Battalions. — Dental 
personnel are assigned to construction battalions. 
When the battalion is in garrison the Navy 
establishment at which it is located provides 
dental operating space, equipment, and supplies. 
When the construction battalion or its detach- 
ments (units) deploy, the dental personnel ac- 
companying the deployment utilize field equip- 
ment. 

6-189. Dental Facilities in Ships 

(1) Dental spaces in ships are allocated by the 
Naval Ship Systems Command (NAVSHIPS) in 
accordance with the dental support requirements 
of the particular type of vessel. The Naval Ship 
Systems Command, in collaboration with 
BUMED, establishes the location of the dental 
department and general plan for the dental spaces. 

(2) The Naval Ship Systems Command's Pub- 
lication, General Specifications for Ships of the 
United States Navy, contains requirements for 
initially fitting and equipping dental spaces 



aboard ships. NAVSHIPS has supply responsibil- 
ity for material which is permanently attached 
to the hull structure, such as desks, lavatories, 
file cabinets, lighting fixtures, and certain items 
of fixed dental equipment. 

(3) NAVSHIPS maintains Standard and Type 
Drawings for prosthetic laboratories, dental 
officer's office, and department administrative 
spaces. The designs for dental treatment spaces 
are worked out between NAVSHIPS and 
BUMED representatives in planning conferences. 

6-190. Ship Alterations 

(1) Modification to the dental spaces of ships 
in commission is accomplished by a ship altera- 
tion. In ships with inadequate dental facilities, it 
is the responsibility of the dental officer to initi- 
ate corrective action by presenting a proposal for 
alteration to the commanding officer. If the com- 
manding officer concurs in the need for the altera- 
tion, the command will submit a request to Naval 
Ship Systems Command that a ship alteration be 
issued. NAVSHIPS will refer the request to 
BUMED for technical review. If the request is 
approved following final review by NAVSHIPS, 
a ship alteration will be issued. In advance of 
scheduled overhauls, NAVSHIPS reviews out- 
standing ship alterations and prepares an author- 
ized list of alterations to be accomplished during 
the overhaul period. 

(2) During alterations to the dental facilities, 
the dental officer should provide technical advice 
and assistance as required. 

NOTE-There are no articles 6-191 and 6-192. 



26 Mar 75 



6-63 
Change 84 



< 

1 



c 



( 



c 



6-193 



CHAPTER 6. DENTAL CORPS 



6-195 



Section XXV. INSPECTION OF DENTAL ACTIVITIES AND FACILITIES 



Inspection Objectives 

General Instructions 

Scope of Inspections 

6-193. Inspection Objectives 

( 1 ) Evaluate the effectiveness of the inspected 
command or activity in the performance of as- 
signed mission, functions, and tasks. 

(2) Determine the adequacy as to quantity, 
quality, and management of resources available to 
the inspected command or activity in the per- 
formance of assigned mission, functions, and 
tasks. 

(3) Evaluate the effect of any deficiencies, in 
either administration or resources, on the ability 
of the inspected command or activity to perform 
its assigned mission, functions, and tasks. 

(4) Recommend, via the chain of command, 
appropriate action to correct deficiencies. 

6-194. General Instructions 

(1) Dental facilities shall be inspected or 
visited as follows: 

(a) Dental activities under the command of 
the Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, shall 
be inspected trie nnially by the Inspector General, 
Dental. Command inspections shall be conducted 
in accordance with OPNAVINST 5040.7 (series) 
and BUMEDINST 5040.1 (series). 

(b) Dental departments of activities not 
under the command of Chief, Bureau of Medicine 
and Surgery, shall be inspected by the cognizant 
staff dental officer or the dental officer ordered 
to assist the immediate superior in command in 
conducting the command inspection in accord- 
ance with OPNAVINST 5040.7 (series). 

(c) Marine Corps activities shall normally 
be inspected or visited biennially by the dental 
officer on the staff of the Commandant of the 
Marine Corps and annually by the dental officer 
on the staff of the Commanding General, Fleet 
Marine Force, Atlantic or Pacific, as appropriate. 

(d) When requested, the Inspector General, 
Dental, shall assist immediate superiors in com- 
mand by providing dental technical assistance 
for conducting a command inspection. 

(e) Staff dental officers shall provide techni- 
cal assistance as requested by the area coordinator 
or immediate superior in the area coordination 
review or command inspection. 

(f) With the concurrence of immediate su- 
periors in command, the Inspector General, Den- 
tal, shall conduct professional/technical visits to 
the dental departments of naval shore activities 



Article 

6_!93 

6-194 

6-195 

and shore based fleet activities and commands as 
direct liaison with BUMED concerning technical and 
professional dental matters and policies of partic- 
ular interest to the Dental Division. 

(g) The Inspector General, Dental, will maintain 
liaison with the Chief of Naval Operations (NAV1NS- 
GEN) in all matters concerning inspection of dental 
activities and facilities. 

6-195. Scope of Inspections 

(1) Bureau Commanded Dental Activities. — 
Inspection of a dental activity under the com- 
mand of the Bureau should include, but not be 
limited to, the following: 

(a) Management and Administration. — 

(1) Performance of the assigned mission. 

(2) Organization and organization chart 
of the activity and internal directives. 

( 3 ) Development of procedures to the end 
that the activity will operate according to a 
functional plan consistent with the best possible 
utilization of personnel and available funds. 

(4) Cleanliness, sanitation, and appear- 
ance of the dental activity. 

(5) Internal and external security. 

(6) Adequacy of public relations. 

(7) Dissemination of information to per- 
sonnel of the command. 

(b) Personnel. — 

( 1 ) Study of personnel requirements. 

(2) Maintenance of discipline and admin- 
istration of personnel. 

(3) Appearance and bearing of military 
personnel. 

(4) Adequacy of military professional and 
technical training programs (residencies, ad- 
vanced training, technician training). 

( 5 ) General educational facilities for per- 
sonnel of the command. 

(6) Physical education facilities, athletics, 
and recreational programs. 

(7) Indoctrination of newly reported per- 
sonnel. 

(8 ) Maintenance of personnel records, of- 
ficer and enlisted. 

(c) Dental Services, Operations, and Readi- 
ness. — 

( 1 ) Adequacy of professional care. 

(2) Professional standards. 

(3) Peacetime operation. 

(4) Disaster and emergency plans. 

( 5 ) Condition of materiel readiness. 



6-65 
Change 73 



6-195 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



6-195 



(d) Materiel. — 

(1) Security and custody of Government 
property, including the security and accounta- 
bility of precious metals, alcohol, and narcotics. 

(2) Stock levels. 

(3) Condition. 

(e) Facilities. — 

( 1 ) Adequacy and utilization of resources. 

(2) Planned changes or modifications to 
the dental facility. 

(f) Special Interest Items. — As listed in 
OPNAVINST 5040.7 (series). 

(2) Dental Service in Hospitals. — Inspections 
of the dental service in a hospital should include, 
but not be limited to: 

(a) Management and Administration. — 

(1) Performance of the assigned mission. 

( 2 ) Assurance that the maximum effort is 
placed on dental care and that other activities 
except essential training are kept to a minimum. 

(3) Organization and internal directives 
of the service. 

(4) Cleanliness, sanitation, and appear- 
ance of the dental service. 

{ 5 ) Internal and external security. 

(b) Personnel. — 

(1) Personnel requirements. 

(2) Maintenance of discipline. 

(3) Appearance and bearing of military 
personnel. 

(4) Adequacy of the dental intern and res- 
idency programs when such are being conducted, 
and technician training. 

(5) Indoctrination of newly reported per- 
sonnel. 

(c) Dental Services, Operations, and Readi- 
ness. — 

(1) Adequacy of professional care. 

(2) Professional standards. 

(3) Peacetime operation. 

(4) Disaster and emergency plans. 



(5) Condition of materiel readiness. 

(d) Materiel. — 

(1) Security and accountability of pre- 
cious metals, alcohol, and narcotics. 

(2) Adequacy of supply support. 

(3) Condition and utilization of materiel. 

(e) Facilities. — ■ 

(1) Adequacy of space assigned to the 
dental service. 

(2) Planned changes or modifications to 
the dental facility. 

(3) Dental Departments. — Inspections of den- 
tal departments at naval shipyards, air activities, 
stations, bases, and other activities not under the 
command of BUMED, should include: 

(a) Management and Administration. — 

( 1 ) Mission and organization. 

(2) Location in relation to center of pop- 
ulation. 

(3) Records and reports. 

(4) Log or journal and department or- 
ganization and instruction book. 

(b) Personnel. — 

(1) Personnel requirements. 

(2) Adequacy of professional and techni- 
cal training programs. 

(c) Dental Services, Operations, and Readi- 
ness. — 

( 1 ) Personnel dependent upon the activi- 
ty for dental care. 

(2) Adequacy of professional care. 

(d) Materiel,- — 

( 1 ) Stock levels. 

(2) Security, care, and custody of proper- 
ty, including narcotics and alcohol. 

(3) Condition. 

(e) Facilities. — 

(1) Adequacy and utilization of facilities. 

(2) Planned changes or modifications to 
dental facility. 



Change 73 



s 







r 



< 



( 



Chapter 7 

MEDICAL SERVICE CORPS 



Sections 

Articles 

I. Establishment 7- 1 through 7- 3 

II. Appointments 7-4 through 7- 7 

III. Employment 7-8 through 7- 9 

IV. Education and Training 7-10 through 7-13 



Section I. ESTABLISHMENT 

Article 

Enabling Legislation 7-1 

Grades and Authorized Strength 7-2 

Chief of the Medical Service Corps 7-3 



7-1. Enabling Legislation 

(1) The Medical Service Corps was established 
as a staff corps of the United States Navy on 4 
August 1947 by the Army-Navy Medical Services 
Corps Act of 1947 (34 USC 30 a-j). This staff 
corps was created as a component of the Medical 
Department of the Navy to complement the func- 
tions of the Medical and Dental Corps. Members 
of the Medical Service Corps are governed by all 
laws and regulations pertaining to commissioned 
officers of other staff corps, except when specific 
exceptions are set forth. 

(2) The act provided for the corps to consist 
of such sections in the various administrative, 
professional, and scientific specialties as the Secre- 
tary of the Navy considers necessary. The corps 
currently consists of the Health Care Administra- 
tion, Medical Allied Sciences, Medical Specialist, 
Optometry, Pharmacy, and Podiatry Sections. 
The Medical Allied Sciences Section includes spe- 
cialists such as bacteriologists, chemists, entomol- 
ogists, physiologists, and psychologists. The Med- 
ical Specialist Section includes dietitians, physical 
therapists, and occupational therapists. 

7-2. Grades and Authorized Strength 

(1) The Medical Service Corps consists of 
officers in the grades of ensign through captain. 
These officers take precedence next after officers 
of the Dental Corps serving in the same grade 
and having the same dates of rank (10 USC 
5508). 



(2) The total authorized number of Regular 
officers of the corps is limited by law (10 USC 
5404). The authorized active duty strength of the 
corps, including Regular, Reserve, and Tempo- 
rary officers, is adjusted periodically as required. 

(3) Within the authorized strength of the 
corps, the actual strength of each of the compo- 
nent sections is contingent on, and determined 
by, requirements for officers in the specialties 
concerned. 

7-3. Chief of the Medical Service Corps 

(1) The Chief of the Medical Service Corps is 
appointed by the Secretary of the Navy, upon the 
recommendation of the Surgeon General, from 
officers on the active list of the Navy in the Medi- 
cal Service Corps holding permanent appoint- 
ments in grades not below lieutenant commander. 
The Chief is appointed for a term of not more 
than 4 years, to serve at the pleasure of the Secre- 
tary. While so serving, he holds the grade of cap- 
tain in the Navy and is entitled to the pay and al- 
lowances of an officer in that grade. His perma- 
nent status as a commissioned officer in the Medi- 
cal Service Corps is not disturbed by his appoint- 
ment as Chief. (10 USC 5139(a).) 

(2) An officer who is retired for any reason 
while serving as Chief of the Medical Service 
Corps or who, after serving at least V/i years as 
Chief, is retired after completion of that service 
while serving in a lower grade may, at the discre- 
tion of the President, be retired with the grade of 
captain and with retired pay based on that grade 
(10 USC 5139(b)). 



7-1 

Change 63 



7-4 



Source 

Qualifications 

Grades 

Augmentation Program 

7-4. Source 

(1) Chief medical or dental service warrants, 
medical or dental service warrants, and persons in 
the Hospital Corps of the Navy in the rates of 
hospital corpsman first class or dental technician 
first class, or senior, who possess such qualifica- 
tions as may be prescribed by the Secretary of the 
Navy, and other persons who possess such requi- 
site qualifications and who are graduates of 
accredited schools of pharmacy, optometry, or 
other schools or colleges with degrees in sciences 
allied to medicine or such degrees as may be ap- 
proved by the Surgeon General, may be ap- 
pointed to commissioned grades in the Medical 
Service Corps, 



7-8 



Article 

7-4 
7-5 
7-6 
7-7 

Service Corps, Regular Navy, will be in the grade 
of ensign, except that persons holding or who 
have completed all requirements for doctoral de- 
grees in approved specialties may be appointed in 
the grade of lieutenant, junior grade. Individuals 
appointed in the Medical Service Corps, Naval 
Reserve, are granted service credit for advanced 
education and professional experience acquired 
prior to appointment. Original appointments in 
the Naval Reserve may be made in the grade of 
ensign through lieutenant depending on the 
amount of service credit to which appointees are 
entitled in accordance with current Secretary of 
the Navy regulations governing such appoint- 
ments. 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 
Section C. APPOINTMENTS 



7-5. Qualifications 

(1) MSC officer procurement programs are 
open to men and women, except appointment in 
the Medical, Allied Sciences Section specialty of 
Radiation Health is restricted to men. 

(2) Applicants must be found physically, men- 
tally, morally, and professionally qualified prior 
to appointment to commissioned grades as Regu- 
lar or Reserve officers. The general and specific 
requirements for appointment are set forth in the 
BUPERS Manual, in BUPERS Instructions (1120 
series), and in the U.S. Navy Recruiting Service 
Manual. Requirements vary with the specific pro- 
grams, with the sections of the corps in which ap- 
pointments are sought, and with the status of the 
candidates. 

7-6, Grades 

(1) Original appointments in the Medical 



7-7. Augmentation Program 

(1) The augmentation program provides an 
opportunity for Reserve officers of the U.S. Navy 
and Regular Navy temporary commissioned 
officers to request permanent appointments as 
commissioned officers in the Medical Service 
Corps of the Regular Navy. Eligibility require- 
ments are contained in BUPERS Instructions 
(1120 series). Each officer who is recommended 
for transfer will be assigned a lineal position on 
the appropriate lineal list according to his date of 
rank in the grade in which serving at the time of 
transfer and will be permanently appointed in a 
grade appropriate thereto. Each officer perma- 
nently appointed in a lower grade than the grade 
in which serving will also be temporarily reap- 
pointed in a higher grade. No permanent ap- 
pointment will be above the grade of lieutenant. 



Section III. EMPLOYMENT 



Generkl Duties 

Specific Duties 

7-8. General Duties 

(1) Medical Service Corps officers render sup- 
port to the Medical Department by performing 
primary duties in administration and various pro- 
fessional and scientific specialties allied to medi- 



Article 

7-8 

7-9 

cine. In addition to the primary duties prescribed 
for the billet to which a Medical Service Corps 
officer is detailed, such officer may be assigned 
any additional duties which he is qualified to per- 
form and which contribute to the proper func- 



7-2 

Change 63 



7-9 



CHAPTER 7. MEDICAL SERVICE CORPS 



7-9 



tioning of the command, except those duties con- 
travening the provisions of international agree- 
ments such as the Geneva Conventions (art. 1355 
ofNAVREGS<1948)). 

7-9. Specific Duties 

(1) Subject to the direction of the command- 
ing officer or other proper authority, the specific 
employment of Medical Service Corps officers, by 
Section, follows: 

(a) Medical Allied Sciences. — Under the ad- 
ministrative supervision of senior officers of the 
Medical Corps, when available, perform profes- 
sionally independent duties within the various 
sciences allied to medicine. Such assignments are 
effected in both the operational and research 
areas of emphasis in a wide variety of installa- 
tions. Initial assignment can be expected in the 
various Navy and Marine training and hospital 
settings. With the development of military-pro- 
fessional skills and experience, assignments re- 
quiring a greater degree of sophistication in re- 
search design and methodology may be antici- 
pated. Billets are located in medical centers, hos- 
pitals, medical research activities, disease vector 
control centers, Medical Department schools, dis- 
pensaries, preventive medicine units, foreign 
groups with medical detachments, and a wide va- 
riety of Marine Corps activities. 

(b) Optometry. — Perform duty under the 
direction of the medical officer; conduct external 
examination of the eyes and their appendages; de- 
termine visual acuity, oculomotor, or oculorefrac- 
tive errors or defects, and prescribe and fit appro- 
priate lenses therefor; bring to the attention of 
the medical officer all patients who have or who 
are suspected of having pathological or abnormal 
conditions or who may require medical or surgi- 
cal treatment; sign prescriptions for corrective 
lenses and orthoptic training; instruct assigned 
personnel "in optometric fabrication and allied 
techniques; have immediate supervision of the 
professional services rendered in an optical unit; 
and supervise optometric technicians in fabricat- 
ing and dispensing spectacles. Billets are located 
in medical centers, hospitals, dispensaries, Marine 
Corps components, and BUMED. 

(c) Pharmacy. — Supervise pharmaceutical 
services; participate in research and investiga- 
tions concerning pharmaceutical items, material 
procurement, and industrial mobilization; advise 



medical and dental officers in matters of pharma- 
cology; and engage in the instruction of Medical 
Department personnel. Billets are located in med- 
ical centers, hospitals, medical research activities, 
dispensaries, the Defense Medical Material Board, 
The Defense Supply Agency, and BUMED. 

(d) Podiatry.— Perform duty under the supervision 
of the medical officer and be responsible for the pre- 
vention, diagnosis, and treatment of foot disorders by 
medical and surgical means, consulting with the med- 
ical officer in case of systemic disease manifesta- 
tions in the foot. Billets will ordinarily be located in 
medical centers, hospitals, dispensaries, and Marine 
Corps activities. 

(e) Health Care Administration. — Admin- 
ister nonprofessional aspects of medical and dental 
departments ashore and afloat; manage adminis- 
trative functions such as fiscal and supply, person- 
nel, records, food service, security, maintenance, 
and special services in support of missions of 
activities under the primary support of BUMED; 
manage environmental sanitation program func- 
tions under the direction of the medical officer; 
administer and serve as instructors in designated 
training programs in Medical Department schools 
and other activities; perform medical service 
planning and logistic duties in major staffs; and 
serve as assistants to inspectors in reviewing 
administrative organization and operations of 
medical and dental activities. Billets are located 
in designated vessels, Marine Corps components, 
unified and specified staffs, district and fleet staffs, 
the Defense Supply Agency, the Navy Depart- 
ment, medical centers, hospitals, medical research 
activities, Medical Department schools, dispen- 
saries, dental clinics, and preventive medicine 
units. 

(f) Medical Specialist. — Dietitians, occupa- 
tional therapists, and physical therapists perform 
duties in the specialties in which qualified; super- 
vise assigned personnel; and engage in the in- 
struction and training of Medical Department 
personnel. Billets are located in medical centers 
and hospitals. 

(2) An officer of the Medical Service Corps 
may be detailed as commanding officer or officer 
in charge of such activity as appropriate to this 
corps (art. 1351 of NAVREGS (1948); 10 USC 
5945). For temporary succession to command, see 
article 1377 of Navy Regulations (1948). 



7-3 

Change 73 



7 _jo MANTFAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 

Section IV. EDUCATION AND TRAINING 

Purpose 



Basic 

Operational 

Formal 

7-10. Purpose 

(1) The authority and responsibility for the pro- 
fessional education and training of Medical De- 
partment military personnel are vested in the 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery by articles 0431 
and 0432 of Navy Regulations. Since the mission 
of the Medical Service Corps is to support the Medi- 
cal Department in discharging its worldwide obli- 
gation as part of the U.S. Navy, the training 
program for the corps is designed to provide officers 
with appropriate qualifications to fulfill that pur- 
pose. This is the fundamental justification for such 
a training program and, while other benefits accrue, 
they are secondary. 

7-11. Basic 

(1) The qualification standards for appointment 
in the Medical Service Corps establish a presump- 
tion that an appointee is qualified to embark on a 
career in the corps and to perform the general duties 
required of a junior officer. 

(2) Either before or immediately subsequent to 
commissioning, Medical Service Corps officers un- 
dergo basic orientation and indoctrination. The ob- 
jective is to orient them in naval customs, traditions, 
and regulations, and to develop skills in naval lead- 
ership, administration, and related subjects. 

7-12. Operational 

(1) On completion of the basic indoctrination 
course, continued instruction of Medical Service 
Corps officers then becomes a command respon- 
sibility. Subject to the concurrence of the com- 
manding officer, the administrative officer or senior 
Medical Service Corps officer, as appropriate, shall 
establish, coordinate, and maintain an organized 
training program for Medical Service Corps officers. 
He shall instruct junior officers in their duties and 
responsibilities and shall familiarize theih with the 
mission, responsibility, and scope of the command. 
Organized instruction on pertinent military and 
Medical Department subjects is vital to the success 
of the program. The broadening of mental outlook 
and resultant increase in professional knowledge 
will enable the officers to better meet the duties, 
responsibilities, and complexities of higher rank. 

(2) Experience acquired through an officer's ded- 
icated performance of duty, coupled with progres- 
sive assignments involving greater responsibilities, 
is most significant to his professional development. 
Concurrently, participation in part-time academic 
courses taken either by correspondence or in person 



7-13 



Article 
_ 7-10 

7-11 
_ 7-12 

7-13 



during off-duty hours is encouraged. Courses of- 
fered by civilian educational institutions, when of 
service benefit, can in part be underwritten finan- 
cially under the terms of current Bupers and Bumed 
Instructions. Further, attendance at professional 
and scientific meetings, which, are held in most 
locales, provides an effective means whereby an of- 
ficer may keep abreast with advances in his spe- 
cialty. 

(3) Each officer has a major share in the manage- 
ment and planning of his own career. He has a 
primary responsibility for his own military char- 
acter and professional competence. 

7-13. Formal 

(1) A formal training program for Medical Serv- 
ice Corps officers, encompassing full-time academic 
training in service and civilian institutions, is ad- 
ministered by the Bureau. The general objectives 
are: 

<a) To provide for the manning of every billet 
by an officer of appropriate qualifications in order 
that the maximum effectiveness of each position 
may be achieved. 

(b) To satisfy the normal desire for self-im- 
provement. 

(c) To advance the Navy's contribution to the 
fields in which Medical Service Corps officers op- 
erate and receive training, 

(2) The following are general points of philos- 
ophy guiding the administration of the Medical 
Service Corps training program: 

(a) Each training assignment must result in 
demonstrable benefit to the service. 

(b) In each assignment, the qualifications of 
the individual to pursue the training and to apply 
its fruits must be maximal. 

(c) Each assignment must be consistent with 
the individual's career pattern. 

(d) Such resources as are available may be 
devoted to the training program but not to the det- 
riment of the continuing fulfillment of the corps' 
responsibilities in operating billets. 

(e> In order that maximum service benefit 
may be assured, the choice of institutions in which 
training is to be given and decisions about the cur- 
riculum content are the functions of Bumed, due 
regard being given to the wishes of individuals 
concerned. 

(3) The current curriculums available, eligibility 
requirements, and processing procedures are set 
forth in a Bumed Instruction (1520 series). 



7-4 

Change 12 



r 



i 



L_ 



Chapter 8 

NURSE CORPS 



Sections 



Articles 

I. Organization 8- 1 thru 8- 4 

II. Nurse Corps Personnel Matters 8- 5 thru 8-11 

III. Duty Assignments 8-12 thru 8-19 

IV. Education and Training 8-20 thru 8-24 

V. Management and Administration 8-25 thru 8-29 



Section I. ORGANIZATION 

Article 

Mission 8-1 



Establishment 

Director of the Navy Nurse Corps 

Nursing Division, BUMED 

8-1. Mission 

(1) The primary mission of the Navy Nurse 
Corps is to provide professional nursing care to, 
and promote the health of, Navy and Marine 
Corps personnel, their dependents and others as 
authorized by law. In addition, the Nurse Corps 
provides teaching, training, and supervision of 
Hospital Corps personnel in the practice of nurs- 
ing. 

8-2. Establishment 

(1) The Nurse Corps was created by an Act of 
Congress on May 13, 1908 (35 Stat. 127, 146). 
The present Nurse Corps, a component of the 
Medical Department, was established as a Staff 
Corps of the Navy by the Act of April 16, 1947 
(as revised and reenacted 10 USC 6027). The 
Nurse Corps Reserve is authorized by the Reserve 
Officer Personnel Act of 1954 (50 USC 1181, 
1305). 

8-3. Director of the Navy Nurse Corps 

(1) The Director of the Navy Nurse Corps is 
appointed by the Secretary of the Navy upon the 
recommendation of the Surgeon General from 
among the officers on the active list of the Navy 
in the Nurse Corps holding permanent appoint- 



8-2 

8-3 

8-4 

ments of lieutenant commander and above. The 
Director shall be appointed for a term of not 
more than 4 years, to serve at the pleasure of the 
Secretary. While so serving, the Director has the 
rank of captain in the Navy and is entitled to 
pay and allowances of an officer serving in that 
rank. The Director's permanent status as a com- 
missioned officer in the Nurse Corps is not dis- 
turbed by appointment as Director. (10 USC 
5140.) 

(2) The Director of the Navy Nurse Corps is 
responsible to the Chief of the Bureau of Medi- 
cine and Surgery via the Assistant Chief for Per- 
sonnel and Professional Operations for the ad- 
ministration, supervision, direction, and coordi- 
nation of the Navy Nurse Corps, its functions, 
and programs. 

8-4. Nursing Division, BUMED 

(1) The Director of the Navy Nurse Corps is 
also the Director of the Nursing Division, Bu- 
reau of Medicine and Surgery. The Division 
Director is responsible for the performance of all 
functions of the Division. The Division shall 
plan, advise, and make recommendations regard- 
ing changes in administrative policies affecting 
nursing service; promote and make recommenda- 



8-1 

Change 71 



8-4 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



8-4 



tions regarding implementation of established 
standards for nursing practice; develop, coordi- 
nate, evaluate, and advise on matters pertaining 
to personnel policy, military requirements and 
professional qualifications of Nurse Corps officers 
and other nursing service personnel; make re- 
commendations to the Bureau of Naval Personnel 
regarding procurement, distribution, separation, 
training, career development, and accounting of 
nursing service personnel; and implement poli- 



cies of the Chief, BUMED, as they relate to nurs- 
ing practice, service, education, and research. 

(2) The Nursing Division consists of an Office 
of the Division Director, Deputy Director, a Pro- 
curement and Information Branch, Personnel 
Actions Branch, Personnel Planning and 
Accounting Branch, and Education and Training 
Branch. Nurse Corps officers assigned to the Bu- 
reau of Naval Personnel, the BUMED Research 
Division, and Inspector Genera!, Medical, pro- 
vide liaison to the Division Director. 



8-2 

Change 71 



8-5 



CHAPTER 8. NURSE CORPS 
Section II. NURSE CORPS PERSONNEL MATTERS 



8-11 



Strength and Grades - ._. 

Appointments 

Promotions _. . 

Augmentation _ 

Release From Active Duty . _ . - 

Resignation — 

Retirement - , . - - ... 

8-5. Strength and Grades 

(1) The authorized number of Regular officers 
of the Nurse Corps is 6/10 of 1 percent of all 
authorized commissioned officers, enlisted person- 
nel, midshipmen, and the actual number of war- 
rant officers of the Regular Navy and Regular 
Marine Corps (10 USC 5404). 

(2) The Nurse Corps consists of officers in the 
grade of ensign, lieutenant (junior grade), lieu- 
tenant, lieutenant commander, commander, and 
captain. 

8-6. Appointments 

(1) Initial appointments in the Nurse Corps, 
Naval Reserve, are made in the grades of ensign, 
lieutenant (junior grade) and lieutenant depend- 
ing upon the professional and personal qualifica- 
tions of the applicant as outlined in the Bureau 
of Naval Personnel Manual and the Navy Re- 
cruiting Manual (NAVPERS 15838). 

8-7. Promotions 

(1) Eligibility, — Nurse Corps officers are eligi- 
ble for consideration for promotion to the next 
higher grade when they are in the promotion 
zone or are senior to the officers in the promotion 
zone in the grade in which they are serving. 
(Title 10 USC 5753 as amended by Public Law 
90-130 of 8 November 1967.) 

(2) Qualifications, — 

(a) Nurse Corps ensigns are promoted to 
lieutenant (junior grade) upon the recommenda- 
tion of their commanding officer, subject to at- 
taining eligibility based upon satisfactory per- 
formance and licensure as a registered nurse in 
accordance with SECNAVINST 1412.6E. 

(b) Promotions to lieutenant, lieutenant 
commander, commander, and captain are made 
upon the recommendations of a selection board 
convened for each grade. Each Nurse Corps 
officer is selected for promotion on the basis of 
performance as reported on the Fitness of Officers 
as compared with other officers of the same 
grade. 



Article 

8- 5 

8- 6 

8-7 

8- 8 

8-9 

8-10 

8-11 

8-8. Augmentation 

(1) Nurse Corps officers of the Naval Reserve 
may apply for augmentation into the Regular 
Navy. Applicants must meet the requirements as 
set forth in the Bureau of Naval Personnel Man- 
ual. 

8-9. Release From Active Duty 

(1) The voluntary release of Reserve Officers 
is provided for in BUPERSMAN and BUPER- 
SINST 1926.2 series. The Personnel Actions 
Officer is responsible for initiating action for the 
voluntary release of Reserve officers upon com- 
pletion of their active obligated service and for 
processing requests received from Reserve officers 
who desire early release in accordance with BUP- 
ERSINST 1926.2 series. Action on requests for 
early release of Reserve officers is taken by an 
informal board in the Bureau of Naval Person- 
nel. 

8-10. Resignation 

(1) Officers of the Regular Navy and the 
Naval Reserve serving on active duty who submit 
their resignations may expect favorable action 
thereon with release from active duty provided 
they have fulfilled the service requirements of 
paragraph 5 of SECNAVINST 1920.3 series. 

8-11. Retirement 

(1) Voluntary Retirement, Regulars. — 

(a) SECNAVINST 1811.3 series set forth 
the policy concerning retirement of commis- 
sioned officers with 20 or more years of active 
service. Requests for retirement from members 
with 20 or more years of active service will be 
considered on the basis of the overall needs of 
the service and the merits of the individual case. 

(b) Final approval of request for retirement 
rests with the Secretary of the Navy. Approval of 
requests will normally be withheld until the in- 
dividual has completed a minimum of 1 year at 
the current duty station, or a normal tour when 
serving outside the continental United States. 

(2) Statutory Service Retirement, Regular 



8-3 

Change 71 



8-11 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



8-11 



{Captain and Commander, 10 USC 6398; and 
Lieutenant Commander, 10 USC 6396). — 

(a) A Nurse Corps officer on the active list 
of the Navy with a permanent appointment in 
grade of captain, shall be retired by the President 
on the first day of the month following the 
month in which the officer completes 31 years of 
active commissioned service. 

(b) A Nurse Corps officer on the active list 
of the Navy with permanent appointment in 
grade of commander who is not on a promotion 
list to captain shall be retired by the President on 
the first day of the month following the month 
in which the officer completes 26 years of active 
commissioned service and is considered of twice 
failing selection. 

(c) An officer on the active list of the Navy 
in the grade of lieutenant commander in the 
Nurse Corps shall be retired on 30 June of the 
fiscal year in which the officer (1) is not on a 



promotion list, (2) is considered as having twice 
failed of selection for promotion to the grade of 
commander, and (3) has completed at least 20 
years of active commissioned service. 

(3) Voluntary Retirement, Reserve Officers — 
Nurse Corps officers of the Naval Reserve may 
be retired with pay at any time upon their own 
request after 20 years of active service in the 
Armed Forces, or upon their request after com- 
pleting 20 years of satisfactory Federal Service. 
In the event the officer does not request retirement 
at the completion of 20 years, BUPERSINST 
1926.2 series contains the pertinent administrative 
policy and information for the involuntary re- 
lease to inactive duty of Reserve officers. In gen- 
eral they are released from active duty at the end 
of the fiscal year in which they attain retirement 
eligibility. 

(4) Physical Disability Retirement, Reserves 
and Regular Officers.— BUPERS MANUAL 
3860340 contains the basic regulations relative to 

retirement as a result of physical disability. 



8~4 

Change 71 



8-12 



General . 

Inspector General, Medical, Nurse Corps Officer 

Nurse Corps Liaison (BUPERS/BUMED) Officer 

Hospital ... 

Dispensary . _ 

Schools 

Recruiting 

Nursing Research 

8-12. General 

(1) Assignments are made to medical facilities 
where authorized billets exist for Nurse Corps 
officers. 

(2) All assignments are made in accordance 
with the needs of the service, the professional 
qualifications, and, if feasible, the personal pref- 
erence of the Nurse Corps officer. 

8-13. Inspector General, Medical, Nurse Corps 
Officer 

(1) The Inspector General, Medical, Nurse 
Corps Officer is directly responsible to the Inspec- 
tor General, Medical, and evaluates the accom- 
plishment of nursing services in meeting the 
goals and objectives of providing the highest 
quality nursing care; determines if nursing serv- 
ice standards established by professional nursing 
organizations and hospital accreditation agencies 
are being met; ascertains compliance with 
BUMED Instructions as they relate to patient 
care and safety; evaluates the physical and social 
environment of patients and personnel and iden- 
tifies hazardous conditions; determines the ade- 
quacy of nursing personnel, supplies, and equip- 
ment, and evaluates the effect of noted deficien- 
cies in accomplishing patient-care objectives; and 
makes recommendations and suggestions to assist 
nursing services to promote and maintain the 
highest standards of patient care and nursing 
practice. 

8-14. Nurse Corps Liaison (BUPERS/BUMED) 
Officer 

(1) The Nurse Corps Liaison Officer is as- 
signed to the Bureau of Naval Personnel and is 
responsible to the Chief of Naval Personnel. The 
Officer provides liaison between BUPERS and 
BUMED to coordinate personnel actions such as 
assignment, distribution, retirement, recall, and 
release of Nurse Corps officers. 

8-15. Hospital 

(1) Chief of Nursing Service. — Chiefs of nurs- 
ing service and senior Nurse Corps officers in 



8-15 



Article 
8-12 
8-13 
8-14 

8-15 
8-16 
8-17 
8-18 
8-19 

charge of nursing service shall be responsible to 
their commanding officers or superiors in the 
chain-of-command for all nursing service pro- 
vided by the command to which attached. They 
carry ultimate administrative authority and res- 
ponsibility in a naval hospital for nursing serv- 
ices. As a member of the administrative staff, the 
chief participates in formulating hospital policy, 
in devising procedures essential to the achieve- 
ment of objectives, and in developing and evalu- 
ating programs and services. The chief nurse 
plans, organizes, directs, coordinates, and evalu- 
ates activities of nursing service staff. The nature 
of the position implies accountability for creat- 
ing a system which fosters the participation of 
nursing staff in planning, implementing, and 
evaluating practice to insure safe, efficient, and 
therapeutically effective nursing care. 

(2) Educational Coordinator. — The responsi- 
bilities of the educational coordinator are to 
plan, organize direct, coordinate, and evaluate 
the inservice program of the nursing service. In- 
service education is a planned educational experi- 
ence provided in the job setting and closely iden- 
tified with service, to help an individual perform 
more effectively as a person and as a worker. 
Programs for staff development utilize educa- 
tional resources inside and outside the hospital. 

(3) Patient Care Coordinator. — The primary 
function of the patient care coordinator is to 
help nursing personnel to give safe, efficient, and 
therapeutically effective nursing care. To accom- 
plish this function, the coordinator works with 
and through nursing personnel in planning, giv- 
ing, and evaluating nursing care based upon the 
needs and responses of patients and upon the 
preparation and competence of the available staff. 
The coordinator collaborates with appropriate 
representatives of other disciplines and agencies 
concerned with patient services to provide coor- 
dinated service to patients for the improvement 
of overall patient care. 

(4) Charge Nurse. — Administers nursing serv- 
ice in patient care units: Ensures maximum care 
of patients; studies nursing care problems and 



CHAPTER 8. NURSE CORPS 
Section III. DUTY ASSIGNMENTS 



8-5 

Change 71 



8-16 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



8-19 



assists in their solution; assists in educational and 
guidance programs for patients and nursing per- 
sonnel; assigns duties to nursing personnel, su- 
pervising and evaluating work performance; en- 
sures proper environment for patients and per- 
sonnel; and assists in research on improvement of 
nursing service. 

8-16. Dispensary 

(1) The senior Nurse Corps officer assigned to 
a dispensary is responsible to the senior medical 
officer for the implementation of administrative 
policies and the direction, supervision, and evalu- 
ation of nursing practice to promote and main- 
tain the highest quality of patient care. 

(2) All Nurse Corps officers assigned to dis- 
pensaries should be familiar with Navy and civil- 
ian health-care methods as well as community 
resources available in the health-care delivery sys- 
tem. 

8-17. Schools 

(1) Naval Officer Training Center, Naval 
Base, Newport, R.I. — A selected number of 
Nurse Corps officers are assigned as instructors to 
the Nurse Corps indoctrination course at this 
School. They provide newly commissioned Nurse 
Corps officers with a comprehensive orientation 
to the Navy and the Medical Department. 

(2) Hospital Corps Schools (A Schools) Great 
Lakes and San Diego, — Nurse Corps officers are 
assigned as instructors in the Principles and 
Techniques of Patient Care and provide class- 
room and clinical learning experience for student 
hospital corpsmen. 

(3) Class C Schools. — Nurse Corps officers are 
assigned to various naval hospitals to provide in- 
struction to hospital corpsmen in medical techni- 
cian specialties. 

(4) Enlisted Training Service, Naval Hospital, 
Portsmouth, Va. — Nurse Corps officers are as- 
signed to instruct potential independent-duty 
corpsmen in Advanced Medical Service Technic. 

(5) Naval Medical School, Bethesda, Md. — 



(a) Nurse Corps officers are assigned to plan 
and coordinate short courses offered to Nurse 
Corps officers. 

(b) Anesthesia School. — Nurse Corps officer 
anesthetists assigned to the Naval Medical School 
function as instructors in orientation to, and 
methods and techniques of, anesthesia. In con- 
junction with the Anesthesia School, Nurse 
Corps officer anesthetists at naval hospitals desig- 
nated by BUMED function as instructors during 
the second year of Anesthesia School. These 
nurses provide supervision and guidance for the 
student nurse anesthetists. 

(6) Other. — Nurse Corps officers are assigned 
to other naval hospitals designated by BUMED 
to function as instructors in specialized clinical 
nursing courses. 

8-18. Recruiting 

(1) The Navy Nurse Programs officers in the 
field are responsible for recruiting qualified ap- 
plicants for direct appointment in the Navy 
Nurse Corps and for participation in the Navy 
Nurse Corps Candidate Program. Methods of re- 
cruiting include presentations in schools of nurs- 
ing, high schools, and to various civic, educa- 
tional, and professional groups. The Navy Nurse 
Programs officer represents the Navy Nurse 
Corps to the nursing community as well as to the 
general public through various communication 
media. 

8-19. Nursing Research 

(1) Nurse Corps officers assigned to research 
are responsible for the administration and coordi- 
nation of resources for nursing research; plan- 
ning, initiating, and conducting research projects 
and studies in clinical nursing, nursing educa- 
tion, and nursing administration designed to im- 
prove the delivery of patient care; and for inter- 
preting and reporting research findings, and 
making recommendations for improvement of 
nursing practice and development of nursing 
service personnel based on these findings. 



8-6 

Change 71 



8-20 

. 

Indoctrination 

Full-Time Education __. 
Continuing Education 
Eligibility Requirements 
Submission of Requests 

8-20. Indoctrination 

(1) An Indoctrination Program is conducted 
for all newly appointed officers of the Nurse 
Corps at the Naval Officer Training Center, 
Naval Base, Newport, R.I. The length of this 
course is 4 weeks or longer as the Chief, 
BUMED, may direct. Emphasis is placed upon 
orientation to the Naval Establishment, the Med- 
ical Department, the role of the officer in these 
organizations, and the development of leadership 
qualities. 

8-21. Full-Time Education 

(1) Full-time duty under instruction is offered 
to selected Nurse Corps officers. The officers who 
qualify for selection by the BUMED Professional 
Advisory Board will receive full pay and allow- 
ances while attending the course. Tuition and 
fees are paid to the educational institutions by 
the Medical Department and officers may be 
reimbursed for textbook purchases at the rate 
prescribed by the Medical Department. 

(a) Undergraduate, Graduate, and Doctoral 
Programs. — Nurse Corps officers of the Regular 
Navy on active duty who demonstrate the poten- 
tial for further professional development may 
apply for full-time duty under instruction in 
civilian colleges and universities to complete un- 
dergraduate education or to acquire graduate ed- 
ucation. Fields of specialization include nursing 
service administration, nursing education, nurs- 
ing research, supervision, and clinical specialties. 

(b) Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, 
California. — A course in Navy Management lead- 
ing to a master of science degree for selected 
Regular or Reserve Nurse Corps officers on active 
duty. 

(c) Anesthesia Program. — A 1 year course 
in anesthesia at a civilian university and 1 year of 
clinical experience under instruction at a naval 
hospital designated by BUMED, leading to certi- 
fication by the American Association of Nurse 
Anesthetists. Nurse Corps officers, Regular, and 
Reserve on active duty, are eligible to apply. 

(d) Operating Room Course. — A course to 
develop competency and leadership in operating 
room nursing at a naval hospital designated by 
BUMED. Upon completion of the course, a cer- 
tificate is awarded by BUMED. Nurse Corps 



8-24 



Article 
8-20 
8-21 
8-22 
8-23 
8-24 

officers, Regular, and Reserve on active duty, are 
eligible to apply. 

(e) Other courses in nursing specialities are 
established and conducted as the needs of the 
profession and needs of the service arise, 

8-22. Continuing Education 

(1) Inservice Education, — Local ongoing pro- 
grams are planned for all nursing service person- 
nel to meet their needs and the needs of the 
nursing service at each medical facility. These 
programs are supported in part by Bureau spon- 
sored guest lectures. 

(2) Short Courses. — A program of short 
courses is planned and implemented by the Navy 
in clinical nursing subjects, teaching, and man- 
agement to acquaint the participants with cur- 
rent trends in the practice and management of 
nursing in the Navy. All Regular and Reserve 
Nurse Corps officers are eligible to apply. Nurse 
Corps officers may also apply for short courses, 
institutes, seminars, and workshops conducted by 
other Federal services, universities, and profes- 
sional organizations at the expense of the Nurs- 
ing Division, BUMED. 

(3) Part-Time Outservice Courses. — Nurse 
Corps officers, Regular, and Reserve on active 
duty, may apply for financial assistance for con- 
tinuing nursing education in colleges and univ- 
ersities on a part-time basis. 

8-23. Eligibility Requirements 

(1) Nurse Corps officers applying for full-time 
duty under instruction and short-term education 
programs must meet the eligibility requirements 
of BUMEDINST 1520.14 series. 

8-24. Submission of Requests 

(1) Nurse Corps officers who meet the above 
eligibility requirements and desire to participate 
in Nurse Corps education programs, upon recom- 
mendation of the command, may submit applica- 
tions to the Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Sur- 
gery (Code 324), in accordance with BUME- 
DINST 1520.14 series. 

(2) Application for the part-time outservice 
courses of instruction may be submitted in 
accordance with the BUMEDINST 1500.7 series. 

8-7 

Change 71 



CHAPTER 8. NURSE CORPS 
Section IV. EDUCATION AND TRAINING 



o 



( 



8-25 



CHAPTER 8. NURSE CORPS 



8-29 



Section V. MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 



Utilization of Nursing Personnel 

Civilian Nursing Service Personnel 

Subspecialty Codes 

Publication of Professional Articles 

Participation in Professional Organizations 

8-25. Utilization of Nursing Personnel 

(1) Pertinent parts of DoD Directive 1125.1 
of 16 September 1967 are quoted for information 
and compliance: 

f. REISSUANCE AND PURPOSE. This Directive * * * 
set [s] forth current policy with regard to utilization of 
military and civilian nursing personnel by the armed 
forces and to clarify working relationships of various 
categories of nursing personnel. * * * * 
III. POLICY. It is the policy of the Department of 
Defense that: 

A. Professional, technical, and vocational nurses and 
other categories of auxiliary personnel required to pro- 
vide nursing services will be included in an identifiable 
division, department, or equivalent unit at each appro- 
priate level within the organization of the respective 
military departments. 

B. Each such division, department, or equivalent nurs- 
ing unit will be supervised and administered by a pro- 
fessional nurse of appropriate experience and seniority 
with the necessary authority to insure effective and 
efficient management of nursing services. 

C. Professional nurses will also function as supervisors 
of technical and vocational nurses in the provision of 
nursing services. 

D. Personnel engaged in providing nursing services 
normally shall be utilized in the performance of nursing 
assignments only. This policy may be waived in areas 
where conditions are such as to require all personnel 
with the armed forces be available for general assign- 
ments. 

8-26. Civilian Nursing Service Personnel 

(1) Employment of civilian personnel for the 
Nursing Service will be in accordance with ap- 



Article 

8-25 

8-26 

8-27 

8-28 

'_„__: 8-29 

propriate provisions of the Federal Personnel 
Manual, Navy Civilian Manpower Management 
Instruction, and Chapter 10, Manual of the Medi- 
cal Department. 

8-27. Subspecialty Codes 

(1) The Nurse Corps is utilizing subspecialty 
coding to identify billets in which a doctoral, a 
masters, or a baccalaureate level of education, or 
specialized training or experience is essential for 
optimum performance of duty. The guidelines 
and criteria for subspecialty coding are in OP- 
NAVINST 1211.6 C. 

8-28. Publication of Professional Articles 

(1) Nurse Corps officers are encouraged to 
make contributions to both military and profes- 
sional literature. They shall be guided by Navy 
Regulations and current directives relative to 
preparation and submission of articles for publi- 
cation. 

8-29. Participation in Professional Organizations 

(1) It is strongly recommended that Nurse 
Corps officers maintain membership and partici- 
pate in the official organization of the nursing 
profession. Nurse Corps officers are also encour- 
aged to be participating members in other pro- 
fessional organizations. 



8-9 

Change 71 



o 

i 
I 

o 



o I 



I 





r 



Chapter 9 

THE HOSPITAL CORPS 



Sections 

Articles 

I. Structure of the Hospital Corps 9-1 through 9- 4 

•II. Hospital Corpsmen, Group X Medical 9-5 through 9-13 



Section I. STRUCTURE OF THE HOSPITAL CORPS 

Articlo 

Establishment : 9-1 

Strength 9-2 

Kating Structure 9—3 

Navy Enlisted Classification Structure 9—4 



9-1. Establishment 

(1) The Hospital Corps as it is now known was 
established within the Medical Department of the 
Navy by the act of 17 June 1898 (ch. 463, sec. 1, 30 
Stat. 474). 

9-2. Strength 

(1) The strength of the Hospital Corps is de- 
termined by the Chief of Naval Personnel, within 
personnel allocations authorized by the Chief of 
Naval Operations. It is limited to an equitable 
share of the appropriated strength of the Navy and 
Marine Corps as a whole as authorized by Congress. 

(2) Female, WAVE, personnel constitute approxi- 
mately 5 percent of the total strength of the Hos- 
pital Corps. 

<3) Hospital corpsmen constitute 89 percent of 
the Hospital Corps strength, and dental technicians 
11 percent. 

9-3. Rating Structure 

(1) Personnel and personnel requirements are 
identified by occupational rating groups and by 
rates which distinguish the degrees of skill within 
the group. Pursuant to the Army-Navy Medical 
Services Corps Act of 1947, the Secretary of the 
Navy established two rating groups within the Hos- 



pital Corps of the Navy: Group X Medical and 
Group XI Dental. 

(2) Group X Medical constitutes the general 
service hospital corpsman rating groups, including 
the allied medical apprentice rates. The hospital 
corpsman and allied apprentice rates are as follows: 





Rate ab- 


Pay 


Rate 


breviation 


grade 




.- HR 


E-l 


Hospital apprentice.. . . 


HA 


... E-2 


Hospitalman . . 


. HN 


K-3 


Hospital corpsman, third class 


.. HM3 


E-4 


Hospital corpsman, second class.. 


-- HM2 


... E-5 


Hospital corpsman, first class. 


.. HM1 ... 


. E-6 


Chief hospital corpsman 


„- HMC .. 


E-7 


Senior chief hospital corpsman 


HMCS . 


E-S 


Master chief hospital corpsman. 


.. HMCM 


. E-9 



(3) Group XI Dental constitutes the general serv- 
ice dental technicians rating group, including the 
allied dental apprentice rates. The dental techni- 
cians and allied apprentice rates are as follows: 





Rate ab- 


Pay 


Rate 


breviation 


grade 


Dental recruit .. 


-- DR 


E-l 


Denta! apprentice.. . .. .. 


... DA 


E-2 


Dentalman . .. 


... DN 


E-3 


Dental technician, third class 


. . DT3 


E-4 


Dental technician, second class 


. . DT2 


E-5 


Dental technician, first class. 


DTI 


E-6 


Chief dental technician 


. . DTC -- 


E-7 


Senior chief dental technician 


- - DTCS ... 


E-8 


Master chief dental technician 


... DTCM - 


E-9 



•See chapter 6 (section VIII) for Dental Technicians, Group XI Dental. 



9-1 
Change 11 



9-4 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



9-7 



9-^4. Navy Enlisted Classification Struc- 
ture 

(1) Navy enlisted classification (NEC) codes iden- 
tify both personnel and requirements, They are 
used to supplement rates by identifying special skills 
not identifiable by rates or rating alone. Hospital 
corpsman rates are supplemented by NEC's in the 
HM-8400 series, and dental technician rates by codes 
in the DT-8700 series. When an NEC has been as- 
signed it becomes an integral part of the rate and 
shall be so recorded in all personnel records and 
correspondence. 

(2) There is no priority list of NEC's within the 
HM-8400 and DT-8700 series. An NEC code is pri- 
mary or secondary solely in relation to the individual 
to which assigned. An NEC code that is primary 
for one person may be secondary for another per- 
son. Not more than two NEC codes may be as- 
signed to one person. 



Procurement 

Distribution and Detail 

Duties of Hospital Corpsmen 

Duties of the Hospital Corpsman Bates 

Utilization 

Training 

Advancement in Bating 

Path of Advancement to Officer Status.. 



9-5. Qualifications 

(1) Applicants for the hospital corpsman rating 
should be volunteers, motivated for duties involving 
care of the sick and injured, show aptitude for and 
be temperamentally adapted for such duty, and have 
General Classification Test scores and educational 
background necessary to progress in the hospital 
corpsman rating. Although rigid educational quali- 
fications have not been established, it is desirable 
that applicants be high school graduates; however, 
applicants with limited education who are positively 
motivated and have mental capacity to learn may be 
accepted. Applicants should be evaluated by a 
Classification Interviewer, PN-2612, or by an officer 
of the Medical Department. Applicants showing evi- 
dence of unusual immaturity, emotional instability, 
or low moral character should be rejected regardless 
of other qualifications. 

9-6. Procurement 

<1> Candidates for hospital corpsmen are pro- 
cured from volunteers enlisted directly into the 
Hospital Corps rating as hospital recruits; volun- 



(3) The Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, 
through delegated authority, controls assignment 
of NEC codes in the HM-8400 and DT-8700 series. 
The commanding officers of Hospital Corps schools 
and activities having established courses are au- 
thorized to assign the appropriate NEC code to 
graduates. Once assigned, an NEC code in the HM- 
8400 or DT-8700 series may not be revoked or 
changed without specific authority from the Chief, 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. 

(4) Rate and NEC job requirements for each com- 
mand are determined by the Chief of Naval Person- 
nel and published in the Manpower Authorization, 
NAVPERS 576. Commanding officers should request 
modification of their Manpower Authorization when 
necessary to reflect their actual NEC job require- 
ments. Training requirements for technicians are 
determined from the job requirements as written 
into Manpower Authorizations. 



Article 

9- 5 
9- 6 
9- 7 
9- 8 
9- 9 
9-10 
9-11 
9-12 
0-13 



teers undergoing recruit training selected by Clas- 
sification Interviewers, PN-2612; volunteer appli- 
cants or "strikers"; and volunteers transferring 
from the United States Marine Corps. 

(2) Hospital recruits are high school or junior 
college graduates who, by agreement at the time of 
enlistment, are guaranteed training in a class A 
school. 

(3) "Strikers" are enlisted men who have com- 
pleted recruit training, are serving in apprentice 
ratings, and request transfer to the Hospital Corps 
after a period of observation in the medical depart- 
ments of activities ashore or afloat. 

(4) Under regulations prescribed by the Secre- 
tary of the Navy, enlisted members of the Marine 
Corps are eligible for transfer to the Hospital Corps 
of the Navy, and enlisted members of the Hospital 
Corps are eligible for transfer to the Marine Corps 
(10 USC 6014). 

9-7. Distribution and Detail 

(1) Hospital corpsmen may be assigned to any 
unit or activity of the Naval Establishment where 
their services are required. They shall be assigned 



Section H. HOSPITAL CORPSMEN, GROUP X MEDICAL 

Qualifications 



9-2 

Change 11 



9-7 



CHAPTER 9. THE HOSPITAL CORPS 



9-9 



to the medical departments of the ship or station 
to which attached. Under terms of the Geneva 
Cor: . entions, hospital corpsmen may not be as- 
signed to tasks of a combat nature. WAVE hos- 
pital corpsmen may be assigned to the major 
distribution commands of the Shore Establish- 
ment, to fleet activities shore based in the 
United States, to overseas in selected locations where 
suitable quarters are available for women, and to 
a few billets afloat on dependent -carrying vessels 
of the Military Sea Transportation Service. In- 
formation relative to duty assignments of hos- 
pital corpsmen is contained in the Enlisted Trans- 
fer Manual, NAVPERS 15909. 

(2) Technicians should be assigned to commands 
having the same NEC requirement written into 
their enlisted Manpower Authorization. 

9-8. Duties of Hospital Corpsmen, 

(1) The general duties of hospital corpsmen are 
prescribed by the Surgeon General as set forth in 
this Manual and BUMED directives. Detailed du- 
ties on any specific ship or station are prescribed 
by the commanding officer, the senior medical 
officer, or other competent authority. In addition 
to the military duties common to all enlisted per- 
sonnel, hospital corpsmen shall perform medical 
department functions of the ship or station to which 
attached. These medical department functions 
embrace the broad fields of preventive medicine; 
first aid; tentative diagnosis and emergency treat- 
ment; diagnosis, nursing care, and definitive treat- 
ment; and the administrative procedures relative 
thereto. These duties are performed under the 
supervision of Medical Department officers except 
when serving on independent duty. 

(2) Qualified petty officers in the hospital corps- 
man rating perform all duties of the medical de- 
partment on small vessels and shore stations to 
which no medical officer is attached. All chief hos- 
pital corpsmen and hospital corpsmen, first class, 
are considered qualified for independent duty unless 
evidence to the contrary is at hand in the individ- 
ual case. When no personnel in these ratings are 
available, hospital corpsmen, second class, who have 
completed a course of instruction in advanced Hos- 
pital Corps school, or have successfully passed the 
servicewide examination for hospital corpsman, first 
class, may be assigned to independent duty. Hos- 
pital corpsmen on independent duty are responsible 
to their commanding officers for the sanitation of 
the command; the health of personnel; care of the 
sick and injured; procurement, storage, and custody 
of medical department property; and preparation of 
medical reports and Health Records. They per- 
form the administrative duties and, to the extent for 
which qualified, the professional duties prescribed 
for medical officers of ships and stations. They shall 



not attempt or be required to perform medical du- 
ties for which they are not professionally qualified. 
When it is necessary to perform physical examina- 
tions, sign original entries in Health Records, and 
undertake other professional and administrative 
duties normally performed by medical officers, hos- 
pital corpsmen shall perform these duties only when 
a medical officer is not available. 

(3) Specific duty assignments should be rotated 
to provide diversified training and job experience. 
However, this rotation should be planned on an indi- 
vidual rather than a routine basis, thus considering 
the varying degrees of individual adaptability as well 
as job and training requirements. A careful bal- 
ance must be maintained between the advantages of 
increased job efficiency resulting from permanency 
of personnel and training advantages derived from 
rotation. Too rapid rotation nullifies both advan- 
tages. Ward corpsmen can advantageously be ro- 
tated from a.m. to p.m. to night duty on the same 
ward or nursing service, thereby achieving equitable 
rotation without sacrificing job continuity. 

(4) Hospital corpsmen should not be required to 
perform night duty periods in excess of 1 month and 
should not be assigned night duty more often than 
1 month out of 3. In tropical climates particularly 
and elsewhere when feasible, tour of night duty 
should be of 2 or 3 weeks' duration. Hospital corps- 
men should be granted 48 hours' liberty immedi- 
ately preceding and subsequent to a tour of night 
duty. 

9-9. Duties of the Hospital Corpsman 
Bates 

(1) Hospital Recruit (HR). — Hospital recruits are 
new enlistees in the Hospital Corps. Upon comple- 
tion of recruit training their rate is changed to hos- 
pital apprentice and they are assigned duty under 
instruction at a class A Hospital Corps school. 

(2) Hospital Apprentice lHA) .—After graduation 
from Hospital Corps school, hospital apprentices 
shall be assigned duties directly related to patient 
care at naval hospitals, station hospitals, larger shore 
activities, or large ships. They should be assigned 
to wards for duty and on-the-job training in ele- 
mentary nursing procedures. 

(3) Hospitalman (HJV>. — Hospitalmen should be 
assigned to wards or other clinical services for duty 
and on-the-job training in the more advanced 
nursing procedures, or for duty and on-the-job 
training in elementary clinic procedures. 

(4) Hospital Corpsman, Third Class IHM3). — 
Hospital corpsmen, third class, are normally assigned 
to wards, clinical services, or administrative units; 
for duty as senior ward corpsman; for duty and on- 
the-job training in the more advanced clinic pro- 
cedures; or for duty and on-the-job training in 
elementary administrative procedures. 



9-3 
Change 11 



9-9 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



9-11 



(5) Hospital Corpsman, Second Class (HM2) . — 
Hospital corpsmen, second class, are normally as- 
signed duty as senior ward corpsman, or duty in 
clinics or administrative units and further on-the- 
job training. 

(6) Hospital Corpsman, First Class (HMD . — Hos- 
pital corpsmen, first class, are normally assigned 
supervisory duty on wards, as assistants to the chief 
of a clinical service, or as petty officer in charge of 
an administrative unit. 

(7) Chief Hospital Corpsman (.HMO. — Chief 
hospital corpsmen are normally assigned super- 
visory duties as senior assistant to the chief of a 
clinic a! service, or as chief petty officer in charge 
of an administrative section, or as the assistant to 
the chief of an administrative division. 

(8) Senior Chief Hospital Corpsman (HMCS). — 
Senior chief hospital corpsmen are normally as- 
signed duties as senior assistant to a chief of serv- 
ice or division or as senior petty officer in charge 
of an administrative branch. 

<9> Master Chief Hospital Corpsman (.HMCM) . — 
Master chief hospital corpsmen are normally as- 
signed in billets requiring qualifications at the high- 
est enlisted level in duties requiring top leadership, 
supervisory and training skill, and professional 
qualifications. 

9-10. Utilization 

(1) Utilization of hospital corpsmen shall be in 
accordance with the following guide which should 
be deviated from only to the extent necessary to ef- 
fect maximum efficiency of the command as a whole: 

(a) The maximum number of hospital corps- 
men consistent with the overall needs of the activ- 
ity shall be assigned to wards and clinical services. 
WAVE hospital corpsmen shall be utilized in billets 
involving direct and indirect contact with female 
patients to the maximum extent feasible. 

(b> The requirement for assigning qualified 
personnel to patient care is paramount; therefore, 
all hospital corpsmen performing duties in the 
nursing service shall be assigned en bloc to the 
nursing service. 

(c) Ward corpsmen should be assigned to three 
section watches. Watches should be equitable for 
all in the same rate with progressively fewer watches 
with each advancement in rating. 

id) Within reasonable limits, the average work 
hours shall be the same for all corpsmen regardless 
of rate. The average workweek should be no more 
strenuous than necessary to insure high quality of 
patient care. 

(e) Trained petty officers should be utilized in 
patient care functions to the maximum extent 
feasible, 

(/) Hospital corpsmen should be rotated to 
various duties within the command to the minimum 



extent necessary for training purposes in order to 
achieve maximum efficiency resulting from perma- 
nency of personnel. 

(?) Hospital corpsmen who cannot perform 
effectively under proper supervision on ward duty 
or other professional services should be recom- 
mended for administrative discharge or change in 
rating as appropriate, rather than reassigning them 
to nonpatient care functions. 

(h) Hospital corpsmen should not be considered 
eligible for reassignment from patient care to non- 
patient care functions solely because they have com- 
pleted a given number of months on ward duty. 

(i) Technicians should be utilized in the duties 
of their specialties to the maximum extent feasible. 
However, technicians must maintain proficiency in 
the general duties of their rate and may be so as- 
signed to general duty when that need is greater. 

9-11. Training 

(1) The Chief of the Bureau of Medicine and 
Surgery is responsible for the professional training 
of personnel of the Hospital Corps. To discharge 
this responsibility, basic and advanced Hospital 
Corps schools have been established and technical 
training courses instituted in naval hospitals and 
other naval medical facilities. Training consists of 
formal schools and courses, on-the-job training, in- 
service training, and outservice training. Upon suc- 
cessful completion of a course of instruction appro- 
priate entries shall be made in service records, 
training certificates issued, and Navy Enlisted Clas- 
sification codes assigned. Detailed training infor- 
mation is contained in Instructions in the 1500 and 
1510 series. 

(2) Basic Hospital Corps Schools, Class A. — The 
mission of the basic Hospital Corps schools, class A, 
is to instruct and train enlisted personnel in the 
basic subjects and procedures required to qualify 
them for duties as general service hospital corpsmen. 
The curriculum is designed to prepare enlisted per- 
sonnel to perform the general duties normally re- 
quired of hospital corpsmen in the first 4 years of 
their naval service. The curriculum emphasizes 
direct patient care. This school, together with in- 
service training, prepares hospital corpsmen for ad- 
vancement in rating through hospital corpsman, 
third class. It is mandatory for all personnel upon 
first entering the Hospital Corps, except that waiver 
of this requirement may be requested from the Bu- 
reau of Medicine and Surgery for individuals con- 
sidered qualified as a result of civilian training. 
Certificates of graduation from basic Hospital Corps 
schools are issued to graduates, but graduates are 
not assigned an NEC. 

(3) Advanced Hospital Corps School, Class B. — 
The mission of advanced Hospital Corps school, class 
B, is to give advanced training to petty officers of 



9-4 

Change 11 



9-11 



CHAPTER 9. THE HOSPITAL CORPS 



9-12 



the Hospital Corps to prepare them for duty as 
senior general service hospital corpsmen and for 
duty independent of a medical officer. The cur- 
riculum emphasizes first aid, tentative diagnosis and 
emergency treatment of disease and injury, personal 
hygiene and environmental sanitation, and medical 
department administration. Students are normally 
enrolled in this school at the time of sea/shore or 
shore/sea rotation. The maximum possible number 
of career hospital corpsmen are trained in this 
school prior to assignment to independent duty. 
Certificates of graduation from advanced Hospital 
Corps schools are issued and graduates are assigned 
the NEC HM-8405. 

(4) Technical Training Courses, Class C. — The 
purpose of technicians courses is to train selected 
hospital corpsmen at the appropriate time in their 
naval careers to perform duties as technical assist- 
ants in specialized fields including diagnostic pro- 
cedures, specialized treatment, preventive medicine, 
submarine medicine, medical research, and medical 
department administration. Courses are 16 to 60 
weeks in duration and are continuously under re- 
view to meet changing medical department require- 
ments. Students are selected by the Bureau of 
Medicine and Surgery on a competitive basis from 
among qualified volunteers. Normally, hospital 
corpsmen are not , selected for training in more 
than one technical specialty; however, waivers of 
this factor may be requested. Normally, candidates 
for advanced Hospital Corps school, class B, and 
for Medical Administration Technician training are 
selected without regard for Navy Enlisted Classifi- 
cations previously assigned. The course in Medical 
Field Technic is mandatory at the time of first 
assignment to duty with the Fleet Marine Force and 
requests for this training are not desired. Requests 
for other technician training are desired from hos- 
pital corpsmen serving ashore or afloat. To the 
extent feasible, selected candidates are ordered to 
duty under instruction as technicians at the time 
of sea/shore or shore/sea rotation. The Manual 
of Navy Enlisted Classifications, NAVPERS 15105 
(series), lists the broad duties of technicians and 
code numbers assigned to each. Detailed informa- 
tion relative to submission of applications for train- 
ing, school and course locations, and convening 
date and qualifications are contained in Instructions 
in the 1510 series. Certificates of Special Instruc- 
tions are issued, and graduates are assigned an ap- 
propriate NEC. 

(5) Inservice Training. — The purpose of inservice 
training is to provide a continuing, organized train- 
ing program at each duty station to supplement the 
formal training received in Hospital Corps schools. 
This program is designed to broaden knowledge and 
skills, to keep hospital corpsmen abreast of the 
rapid advances in medical procedures, to provide 
well-trained hospital corpsmen for duty of their 



rate, and to qualify them for advancement In 
rating. Instruction shall be continuous and 
progressive and shall cover subjects outlined in the 
appropriate training courses for advancement in 
rating. On-the-job training in the duties of general 
service hospital corpsmen shall be an integral part 
of the inservice training program. Instructors shall 
be officers of the medical department or petty offi- 
cers instructing under their supervision. 

(6) On-the-Job Training of Technicians. — On- 
the-job training of technicians is necessary to sup- 
plement the number graduated from schools and 
courses in order to meet local and total require- 
ments. Naval hospitals and other naval medical 
facilities shall conduct on-the-job training of tech- 
nicians to the extent feasible. When vacant techni- 
cians billets cannot be filed, it is incumbent upon 
the commanding officer to assign general service 
hospital corpsmen to the vacant billets and to in- 
stitute on-the-job training to meet the needs of 
his own command. Technicians so trained shall 
be reported to the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. 
Certificates of On-the-Job Training will be for- 
warded with the letter authorizing assignment of 
the appropriate NEC. 

(7) Outservice Training. — 

(a) The Bureau encourages Medical Depart- 
ment personnel to take advantage of part-time out- 
service training in accredited civilian institutions 
and will authorize tuition aid, provided funds are 
available, for courses directly related to areas of 
Medical Department responsibility. Such areas are 
considered to be the physical, chemical, clinical, 
biological, and sociopsychology sciences and the 
fields of Medical Department administration. 

Cb) Consideration will also be given to requests 
for courses outside those areas if they can be shown 
to be a necessary part (required credits or prereq- 
uisites to desired courses) of a fully planned pro- 
gram leading to a degree or certificate which will 
enable the applicant to assume increased responsi- 
bility or to function more effectively toward accom- 
plishing the mission of the Medical Department. 

9-12. Advancement in Rating 

(1) To be eligible to compete in examinations for 
advancement in rating, hospital corpsmen must first 
fulfill service requirements, complete the prescribed 
training courses and practical factors, and be rec- 
ommended by their commanding officer. Detailed 
information relative to advancement in rating is 
contained in the Bureau of Naval Personnel Manual, 
the Manual of Qualifications for Advancement in 
Rating (NAVPERS 18068), and BUPERS Instruc- 
tions in the 1400 series. 

(2) Qualifications for advancement in rating in- 
clude both military and professional requirements. 
The Manual of Qualifications for Advancement in 



9-5 
Change 11 



9-12 



MANUAL "OF THE MEDICAL DEPABTMENT, U.S. WAVY 



9-13 



Rating lists minimum qualifications. Examinations 
are prepared with the assumption that all candidates 
possess minimum qualifications. The purpose of the 
examination is to determine the candidates best 
qualified; therefore, examination questions are de- 
signed to be quite comprehensive for each rate. Ex- 
aminations become broader in scope and more thor- 
ough with each advancement in rating. The 
Handbook of the Hospital Corps is the best single 
reference in preparing for advancement in rating; 
however, the appropriate Navy' training courses are 
the best guides from which to determine the breadth 
and depth of knowledge expected of each rating. 
Training Publications for Advancement in Rating 
(NAVPERS 10052) lists all reference documents 
necessary in preparation for the military and pro- 
fessional examinations for advancement in rating. 

(3) Hospital corpsmen who are technicians take 
the same military and professional examinations as 
their contemporaries who are not technicians. For 



this reason and because technicians may be called 
upon at any time to perform the general duties of 
their rate including independent duty, technicians 
must maintain professional competence in the gen- 
eral duties of hospital corpsmen. 

9-13. Path of Advancement to Officer 
Status 

(1) The normal path of advancement for hospital 
corpsmen is to ensign, Medical Service Corps. How- 
ever, hospital corpsmen may apply for any of the 
officer candidate training programs or officer pro- 
curement programs for which they consider them- 
selves qualified. WAVE hospital corpsmen may 
apply for training leading to a commission as ensign, 
Nurse Corps. Instructions relative to qualifications, 
procedures for submitting requests, and scope of 
these programs are outlined in chapter 7 of this 
Manual, in the Bureau of Naval Personnel Manual, 
and in Instructions in the 1120 series. 



9-6 

Change 11 



I 

■ r- 



( ■ 




Chapter 10 

CIVILIANS 



Sections 

Articles 

I. Civilian Employees - -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 10—1 through 10— 3 

II. Civilian Posit ions 10-4 through 10— 5 

III. Civilian Physicians ■ - 10-6 through 10-11 

Section I. CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES 

Article 

General - 10-1 

Bureau Policy - -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - 10—2 

Organizational Relationships - . ..... 10—3 



10-L General 

(1) This section contains general instruc- 
tions pertaining to civilian personnel manage- 
ment at Navy Medical Department activities. 
More specific and detailed civilian personnel 
policies, regulations, and procedures are issued 
by the U.S. Civil Service Commission and the 
Department of the Navy's Office of Civilian 
Manpower Management (OCMM) and are codified 
in the Federal Personnel Manual (FPM) and 
Navy Civilian Manpower Management Instructions 
(CMMI's) respectively. In addition, BUMED 
directives may be issued to advise commands 
of special Bureau policies and of civilian 
manpower management matters peculiar to Navy 
Medical Department activities. 

(2) Navy Civilian Manpower Management 
Instruction (CMMI) 250 sets forth the Navy's 
policy, organization, and assignment of program 
responsibility for civilian manpower manage- 
ment. The Navy's philosophy is that the pur- 
pose of civilian manpower management is to aid 
managers in mission accomplishment and that 
basic responsibility for civilian manpower 
management, whether at the headquarters or 
a field activity, rests with the commanding 
officer. Accordingly, not only the Chief of 



BUMED but also commanding officers and 
officers in charge of field activities have been 
delegated authority, with a few exceptions, to 
classify civilian positions through grade GS-15 
(see SECNAVINST 12520.5 series) and to effect 
appointments and other personnel actions (see 
CMMI 311). Commanding officers, however, are 
required to have available the services of a 
civilian personnel office organized and operated 
in conformance to CMMI 250. Activities of 
sufficient size to support a staff of well-quali- 
fied civilian personnel technicians may have 
their own civilian personnel office; smaller 
activities, depending on size, location, and 
special circumstances, are encouraged to 
obtain all or partial civilian personnel admin- 
istration services from another activity or from 
a consolidated civilian personnel office. Re- 
gardless of whether civilian manpower manage- 
ment services are obtained in-house or from 
anorher source, the civilian personnel officer 
will serve as the commanding officer's princi- 
pal advisor and act as his representative in the 
administration of the civilian manpower program, 
CMMI 250 further stipulates that the commanding 
officer and civilian personnel officer shall 
have ready and effective access to each other, 
and that the civilian personnel officer will report 
directly to the commanding officer or the execu- 
tive officer or his equivalent. 



10-1 

Change 71 



10-2 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



10-5 



10-2. Bureau Policy 

(1) BUMED subscribes completely to the com- 
cept that civilian manpower management and the 
responsibility for the administration of person- 
nel policies and programs is inherent in command 
responsibility. Accordingly, commanding offi- 
cers and officers in charge of field activities 
of the Navy Medical Department will be expected 
to exercise their delegated authority to classify 
civilian positions and effect civilian personnel 
actions except where specifically limited by 
BUMED directives. 

(2) Navy Medical Department activities em- 
ploying civilians shall make provision for 
adequate staff services in the civilian manpower 
management area. Irrespective of whether per- 
sonnel management services are obtained in- 
house or from another source, the organizational 
location and reporting lines of the civilian 
personnel office/officer will be in compliance 
with the provisions of CMMI 250. BUMED 's 
policy with respect to the foregoing is outlined 
in BUMEDINST 5450.4 series (Organization 
Manual for Naval Hospitals). This policy, 
which is applicable not only to naval hospitals 
but also to naval medical centers and other Med- 



ical Department activities, provides that the 
civilian personnel office shall be established 
as an organizational entity and placed under 
the immediate supervision of the administrative 
officer. 



10-3. Organizational Relationships 

(1) Commands will normally look to their in- 
house civilian personnel officer or to their 
servicing civilian personnel officer for advice 
and assistance on civilian manpower manage- 
ment matters. However, if additional counsel 
or assistance is needed, commands should feel 
free to consult BUMED 's Personnel Services 
Officer who is the Bureau's liaison with the 
Office of Civilian Manpower Management. More- 
over, commands are free to contact directly 
technical codes in the Office of Civilian Man- 
power Management in Washington or OCMM's 
regional or branch offices. However, if such 
direct contacts involve policy matters, contro- 
versial cases, or items of significant public or 
Congressional interest, commands should inform 
either BUMED's Personnel Services Officer 
or the BUMED program manager who may be 
involved. 



Section II. CIVILIAN POSITIONS 



Funds and Ceilings .......... 

Establishment of Positions- 

10—4. Funds and Ceilings 

(1) Funds for personal services are provided 
in the annual operating budget issued to each 
activity for operating expenses. In the event 
of the imposition on BUMED of civilian ceilings 
by higher authority, the Bureau will assign ceil- 
ings to its field activities. Commands are 
authorized to establish or abolish civilian posi- 
tions, within available resources, which best 
suit the needs of the activity, subject to the 
limitations in article 10—5. 

10-5. Establishment of Positions 

(1) All civilian positions must be established 
in accordance with applicable laws and regula- 
tions. 

(2) Positions in grade GS-12 and above shall 
be submitted for prior BUMED approval. Re- 



Article 

10-4 

- 10-5 

quests for approval shall be accompanied by a 
job description and any further justification 
required by current BUMED directives. The 
request shall also indicate the grade level pro- 
posed and whether the position is a new or 
modified one. BUMED review will be primarily 
for conformance with the current position man- 
agement policy promulgated by BUMEDINST 
5310.2 series, and consistency with current 
and prospective programs and workload of 
the activity. After BUMED approval, final 
classification action will be taken by the act- 
ivity for positions through grade GS-15. 

(3) In addition to the foregoing, BUMED may 
control the establishment, classification, or 
filling of particular types or levels of positions 
through the issuance of specific BUMED direc- 
tives. 



10-2 

Change 11 



10-6 CIVILIANS 10-8 

Section ID. CIVILIAN PHYSICIANS 

Article 

General 10—6 



Methods of Obtaining Services 

Selection 

BUMED Approval 

Security Clearances 

Duties 

10-6- General 

(1) The absence or nonavailability of a Navy 
Medical Corps officer, or the nonavailability of a 
Medical Corps officer with a particular qualifica- 
tion, may at times necessitate the employment or 
the procurement of the medical services of a 
civilian physician. 

(2) Civilian physicians may be utilized in 
special cases on a part-time or full-time basis in 
the United States at naval hospitals and naval 
dispensaries to augment the military medical 
staff. 

(3) Civilian physicians may be utilized on a 
full-time or part-time basis, under the general 
supervision of a Navy medical officer, at industrial 
and industrial-type activities of the Navy and 
Marine Corps. At certain locations, it may be 
necessary to utilize the services of civilian physi- 
cians in the absence of a Navy medical officer. 

(4) This section in no way alters provisions of 
chapter 11, section II, of this Manual; SEC- 
NAVINST 6320.8 series; BUMEDINST 6320.31 
series; or BUMEDINST 6320.32 series. 

10-7 . Methods of Obtaining Services 

( 1 ) Regular Civil Service Appointment to 
Classified Positions. — Activities are expected to 
employ civilian physicians pursuant to Civilian 
Manpower Management Instructions issued by 
the Office of Civilian Manpower Management 
which cover the subjects of position classification, 
appointment, and compensation. In the event that 
there are no acceptable applicants for appoint- 
ment or if applicants do not accept appointments 
for one reason or another, activities may consider 
under justifiable circumstances a method described 
below. 

(2) Employment as Experts or Consultants. — 
Employment of civilian physicians as experts or 
consultants under excepted appointments or per- 
sonal service contracts is governed by Civilian 
Manpower Management Instruction (CMMI) 
304. In addition to those factors discussed in 
CMMI 304 on the proper rate of compensation, 
the activity should consider the rates normally 
charged in the locality concerned for medical 



10- 7 

10- 8 

10- 9 

10-10 

_ 10-11 

services of the kind that require the expert's 
employment by the Navy. 

(3) Contracts for Nonpersonal Services. — Con- 
tracts for nonpersonal services of civilian physi- 
cians may be considered only in the event that 
there are neither acceptable applicants for regular 
civil-service positions nor acceptances of offers for 
employment, as- experts or consultants, under 
excepted appointments or personal service con- 
tracts. In this event, appropriate requests for 
authority for the procurement of professional 
medical services of physicians on a "when 
needed" basis shall be forwarded by the re- 
quiring activity on a Requisition Form, DD 
Form 1149, for approval by the primary sup- 
port official via the Chief of the Bureau of 
Medicine and Surgery. The procurement of 
medical services in this manner shall be approved 
to fulfill bona fide medical responsibilities. Such 
needs are of a nonpersonal nature and shall be 
procured from one of the following sources: 

(a) Hospitals, clinics, or other organizations 
or individuals having the necessary facilities, staff, 
and equipment to render the required medical 
services of a nonpersonal nature; or 

( b ) Other Government departments or agen- 
cies through Government orders for medical 
services in accordance with Armed Services Pro- 
curement Regulation, section V, part 7. 

(4) Requisitions submitted in accordance with 
subarticle 10-7(3), when approved, may be 
authorized for procurement in accordance with 
existing procedures for obtaining nonpersonal 
services by contract at rates normally charged in 
the locality concerned. 

10-8. Selection 

(1) Careful selection of civilian physicians is 
required to insure the highest standards of pro- 
fessional service. The qualifications requirements 
for services procured under subarticle 10-7(1) 
will be in accordance with the qualifications 
standards for medical officers established by the 
Civil Service Commission. If a non-U.S. citizen 
physician in a foreign area, those qualifications 
standards that apply locally will be used. To 
qualify as an expert or consultant for employ- 
ment under excepted appointment or personal 

10-3 
Change 71 



10-9 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



10-11 



service contract (subart. 10-7(2)), a physician 
must be a certified member of an American 
Specialty Board, or the equivalent, and must be 
recognized as a practitioner of excellent qualifica- 
tions with a high degree of attainment in his 
professional field. The qualifications standards 
for medical officers established by the Civil Serv- 
ice Commission shall be used as a guide for 
qualifications requirements for physicians provid- 
ing services procured under subarticle 10—7(3). 

(2) Civilian physicians selected must (a) be 
graduates of an accredited medical school; (b) be 
currently licensed to practice in a State or Terri- 
tory of the United States; (c) possess high moral, 
professional, and ethical standards; and (d) be 
in good professional standing in their respective 
communities. 

(3) If the civilian physician is a non-TJ.S. 
citizen, the requirement that he be currently 
licensed to practice in a State or Territory of 
the United States is waived, providing he per- 
forms his Navy duties in a foreign area. 

10 -9. BUMED Approval 

(1) Naval hospitals and naval dispensaries 
requiring the services of civilian physicians as 
provided in this section shall submit requests for 
authorization to BUMED for approval prior to 
employment. Such requests shall contain the fol- 
lowing information: 

(a) Justification for the request. 

(b) Name and qualifications of the civilian 
physician. 

(c) Schedule of proposed employment. 

(d) Proposed amount and method of 
payment. 



10-10, Security Clearances 

( 1 ) Security investigations for physicians who 
are employed or furnish professional medical 
services under the provisions of this section shall 
meet the requirements of the Civilian Manpower 
Management Instructions and the Department of 
the Navy Security Manual for Classified Informa- 
tion (OPNAVINST 5510.1 series). 

10-11. Duties 

( 1 ) Civilian physicians may be utilized to per- 
form any professional duties for which they are 
qualified. 

(2) Under the direction of a Navy Medical 
Corps officer, they may perform general medical 
duties involving military personnel with the 
exception of those purely military in nature such 
as: 

(a) Physical examinations of candidates for 
duty involving flying, submarine and diving, or 
other examinations that must be performed by 
specially qualified medical officers. 

(b) Physical examinations for promotion of 
active duty officers or applicants for appointment 
to commission status in the Regular Navy or 
Marine Corps. 

(c) Physical examinations of applicants to 
officer candidate training programs. 

(d) Physical examinations of officers of 
Reserve components incident to reporting for 
active duty other than training duty. 

(e) Exercise of military command and ad- 
ministration over naval uniformed personnel. 

(f ) Duties as member of medical boards or 
physical evaluation boards. 



10-h 

Change 71 



r 



< 



Chapter 11 

NAVAL HOSPITALS 



SECTIONS 



Articles 

I. Mission and Organization H- 1 through 11- 5 

II. Office of the Commanding Officer 11- 6 through 11-11 

III. Military and Administrative Functions 11-12 through 11-24 

IV. Professional Services H-25 through 11-50 

V. Hospital Ships H-51 through 11-53 



Section I. MISSION AND ORGANIZATION 

Article 

Mission 1 

Direction 11-2 

Command 11-3 

Organization 11-4 

Instructions and Notices 1^-5 



11-1. Mission 

(1) The mission of a naval hospital is: 

(a) To provide general clinical and hospital- 
ization services for active duty Navy and Marine 
Corps personnel, active duty members of the 
other armed services, dependents of active duty 
personnel, and other persons authorized in cur- 
rent directives. 

<b) To cooperate with military and civil 
authorities in matters pertaining to health, sani- 
tation, local disasters, and other emergencies. 

(2) This mission includes: 

(a) The care and treatment of sick and in- 
jured military personnel with the objective of 
their expeditious return to duty. 

(b) The prompt disposition of those patients 
who require special treatment not adequately 
available or who are found physically unfit for 
retention in the military service. 

(3) Statements of specific tasks assigned to ac- 
complish the mission are promulgated by the 
5450 series of BUMED Instructions. 

11-2. Direction 

(1) BUMED is charged with the command 
and support of all naval hospitals. 



11-3. Command 

(1) A naval hospital shall be commanded by 
a Medical Corps officer. The executive officer 
shall be that medical officer, eligible to succeed 
to command, who is usually next in rank to the 
commanding officer, unless otherwise specifically 
ordered by the Chief of Naval Personnel. In the 
event of the incapacity, death, absence, or detach- 
ment without relief of the commanding officer, 
the executive officer shall succeed to command. 

11-4. Organization 

(1) A naval hospital is a self-contained com- 
mand unit under the area coordination of the 
commandant of the naval district, or the com- 
mander of the group activity as designated in 
current directives. The hospital shall be organ- 
ized and administered in accordance with law, 
U.S. Navy Regulations, and orders of competent 
authority. 

(2) It is the responsibility of the commanding 
officer to effect an efficient and effective organ- 
ization which shall provide for both the clinical 
and administrative functions of the hospital. 
Since naval hospitals vary in size, personnel, and 
facilities, a flexible organization plan is neces- 



11-1 
Change 29 



11-1 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



11-5 



sary. The chart in subarticle 11-4(4) illustrates 
an approved organization. Establishment of a 
service or division not included in the standard 
organization plan or authorized as an exception 
to the plan, due to local conditions or assign- 
ment of a special mission, will necessitate new 
charts and functional statements to be submitted 
to the Bureau for review. 

(3) BUMEDINST 5450.4 series provides de- 
tails for naval hospitals on the internal organ- 
ization of the various clinical services and ad- 



ministrative divisions as well as the assignment 
and distribution of functions therein. 

(4) Master Organization Chart. — See next 
page. 

11-5. Instructions and Notices 

(1) The commanding officer shall issue hos- 
pital instructions and notices as may be required 
for the guidance of staff and patients. Directives 
pertaining to patients shall not be more stringent 
than necessary to ensure efficient administration. 



11-2 

Change 29 



BASIC ORGANIZATION CHART FOR NAVAL HOSPITALS 



wii a In- urn ni Ch.M oi > C "■'P' S"nrira in 

1 Wh*'« tt^iinbl* (scilihri and HoH-nfl comolidcinon ol nit 

au^alHni r»at!*ffl< Im«hvNhI « D*p*™d#jn< i»rv«P "ay b* Or£nn>r*d 

3 VparoU S»«n< Spiral Dm no- OFVd 9 i*-. '-r [tnij|#n D nj pa.mitta.1 
irt hiMpilnh wh»r» lha i-cup* al *n p'Oflmm' |JiF l.ai niitaw 



j EiHBl.thFrf whan SC - fJ --- ■■ °"ntli*d o 
A Enable -Kan autKannd br l«J*#-H 



tilinppin.il*, D„, r3 n 



i hbl.c Wa.lii CftftfcM 



OFFICE OF THE COMMANDING OFFICER 



COMMANDING OFFICER 
EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER 



BOARDS 
AND 
COMMITTEES 





PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 




DIRECTOR OF CLINICAL SERVICES 
EXECUTIVE OFFICER , 










ANESTHESIOLOGY SERVICE 






OBSTETRICS * GYNECOLOGY 
SERVICE 










DENTAL SERVICE 






ORTHOPEDIC SERVICE 










DERMATOLOGY SERVICE 






■ 

OUTPATIENT SERVICE 

i 










E. E. N. T. SERVICE 






PEDIATRIC SERVICE 










LABORATORY SERVICE 






PHARMACY SERVICE 










MEDICAL SERVICE 






PHYSICAL MEDICINE SERVICE 










NEUROPSYCHIATRY SERVICE 






RADIOLOGY SERVICE 










NEUROSURGICAL SERVICE 






SURGICAL SERVICE 










NURSING SERVICE 






UROLOGY SERVICE 





SPECIAL 
ASSISTANTS 





ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS 




ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER 












PATIENT AFFAIRS 
DIVISION 






NAVY EXCHANGE 
DIVISION 

s 












FOOD SERVICE 
DIVISION 






COMPTROLLER 
DIVISION 

* 










PERSONNEL 
DIVISION 

> 




DATA PROCESSING 
DIVISION 












OPERATING SERVICES 
DIVISION 

j 






MAINTENANCE 
DIVISION 

7 












DISBURSING 
DIVISION 

* 






FISCAL * SUPPLY 
DIVISION 

• 





s 

> 



I 

8 

I 



"*21 April 196b 



■UIEAU OF MEDICINE AND SUtCEIT 



11-6 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 
Section II. OFFICE OF THE COMMANDING OFFICER 



11-7 



Article 

The Office '■ U- 6 

Commanding Officer 11—7 

Executive Officer H- 8 

Administrative Officer 11-9 

Boards and Committees 11-10 

Special Assistants 11-11 



11-6. The Office 

(1) The office of the commanding officer shall 
consist of the commanding officer, the executive 
officer, the administrative officer, and other staff 
and clerical personnel as may be required. 

11-7. Commanding Officer 
(1) General Duties. — 

(a) The commanding officer is charged with 
the command, organization, and management of 
the hospital. He shall require the timely and eco- 
nomical performance of the functions and opera- 
tions of the hospital in accordance with U.S. 
Navy Regulations, the Manual of the Medical 
Department, and other directives issued by com- 
petent authority. He shall be responsible for the 
professional care and services provided to the 
patients in the hospital and for the safety and 
well-being of the entire hospital command. Sub- 
ject to the orders of higher authority, he shall 
exercise complete military jurisdiction within the 
hospital reservation. 

(b) The commanding officer shall be re- 
sponsible for the sound and legal expenditure of 
the funds allotted to the hospital for its opera- 
tion. He shall issue instructions concerning the 
use, expenditure, and conservation of equipment 
and supplies which shall define the responsibil- 
ities of the heads of the administrative divisions 
and clinical services regarding the correctness of 
inventories and the transfer of property upon 
their detachment. 

(c) The commanding officer shall be respon- 
sible for the maintenance of orders for the ad- 
ministration of discipline within the hospital 
command. He shall afford necessary assistance 
and provide facilities for inspections, investiga- 
tions, and courts-martial held at the hospital on 
orders issued by competent authority. The com- 
manding officer of a naval hospital is empowered 
by the Secretary of the Navy to exercise sum- 
mary or special courts-martial jurisdiction over, 
and by the Uniform Code of Military Justice to 
impose nonjudicial punishments upon, members 



of the naval service, staff and patients, of his 
command. This authority may not be delegated; 
but, in the temporary absence of the command- 
ing officer, it may devolve on the medical officer 
succeeding to command. Punishments shall be 
recorded in accordance with instructions general- 
ly applicable throughout the Navy. 

(d) The commanding officer, unless specifi- 
cally authorized, shall not act as a recruiting offi- 
cer. He may reenlist or extend the enlistments of 
the enlisted personnel attached to his command 
for duty. He may reenlist Navy enlisted per- 
sonnel in patient status in accordance with 
BUPERS Manual, C-l403(8), and Marine Corps 
enlisted personnel in like status according to 
MARCORPERSMAN, 2201 and 2205. 

(e) The commanding officer shall be respon- 
sible for the public information program of the 
hospital, which shall embrace all areas of public 
relations applicable to and in the interest of the 
hospital. He shall establish, preserve, and pro- 
mote good relations with local professional, civic, 
welfare, and business organizations. 

(f) The commanding officer shall provide sub- 
sistence and lodging in the hospital only to 
those persons specifically authorized such by 
law or by permission of the Chief, Bureau of 
Medicine and Surgery. 

(2) Relations With Civil Authorities.— 

(a) The commanding officer shall require 
obedience from all persons coming under his 
jurisdiction to Federal statutes, and, to the extent 
conflict does not exist, shall observe penal and 
civil law of the State, Territory, or district in 
which the naval hospital is located. Service of 
subpoena or other civil process upon members 
of the service or civilians within a hospital res- 
ervation shall be in accordance with instructions 
of the Department of the Navy applicable to all 
commands in the Navy. 

(b) The commanding officer shall cooperate 
with civil authorities in the control of communi- 
cable diseases in accordance with articles 
22-17 through 22-20. 



11-4 

Change % 



11-7 



CHAPTER 11. NAVAL HOSPITALS 



11-7 



(3) Patients.— 

(a) The commanding officer shall be respon- 
sible for the professional care and treatment of 
all patients in the hospital. Except in emer- 
gencies, major surgical operations and special 
forms of treatment shall not be undertaken with- 
out his approval. 

(b) When a patient being provided inpatient 
or outpatient care at a naval hospital requires 
medical or dental care beyond the capabilities 
of the hospital and of other Federal medical 
facilities in the area, the commanding officer 
may authorize and direct the utilization of sup- 
plemental services and supplies from civilian 
non-Federal sources. This may include, but 
is not limited to, the services of a physician, 
dentist, specialist, or technician, and the pro- 
curement of special tests, examinations, treat- 
ments, or hospitalization. Specific guidelines 
with respect to the care authorized for depend- 
ents are contained in SECNAV Instruction 
6320.8 series. Costs incurred are chargeable to 
the hospital's maintenance and operation allotment 

(4) Personnel. — 

(a) The commanding officer shall submit re- 
quests for necessary adjustments in the military 
personnel allowance of his command, with full 
justifications therefor, to the Bureau of Naval 
Personnel, via the Bureau of Medicine and Sur- 
gery, through official channels. Requests for 
necessary adjustments in the civilian personnel 
allowance of the command shall be submitted 
through official channels to BUMED. 

(b) The commanding officer shall provide 
for the military indoctrination and professional 
and technical training, including authorized in- 
tern and residency training, as appropriate, of 
all Medical Department personnel attached to 
the hospital for duty. 

(c) The commanding officer shall hold pe- 
riodic staff conferences to discuss professional and 
administrative subjects. When practicable, quali- 
fied military and civilian personnel shall be in- 
vited to participate in these conferences. 

(d) The commanding officer shall arrange 
for civilian consultants to confer with the hos- 
pital staff on consultations, professional training, 
and other matters. He shall establish and pro- 
mote cooperative relationships with civil pro- 
fessional organizations in order that the staff may 
profit from such associations. 

(e) The commanding officer shall facilitate 
the use of the professional and instructional serv- 
ices of the hospital by Medical Department per- 
sonnel attached to other activities. He shall 
insure the maintenance of a professional library 
adequate to meet the requirements of the hos- 
pital. 

(f) The commanding officer shall prohibit 



the unauthorized collection of funds within the 
command, and unofficial pecuniary dealings be- 
tween patients and Medical Department person- 
nel. 

(5) Reports, Records, and Correspondence. — 

(a) The commanding officer shall require 
the preparation and submission of official reports 
and returns and the maintenance and disposition 
of hospital records as prescribed by competent 
authority. 

(b) Correspondence dealing with the in- 
ternal administration of the hospital shall be for- 
warded directly to BUMED. Correspondence 
involving military policy, medical logistics, in- 
creases or modifications of hospital facilities, and 
military personnel allowances shall be forwarded 
via the chain of command. 

(6) Inspections. — 

(a) The commanding officer shall make, or 
cause to be made, necessary inspections to deter- 
mine that the hospital is adequately equipped 
and staffed, that it is functioning economically 
and effectively, that the clinical services and ad- 
ministrative divisions are well managed and 
maintained, and that pertinent laws, regulations, 
directives, and orders are being enforced. 

(b) Personnel and materiel inspections shall 
be governed by the following: 

(1) When circumstances permit, person- 
nel of the hospital shall be inspected weekly, but 
not on Sundays. 

(2) Buildings and grounds, exclusive of 
private quarters, shall be inspected weekly, but 
not on Sundays. 

(3) Periodic inspections shall be made of 
storage facilities and their contents to insure com- 
pliance with the policies of the Department of 
the Navy and BUMED regarding adequacy, stock 
levels, maintenance, overhaul, and replacement. 

(4) Periodic sanitary inspections shall be 
made of all buildings and grounds, with par- 
ticular attention to the maintenance of maximum 
standards of food preservation and handling. 

(7) Emergency Precautions. — 

(a) Local disasters or emergencies shall be 
provided for by appropriate disaster plans and 
procedures for handling casualties. Personnel as- 
signed disaster-relief duties shall be drilled regu- 
larly and instructed continually in their assigned 
duties. Emergencies which may result from 
enemy attacks shall be provided for by appropri- 
ate bills, procedures for handling casualties, and 
regular drills. 

(b) In time of war, the hospital shall fly the 
Red Cross flag, and, when considered necessary 
by the commanding officer, shall have other signs 
of its noncombatant status in evidence. 



11-5 

Change 68 



11-7 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



(8) Delegation of Duties. — The commanding 
officer may, at his discretion and when not 
contrary to law or regulations, delegate duties 
to the executive officer, administrative officer, and 
other subordinates, as appropriate, to the maxi- 
mum extent consistent with the retention of con- 
trol. Such delegations of authority, however, 
shall in no way relieve the commanding officer 
of his continued responsibility for the safety, 
well-being, and efficiency of his entire command. 

11-8. Executive Officer 

(1) General Duties. — 

(a) The executive officer shall serve as the 
direct representative of the commanding officer. 
As such, all orders issued by him shall be re- 
garded as proceeding from the commanding offi- 
cer and shall govern all persons within the 
command. While executing the orders of or serv- 
ing as the commanding officer, the executive 
officer shall take precedence over all other offi- 
cers attached to the command. His primary 
function shall be to assist the commanding offi- 
cer in the discharge of his responsibility for the 
professional care of patients and the training of 
the staff, in the formulation of professional 
policies, standards and directives, and in the 
coordination of all internal administration of the 
hospital dealing with professional matters. 

(b) The executive officer shall direct the ad- 
ministrative officer regarding matters of common 
interest and responsibility. Nothing herein is to 
be construed as relieving the executive officer of 
his responsibility in matters under the purview 
of the administrative officer or of the necessity 
of keeping himself informed in such matters to 
the extent that he may be able to assume com- 
mand in the absence of the commanding officer. 

(2) Clinical Services and Care and Treatment 
of Patients. — 

(a) The executive officer shall organize and 
coordinate the various clinical services to ensure 
the highest quality of medical care and the most 
efficient utilization of Medical Department per- 
sonnel. 

(b) He shall exercise general supervision 
over the care and treatment of all patients in the 
hospital, both inpatient and outpatient, and shajl 
keep the commanding officer informed regarding 
the condition of all patients on the serious and 
very serious lists. 

(c) He shall issue instructions for the guid- 
ance and administration of all patients, inpatient 
and outpatient, and designate the hours when 
visitors may be received. 

(d) He shall secure the services of a chaplain 
or other clergyman when a patient expresses a 
desire for spiritual ministrations. Whenever 



practicable, patients who are too ill to request 
spiritual ministration shall be provided the serv- 
ices of a chaplain or other clergyman of their 
faith. 

(e) He shall coordinate and have published 
the times for consultations and special examina- 
tions. 

(f) He shall make recommendations con- 
cerning the appointment to, and keep the com- 
manding officer advised of the actions and recom- 
mendations of, the tumor board, the medical 
board, the tissue committee, the medical records 
committee, and such other boards and commit- 
tees that have to do with patient care. 

(g) He shall assure that the professional 
functions of the hospital are carried on in such 
manner as to merit accreditation by the various 
professional accrediting bodies. 

(h) He shall assure that the necessary direc- 
tives governing professional practices are issued 
and are observed. 

(3) Professional Training. — 

(a) He shall organize a professional training 
committee from among the chiefs of the various 
clinical services, including the administrative of- 
ficer, and shall himself be an active member of 
the committee representing the commanding 
officer whenever he is absent. This training com- 
mittee shall supervise and coordinate all of the 
training programs for medical officers and in- 
terns. The training committee shall also evaluate 
each request for training received from any 
medical officer on the staff. 

(b) He may make recommendations, when 
deemed desirable, to the chief nurse for the train- 
ing of nurses, and to the administrative officer 
for the training of hospital corpsmen. 

(c) He shall arrange the schedule for all 
professional staff meetings, and shall coordinate 
the interservice conferences, ward rounds, sem- 
inars, and consultant lectures. 

(d) He shall assist the chiefs of service in 
the selection and utilization of civilian and re- 
serve lecturers in connection with the intern and 
residency training programs. 

(e) He shall appoint a medical officer to 
have supervision over the Medical Library. 

(4) Assignment of Staff Personnel. — He shall 
direct the assignments of staff officer personnel to 
those duties which will assure the most effective 
use of the officer's training, experieCce and capa- 
bilities, in the best interests of patient care. He 
shall approve watch lists affecting these person- 
nel. 

(5) Inspections. — 

(a) The executive officer shall arrange for 
all inspections. He shall conduct or designate an 



11-6 

Change ^1 



11-8 



CHAPTER 11. NAVAL HOSPITALS" 



11-9 



officer to conduct those which the commanding 
officer cannot attend. A report shall be made to 
the commanding officer of any deficiency de- 
tected during the course of the inspection or of 
any area in which corrective action is considered 
necessary. 

(b) The executive officer shall require the 
officer of the day to inspect the meals served in 
the mess, including the special diets, to insure 
that the food is properly prepared, of good qual- 
ity, sufficient in amount and served in an ap- 
petizing way, and in the case of special diets 
adheres to the therapeutic regimen prescribed 
for the patient. 

(6) Officer of the Day.-^ 

(a) The executive officer shall approve the 
officer of the day watch list. He shall take steps 
to insure that all officers assigned to the officer 
of the day's watch list are properly indoctrinated 
in hospital instructions and notices, hospital 
practices and procedures, as well as pertinent 
parts of the Manual of the Medical Department, 
Navy Regulations, and such other local orders 
and instructions that apply. 

{b) He shall closely supervise the function- 
ing of the officer of the day's office, the admis- 
sion section, and the outpatient service to be 
assured that patients are promptly admitted or 
treated as the case may be. 

(7) Morale and Discipline, — 

(a) The executive officer shall insure that all 
laws, regulations and instructions issued by prop- 
er authority are complied with and shall report 
all such violations to the commanding officer. 

(b) He shall constantly endeavor to main- 
tain a high state of morale among all staff and 
patient personnel. Continued and sympathetic 
attention to all details affecting the welfare of 
these personnel shall be one of his chief con- 
cerns. 

(c) He shall insure that all instances of com- 
mendable conduct and meritorious acts per- 
formed by the staff or patients, as well as the 
names of members of the staff showing outstand- 
ing ability, are brought to the attention of the 
commanding officer. 

(d) He shall make recommendations to the 
commanding officer concerning the granting of 
leave to staff officers, and act on requests of staff 
officers to be absent from duty for short periods 
of time or from morning quarters. 

<e) He shall insure that the officer of the 
day or some other designated medical officer 
makes a daily inspection of the security ward 
and the physical condition of the patients there- 
in. 



(8) Civil Defense, Disaster, and Mobilization 
Planning. — 

(a) He shall participate in and advise the 
commanding officer concerning the medical 
aspects of civil defense and disaster planning 
with local, State, and Federal authorities. 

(b) He shall advise and make recommenda- 
tions to the commanding officer concerning 
medical mobilization planning and requirements. 

(9) Chief of a Clinical Service. — The executive 
officer when so designated by Bureau action may 
serve as the chief of a clinical service. 

11-9. Administrative Officer 

(1) The administrative officer shall be respon- 
sible to the executive officer and commanding 
officer for all administrative matters including 
the coordination of internal administration of 
the hospital as well as management improvement 
functions. All orders of the administrative offi- 
cer shall be regarded as proceeding from the 
commanding officer whose policies and orders 
he shall conform to and effectuate. He shall ad- 
vise the executive officer and the commanding 
officer regarding the nonprofessional functions 
and management of the hospital, and shall assist 
them in the formulation of administrative pol- 
icies, standards, and directives. He acts inde- 
pendently upon matters which do not require 
the personal attention of the commanding offi- 
cer or the executive officer, and keeps the execu- 
tive officer apprised of the action he takes. The 
administrative officer shall advise the executive 
officer regarding matters of common interest and 
responsibility. He shall exercise due caution to 
assure that all matters of a professional nature 
which may come to his attention are promptly 
referred to the executive officer. Neither the ad- 
ministrative officer nor any of the personnel sub- 
ject to his supervision shall assume any respon- 
sibility or authority in professional matters. The 
administrative officer shall be an officer of the 
Medical Service Corps. 

(2) The administrative officer shall: 

(a) Establish methods for improving operat- 
ing procedures, solving administrative problems, 
and correcting unsatisfactory conditions of an 
administrative nature. 

(b) Be responsible for the coordination and 
efficient operation of the administrative divi- 
sions. 

(c) Maintain current information regarding 
laws, regulations, policies, and instructions per- 
taining to naval administration in general and to 
the management of naval hospitals in particular. 

(d) Provide for the preparation, promulga- 
tion, and maintenance of the directives necessary 
to meet the operating requirements of the hos- 
pital. He shall have general orders, orders from 



11-7 
Change 29 



11-9 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



11-11 



higher authority, and all other directives and in- 
formation which concern or are of interest to 
personnel of the command posted on convenient- 
ly located bulletin boards, or otherwise brought 
to the attention of the personnel concerned. 
Copies of the Uniform Code of Military Justice 
shall be made readily accessible to all personnel. 
He shall insure that all infractions of law or 
U.S. Navy Regulations and violations of dis- 
cipline are promptly reported to the executive 
officer and commanding officer. 

(e) In consultation with the chief, fiscal and 
supply' division, and other appropriate officers, 
formulate fiscal policies for presentation to and 
approval by the executive officer and command- 
ing officer. 

(f) Promulgate directives concerning safety 
measures and precautions, including procedures 
for protecting personnel and safeguarding Gov- 
ernment property. 

(g) Prescribe the time at which the weekly 
fire drill shall be held and take charge of all such 
drills and fire-fighting operations, 

(h) If no disbursing officer is attached to the 
hospital, arrange for the safekeeping of money 
and other valuables belonging to the patients in 
such manner as the commanding officer may 
direct. 

(i) Arrange for the care and safe custody of 
all hospital keys. 

(j) Assure that the Decedent Affairs Pro- 
gram functions properly, and directly supervise 
the work of the decedent affairs officer. 

(k) Subject to the approval of the command- 
ing officer, designate qualified personnel to pre- 
pare a curriculum and supervise the courses of 
instruction for members of the Hospital Corps 
as prescribed by the Navy Department. The 
curriculum as prepared shall be submitted to the 
professional training committee for review and 
to the commanding officer for approval. 

(1) Serve as a member of the professional 
training committee and provide organized in- 
struction in hospital administration for Medical 
Service Corps and Hospital Corps personnel at- 
tached to the Command. 

(m) Supervise the activities of those hospital 
boards of an administrative nature, and serve as 
a member of such of those boards when so ap- 
pointed. 

(n) Supervise the assignment of nonprofes- 
sional staff personnel. 

(o) Make recommendations to the executive 
officer and commanding officer concerning the 
granting of leave to administrative staff officers, 
and act on their requests to be absent from duty 
for short periods of time or from morning quar- 
ters. 



(p) Approve liberty lists for patient and 
staff enlisted personnel, in accordance with 
policies established by the executive officer and 
commanding officer. 

(q) Conduct, or have another Medical Serv- 
ice Corps officer conduct, a monthly inspection 
of the clothing of all enlisted personnel attached 
to the command to insure that such personnel 
have the required clothing and that their uni- 
forms are in good condition and comply with 
regulations. 

(r) Maintain contact with the district postal 
officer and the postmaster of the local post office 
regarding the functions of the branch post office 
at the hospital and insure that the hospital mail 
directory is both accurate and current. 

(s) Insure compliance with the provisions 
of chapter 15, U.S. Navy Regulations, pertaining 
to the security of classified matter. 

<t) Administer matters relating to office 
services, including space assignments, communi- 
cations, duplicating, and messenger services. 

(u) Review existing and proposed new or 
revised hospital forms and reports for the pur- 
pose of effecting all possible economies in this 
area. 

(3) Whenever practicable, the administrative 
officer shall be assisted by an assistant to the 
administrative officer who shall be directly re- 
sponsible to him for the performance of certain 
office services and related functions. 

11-10. Boards and Committees 

(1) Boards and committees are appointed by 
the commanding officer to meet standards for 
hospital accreditation, to conform to the require- 
ments of law or regulations, and to advise the 
commanding officer on matters of policy or par- 
ticular interest. BUMEDINST 5450 series con- 
tains examples of boards and committees and 
brief descriptions of functions. 

11-11. Special Assistants - 

(1) The following shall serve as special assist- 
ants to the command: 

(a) The senior chaplain. 

(b) The field director, American National 
Red Cross. 

(c) The public affairs officer. 

(d) The comptroller (when authorized by 
BUMED). 

(2) Other special assistants may be appointed 
at the commanding officer's discretion. Care 
should be taken to limit their number and to 
define their functions explicitly so that the com- 
manding officer's span of control is not weakened 
by having too many individuals reporting to him 
or to members of his office unnecessarily. 



11-8 

Change 29 



11-11 



CHAPTER 11. NAVAL HOSPITALS 



11-11 



(3) The Senior Chaplain, — 

(a) The senior chaplain shall promote the 
religious and moral welfare of patients and staff 
members; conduct or arrange for religious services 
for all faiths; visit bed patients, particularly those 
who are seriously or very seriously ill or under 
confinement; counsel and advise personnel on 
religious or social problems; counsel and advise 
on Navy Relief Society policies, maintain liaison 
with other local welfare agencies; supervise the 
use of the hospital chapel; and maintain custody 
of the chapel funds. 

(b) The office of the senior chaplain consists 
of the senior chaplain, other chaplains, and cleri- 
cal personnel as may be assigned. 

(4) The Field Director, A?nerican Red Cross. — 

(a) The field director, American National 
Red Cross, directs a Red Cross program supple- 
menting and assisting the activities of the hospi- 
tal with respect to the health, welfare, and 
morale of patients and staff members. 

(b) The extent of services rendered by the 
ARC varies with local requirements and ARC 
staffing. They may include counseling on per- 
sonal or family problems, financial assistance, 
social services, recreation programs, health and 
safety services, and cooperation in local and 
regional blood donor programs. Administration 
of ARC programs in naval hospitals is provided 
in BUMED Instruction 5760.2 series. 

(5) The Public Affairs Officer.— The public 
affairs officer shall direct the public affairs pro- 
gram. He shall advise and act for the command- 
ing officer as the hospital's official contact for 
public affairs; supervise the preparation, editing, 
and final review of information for release 
through appropriate channels to news media, 



coordinating with the executive officer on the 
release of medical information; supervise the 
preparation and distribution of the hospital 
newspaper; and establish, preserve, and promote 
good relations with local professional, civic, wel- 
fare, and business organizations and associations. 
The public affairs officer is an officer of the 
Medical Service Corps. This assignment is 
normally a collateral duty. 

(6) The Comptroller. — The comptroller shall 
provide technical guidance and assistance to the 
command and program managers on all financial 
matters. The comptroller's responsibilities shall 
encompass the maintenance of a classification of 
programs administered, their objectives, and a 
current inventory of budget plans and program 
schedules; civilian payrolls, leave and retirement 
records; and the performance of special studies 
and internal review with the objective of finan- 
cial management improvement, conformance with 
prescribed accounting procedures, and the pro- 
motion of economy and efficiency. He shall make 
recommendations as to fiscal policies; review 
and report program performance against financial 
plans; analyze variances and make recommenda- 
tions for financial adjustments; and collect obli- 
gation, expenditure, cost, and other accounting 
and operating statistical data. The comptroller 
shall be directly responsible to the commanding 
officer for the administration of fund authoriza- 
tions granted to the commanding officer. The 
comptroller's exercise of other staff services to 
the commanding officer shall be in consultation 
with the administrative officer and executive offi- 
cer with a view toward formulation of financial 
policies which will equitably support both the 
clinical and administrative program areas in 
fulfilling the overall mission. 



11-9 

Change Jpl 



H_12 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 11-12 
Section III. MILITARY AND ADMINISTRATIVE FUNCTIONS 

Article 

Establishment of Watches 11-12 

Administrative Divisions 11-13 

Personnel Division 11-14 

Patient Affairs Division 11-15 

Fiscal and Supply Division 11-16 

Food Service Division 11-17 

Operating Services Division 11-18 

Maintenance Division 11-19 

Disbursing Division 11-20 

Navy Exchange Division . 11-21 

Data Processing Division 11-22 

Comptroller Division 11-23 

Additional Divisions 11-24 



11-12, Establishment of Watches 

(1) The commanding officer shall establish an 
officer-of-the-day watch, an administrative watch, 
and such other watches as may be necessary for 
the safety, proper operation, and security of the 
command and the care and treatment of its 
patients. 

(2) Officer of the Day.— The officer of the day 
shall be regularly assigned as the officer on watch 
to stand the day's duty. He shall serve as the 
representative of the commanding officer who 
shall prescribe his duties and to whom he shall 
be responsible for the proper discharge of the 
functions of his office. No officer shall be as- 
signed as officer of the day until he is thoroughly 
familiar with the hospital and its management 
and administration. 

(3) The tour of duty of the officer of the day 
shall be a period of 24 hours, normally beginning 
at 1000, during which time he shall remain on 
the reservation. Before assuming duty as officer 
of the day, he shall acquaint himself with all 
matters and conditions in the hospital of which 
he should be aware for the proper performance 
of his duties. He shall remain in charge of his 
station until regularly relieved. He shall main- 
tain an officer-of-the-day log of accurate, clear, 
and complete entries describing every circum- 
stance and occurrence of importance and interest 
which may concern the hospital or its personnel, 
or which may be of historical value. The log shall 
be prepared in the manner and form prescribed 
by U.S. Navy Regulations and the instructions 
of the Bureau. The officer of the day shall sign 
only that part of the log which he has written. 
Any entries made by another officer temporarily 
relieving the officer of the day shall be signed 
by that officer. 

(4) Administrative Watch, — To assure greater 
professional utilization of medical officers, an ad- 
ministrative watch officer is recommended for 
hospitals having 300 or more operating beds and 



should be designated to stand the day's duty in 
the office of and under the supervision of the 
officer of the day. In view of the availability of 
the regular administrative staff during normal 
working hours and dependent upon the admin- 
istrative workload of the officer of the day, the 
administrative watch officer might better func- 
tion from the close of one workday until the 
beginning of the next. However, where justified 
by workload and staffing considerations, a per- 
manent administrative watch officer may be desig- 
nated to perform duties during normal working 
hours. When functioning during normal work- 
ing hours, he shall coordinate his duties with 
appropriate administrative components of the 
hospital. Evening and night coverage for duties 
of the administrative watch officer should be 
continued as additional duty for the hospital's 
regular MSC officer personnel. To perform his 
duties properly, the administrative watch officer 
should be physically present on the reservation 
throughout his duty period. The administrative 
watch officer shall be responsible for but not 
necessarily limited to the following duties during 
the evening and night portions of his watch. 
When the administrative watch officer functions 
during working hours, duties conflicting with 
the regularly assigned duties of the various ad- 
ministrative components of the hospital should 
be excluded. 

(a) Accept incoming phone calls for officer 
of the day, taking independent action on those 
administrative matters in which medical officer 
judgment is not indicated or necessary. 

(b) Authorize and dispatch Government 
vehicles as required. 

(c) Represent the officer of the day at fire 
drills and in other nonmedical emergency 
matters. 

(d) Authorize civilian employee overtime 
when an absolute requirement exists. 



11-10 

Change 29 



CHAPTER 11. NAVAL HOSPITALS 



11-13 



(e) Determine eligibility of individuals re- 
questing emergency, outpatient, and inpatient 
treatment. 

(f) Make nonprofessional staffing arrange- 
ments for special watches and emergency forces 
as required. 

(g) Supervise the operation of the admission 
office(s). 

(h) Take necessary action incident to the 
receipt of disciplinary cases. 

(i) Conduct investigations and make reports 
on accidents and other unusual occurrences, ob- 
tain statements of witnesses, and suggest that 
fitness-for-duty examinations be conducted when 
indicated. 

(j) Inspect hospital corpsmen before they 
go on night duty. 

(k) Issue property and special night-meal 
passes. 

(1) Perform decedent affairs functions as 
necessary. 

(m) Record and take appropriate action on 
incoming official messages. 

(n) Assume temporary custody of patients' 
valuables. 

(o) Take necesary action on requests for 
emergency leave or special liberty if not medi- 
cally contraindicated. 

(p) Advise key offices and next of kin, as 
appropriate, of changes to the serious and critical 
list. 

(q) Inspect the hospital grounds and build- 
ings for cleanliness and effect necessary remedial 
actions as required. 

(r) Approve toll calls. 

(s) Direct the search of the hospital reserva- 
tion when absentees are reported, and coordinate 
with civil authorities as required. 

(t) Receive requests for transcripts of clini- 
cal records and transmit them to the patient 
affairs division for compliance the next working 
day. In emergency situations, process the release 
of transcripts of clinical records when authorized 
by the officer of the day. 

(u) Keep the officer of the day informed of 
significant matters as warranted. 

(v) Maintain a rough log. 
(5) Other Watches, — The commanding officer 
may establish a watch consisting of senior officers 
of the Medical Corps to act in an advisory ca- 
pacity to the officer of the day on professional 
matters and other problems which may arise. 
No officer shall be assigned as senior watch 
officer until he is thoroughly familiar with the 
management and administration of the hospital. 



11-13. Administrative Divisions 

(1) Certain administrative divisions shall be 
established in each naval hospital to transact the 
hospital's business and conduct its administrative 
functions. These divisions shall include a per- 
sonnel division, patient affairs division, fiscal and 
supply division, food service division, and operat- 
ing services division. A maintenance division is 
established when not combined with a public 
works center. A disbursing division, if not con- 
solidated with a Navy regional finance center or 
finance office, may be established when a Supply 
Corps officer is attached. A Navy exchange divi- 
sion and a comptroller division may be estab- 
lished when authorized. When a comptroller 
division is authorized, a separate supply division 
should be established. A separate special services 
division and a security division are permitted 
when the scope of these programs justifies their 
existence. 

(2) Whenever practicable, the chief of a divi- 
sion shall be the senior officer attached to the 
hospital who is specially trained and competent 
in the administrative field under his supervision. 

(3) Chiefs of administrative divisions shall be 
officers of the Medical Service Corps, except that 
the chiefs of disbursing divisions and Navy ex- 
change divisions (at hospitals where these func- 
tions are organized at the division level) shall 
be officers of the Supply Corps, and the chief, 
maintenance division, shall be an officer of the 
Civil Engineer Corps at hospitals having an au- 
thorized billet for a CEC officer. 

(4) Chiefs of administrative divisions report 
to and are directly responsible to the administra- 
tive officer for their effective operation and for 
the performance of the following general ad- 
ministrative functions and such collateral duties 
as may be assigned: 

(a) Plan, direct, and supervise the work and 
training of assigned personnel. 

(b) Prepare and maintain accurate func- 
tional organization charts and position descrip- 
tions, documenting the organizational breakdown 
and the assignment of personnel to positions and 
duties. 

(c) Insure the proper security, custody, use, 
conservation, maintenance, expenditure, and cor- 
rect inventory of all Government property 
charged to the division and require the economi- 
cal use of utilities and supplies. 

(d) Insure that required reports and returns 
are prepared and submitted in accordance with 
instructions and that prescribed records are both 
current and accurate. 

(e) Observe all prescribed and necessary pre- 
cautions for safety and indoctrinate assigned per- 
sonnel in safety and accident prevention. 



o 11-11 
Change 29 



11-13 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



11-20 



(f) Be thoroughly conversant with the fire 
bill and other emergency or disaster bills and 
nstruct personnel in their requirements. 

(g) Maintain current information on the 
laws, regulations, and instructions pertaining to 
the accomplishment of assigned duties and func- 
tions. 

(h) Insure the proper cleanliness and main- 
tenance of assigned spaces and grounds. 

(i) Conduct periodic inspections of assigned 
personnel, materials, and spaces. 

(j) Perform such specific duties as are out- 
lined in the succeeding articles, 

11-14. Personnel Division 

(1) The division shall administer and coordi- 
nate the hospital staff personnel program. 

(a) The office of the division chief shall 
consist of the chief, personnel division, a civilian 
personnel assistant, a training officer, a special 
services officer, and staff and clerical personnel as 
may be assigned. When a full-time training offi- 
cer or special services officer is not assigned, the 
chief, personnel division, shall serve collaterally 
as either or both. 

(b) The division shall be subdivided into 
a military personnel branch, a civilian personnel 
branch, a training branch, and a special services 
branch if a separate special services division is 
not justified. (When workload or staffing is 
limited, the functions of branches may be com- 
bined.) 

11-15. Patient Affairs Division 

(1) The division shall provide and coordinate 
procedures for the admission and disposition of 
patients, and for the processing and disposition 
of medical records, reports, and statistics per- 
taining to their professional treatment and care. 

(a) The., office of the division chief shall 
consist of the chief, patient affairs division, a 
legal assistance referrals officer, a decedent affairs 
officer, and staff and clerical personnel as may 
be assigned. When a full-time legal assistance 
referrals officer or decedent affairs officer is not 
assigned, the chief, patient affairs division, shall 
serve collaterally as either or both. 

(b) The division shall be subdivided into a 
registrar branch, a medical records branch, a 
services branch, and a medical data branch. 
(When workload or staffing is limited, the func- 
tions of branches may be combined.) 

11-16. Fiscal and Supply Division 

(1) The division shall be responsible for estab- 
lishing, coordinating, and maintaining an inte- 
grated system for financial management which 



will provide the commanding officer and pro- 
gram managers with factual data essential for 
effective management control of all operations, 
and provide higher authority with realistic 
budgetary requirements and accurate fiscal re- 
port. (If a comptroller has not been authorized, 
his duties, prescribed in art. 11-23, are per- 
formed by the fiscal branch.) The division shall 
be subdivided into a fiscal branch and a supply 
branch. 

11-17. Food Service Division 

(1) The division shall administer and coordi- 
nate the hospital food service programs. The 
division shall be subdivided into an administra- 
tion and stores branch, a therapeutic diet branch, 
and a production and service branch. The fact 
that the functions of the therapeutic diet kitchen 
are incorporated in the production and service 
branch does not preclude the establishment of 
the therapeutic diet branch. 

11-18, Operating Services Division 

(1) The division shall provide a variety of 
administrative service's essential to the internal 
operation of the hospital, and a rehabilitation 
program for convalescent patients. The division 
shall be subdivided into a general services 
branch, a linen service branch, a housekeeping 
branch, and a security branch if a separate divi- 
sion is not justified. 

11-19. Maintenance Division 

(1) The division shall provide utility services 
and maintain the hospital plant facilities and 
equipment in serviceable condition through ad- 
ministration and coordination of a preventive 
maintenance program, and conduct the pest con- 
trol program. The division shall be subdivided 
into a utilities branch, a shops branch, a grounds 
branch, a garage branch, and a pest control shop. 
The functions of branches may be combined to 
adjust for limited workload or staffing, or the 
division may be deleted in its entirety at hos- 
pitals receiving maintenance support from public 
works centers. 

11-20. Disbursing Division 

(1) A disbursing division shall be established 
as an administrative division when an officer of 
the Supply Corps is attached as disbursing offi- 
cer. 

(2) When established, the disbursing divi- 
sion is responsible for the payment of military 
and civilian personnel attached to the hospital, 
the preparation and payment of public vouchers, 
the accounting of public funds, and the furnish- 
ing of transportation requests, meal tickets, and 
other advances. The division shall hold the 



11-12 

Change 29 



11-20 



CHAPTER U. NAVAL HOSPITALS 



11-24 



money and valuables of patients for safekeeping 
as requested and shall receive and account for 
public moneys collected by the hospital collec- 
tion agent. 

(3) The division may be subdivided into a 
military pay accounts branch, a fiscal branch, and 
a public voucher and transportation branch. 

11-21. Navy Exchange Division 

(1) A Navy exchange division shall be estab- 
lished as an administrative division, when au- 
thorized by BUMED, to manage the hospital 
Navy exchange activities. The division may be 
subdivided into a retail branch and a services 
branch. 

11-22. Data Processing Division 

(1) The division shall be responsible for ad- 
ministering and coordinating the automatic data 
processing services for the hospital and assigned 
satellite medical facilities. Performs ADP opera- 
tions for all divisions and services of the hospital, 
including standard procedures established for 



integrated medical information systems. The 
division . shall be subdivided into a systems 
branch and an operations branch. 

11-23. Comptroller Division 

(1) The division shall be responsible for estab- 
lishing, coordinating, and maintaining an inte- 
grated system for financial management which 
will provide the commanding officer and pro- 
gram managers with factual data essential for 
effective management control of all operations 
and provide higher authority with realistic 
budgetary requirements and accurate fiscal re- 
ports. The division may be subdivided into a 
special studies and internal review branch; a 
budget, progress reporting and statistical branch; 
and an accounting branch. 

11-24. Additional Divisions 

(1) Except for the authorized exceptions to 
the basic organization plan, additional admin- 
istrative divisions shall not be established with- 
out prior approval of the Bureau, 



11-13 
Change 29 



11-25 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



11-27 



Section IV. PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 

Article 

Establishment . 11-25 

Director of Clinical Services 11-26 

General Functions 11-27 

Anesthesiology Service 11-29 

Dental Service 11-30 

Dermatology Service 11-31 

EENT Service 11-32 

Laboratory Service _ 11-33 

Medical Service _ 11-34 

Neuropsychiatry Service 11-35 

Neurosurgical Service 11-36 

Nursing Service 11-37 

Obstetrics and Gynecology Service 11-38 

Orthopedic Service 11-39 

Outpatient Service 11-40 

Pediatric Service i 11-41 

Pharmacy Service . 11—42 

Physical Medicine Service 11-43 

Radiology Service 11-44 

Surgical Service 11-45 

Urology Service 11-46 

Ward Medical and Dental Officers 11-47 

Residents 11-48 

Patients 1 11-49 

Disposition of Patients 11-50 



11-25. Establishment 

(1) Certain clinical services shall be established 
to provide medical and dental care and treatment 
for sick and injured patients and to perform 
such other professional functions as may be re- 
quired by law and regulations. The number and 
designations of these services shall be determined 
by the commanding officer in the light of local 
conditions except that a dental service shall be 
established whenever a dental officer is attached 
for duty. In some hospitals, for example, the 
size and character of the patient load warrants 
the establishment of a separate urology service. 
In others, it may be determined that this 
specialty should be located as a branch of the 
surgical service. Similarly, it may appear prac- 
ticable to divide the EENT service into an 
ophthalmology service and an otorhinolaryngol- 
ogy service in a very large hospital even though 
these specialties are found in a single organiza- 
tional unit in most naval hospitals. Each clinical 
service that is established should be an inde- 
pendent unit reporting to the commanding offi- 
cer through the director of clinical services. 

11-26. Director of Clinical Services 

(1) The executive officer of the hospital shall 
serve as the director of clinical services and, as 
such, directly supervises and coordinates the vari- 
ous clinical services, assuring that the highest 



standards of professional care are maintained. 
(See art. 11-8 for related responsibilities.). 

11-27. General Functions 

(1) Each clinical service shall have the follow- 
ing functions in common: 

(a) Insure that the highest standards of pro- 
fessional practice are maintained. 

(b) Inform and advise the director, clinical 
services (executive officer) regarding all activ- 
ities, including the care and condition of patients, 
especially the seriously and very seriously ill. 

(c) Participate in staff conferences and pro- 
vide consultant services as requested. 

(d) Collaborate with the other clinical serv- 
ices and the administrative divisions, as appropri- 
ate, to promote patient comfort and welfare, and 
to speed patient recovery. 

(e) Exercise general administrative supervi- 
sion and control over assigned wards and sup- 
porting facilities. 

(f) Participate in and conduct appropriate 
portions of the hospital training program. 

(g) Confer with civilian consultants on ap- 
propriate problems, including the education and 
training of residents and interns. 

(h) Initiate and conduct research and/or 
clinical studies as appropriate. 



11-14 

Change 1*1 



11-27 



CHAPTER U. NAVAL HOSPITALS 



11-34 



(i) Insure the adequacy, security, mainte- 
nance, economical and proper use, and proper 
accounting of supplies and equipment. 

{j) Insure the proper preparation and 
maintenance, and the prompt completion and 
submission of prescribed records, reports, and 
returns. 

(k) Insure the prompt and proper disposi- 
tion of patients as provided by law and regula- 
tions. 

(1) Perform such collateral duties as may 
be assigned. 

11-28. Chiefs of Services 

(1) Whenever practicable, the chief of a 
clinical service shall be the senior officer attached 
to the service and especially trained and com- 
petent in the professional field under his super- 
vision. 

(2) An officer designated by the commanding 
officer shall be assigned collateral duty as chief 
of research. It shall be his duty to organize, 
stimulate, and supervise clinical investigation 
pertaining to any and all of the clinical services, 
and to encourage Medical Department officers, 
including residents and interns, in learning and 
applying the techniques of clinical research. 

11-29. Anesthesiology Service 

(1) The service shall determine, in consulta- 
tion with the operating surgeon, the type of 
anesthetic to be used, administer anesthetics, 
maintain complete record of each anesthetic ad- 
ministered, and followup on postanesthetic pa- 
tients. Render consultations concerning patients 
suffering from cardiopulmonary disorders, respir- 
atory depression, and respiratory obstructions. 
Provide training programs for professional and 
nonprofessional personnel in resuscitation and 
insure maintenance of resuscitation equipment. 
Exercise immediate supervision over the post- 
operating recovery room and supervise patient 
oxygen therapy in collaboration with other 
services. 

(2) The service may be subdivided into an 
anesthesia branch and an oxygen therapy and 
resuscitation branch. 

11-30. Dental Service 

(1) The service shall provide and coordinate 
dental services for staff and patient personnel, 
including operative treatments, periodontic treat- 
ments, prosthodontic treatments, and oral sur- 
gery, as required. The service shall also promote 
oral health and institute oral hygienic measures 
for the prevention and control of dental disease. 
The service may be subdivided into an oral diag- 



nosis branch, an operative branch, an oral sur- 
gery branch, a prosthodontics branch, and a 
periodontics branch. 

11-31, Dermatology Service 

(1) The service conducts ward rounds, oper- 
ates the clinics, provides superficial X-ray ther- 
apy, ultraviolet therapy and allergy workups; 
prepares and examines cultural material having 
to do with superficial mycotic diseases, and re- 
views slides on specimens submitted and pre- 
pared by the laboratory which pertain to path- 
ology of the skin. The service may be subdivided 
into a clinical dermatology branch, mycology 
branch, and a dermal histopathology branch. 

11-32. EENT Service 

(1) The service shall provide and coordinate 
services relative to the examination, diagnosis, 
care, treatment, and appropriate disposition of 
patients with diseases, injuries, or disorders of 
the eye, ear, nose, or throat; and shall furnish 
support to the outpatient service in rendering 
EENT care to eligible outpatients. The service 
may be subdivided into an ophthalmology 
branch and an otorhinolaryngology branch. 
(Large hospitals may establish a separate eye 
service and an ENT service.) 

11-33. Laboratory Service 

(1) The service shall operate the clinical lab- 
oratory of the hospital and conduct studies, in- 
vestigations, and examinations in clinical pathol- 
ogy and anatomic pathology, The laboratory 
service may be subdivided into a clinical pathol- 
ogy branch, an anatomic pathology branch and 
a blood bank branch. 

11-34. Medical Service 

(1) The service shall provide inpatient and 
consultation service in internal medicine and its 
subspecialties, allergy, cardiology, chest diseases, 
endocrinology, gastroenterology, and hematol- 
ogy; furnish support to the outpatient service in 
rendering medical care to eligible outpatients; 
maintain a communicable disease ward to pro- 
vide for the specialized care and treatment of 
contagious and infectious diseases, and maintain 
close liaison with Federal, State, and local au- 
thorities on matters relating to the incidence 
and control of communicable diseases. 

(2) Where desirable and practicable, the serv- 
ice will be subdivided into the subspecialty 
branches, allergy, cardiology, chest disease, endo- 
crinology, gastroenterology, and hematology. In 
smaller hospitals, several or all of the subspecial- 
ties will be grouped in general medical clinic 
and ward services. 



11-15 
Change 29 



11-35 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



11-43 



11-35. Neuropsychiatry Service 

(1) The service shall provide and coordinate 
services relative to the examination, diagnosis, 
care and treatment, and appropriate disposition 
of patients requiring psychiatric and/or neuro- 
logical treatment and, when necessary, shall pro- 
vide for the restriction and/or restraint of psy- 
chiatric patients; shall furnish support to the 
outpatient service in rendering psychiatric con- 
sultation to eligible outpatients; shall insure the 
full participation of psychiatric and neurological 
patients in the recreation and rehabilitation pro- 
grams of the hospital. The neuropsychiatry 
service may be subdivided into a psychiatry 
branch, a psychology branch, and a neurology 
branch. 

11-36. Neurosurgical Service 

(1) The service shall provide and coordinate 
services relative to the examination, diagnosis, 
treatment, and disposition of patients with in- 
juries or mass lesion of the skull, brain, spinal 
cord, or peripheral nerves; and shall furnish 
support to the outpatient service in rendering 
neurosurgical outpatient care. It shall be sub- 
divided into a diagnostic branch and a thera- 
peutic branch. 

11-37. Nursing Service 

(1) The service provides nursing care with 
emphasis on rehabilitation and patient teaching 
to all patients. Specialized nursing care is pro- 
vided psychiatric, pediatric, medical, surgical, 
dental, obstetrical, newborn, intensive care, 
emergency and operating room patients. 

(2) The service may be subdivided into a 
clinical nursing branch, an education and train- 
ing branch, and a nursing specialties branch. 

11-38. Obstetrics and Gynecology Service 

(1) This service shall provide inpatient and 
consultation services in the specialties of obstet- 
rics and gynecology and also furnish support 
to the outpatient service in rendering obstetrical 
and gynecological care to eligible outpatients. 
It may be subdivided into an obstetrics branch 
and a gynecology branch. 

11-39. Orthopedic Service 

(1) The service shall provide and coordinate 
services relative to the examination, diagnosis, 
care, treatment, rehabilitation, and appropriate 
disposition of patients requiring orthopedic 
treatment. The service is especially concerned 
with the preservation and restoration of the 
functions of the skeletal system, its articulation, 
and associated structures. It shall be subdivided 
into a surgery branch, a clinic branch, and a 



physical therapy branch when a physical med- 
icine service is not established. 

11-40. Outpatient Service 

(1) The service shall provide and coordinate 
outpatient services relative to the examination, 
diagnosis, and care and treatment of active duty 
and retired members of the Armed Forces and 
their dependents. The commanding officer shall 
designate a senior medical officer with appropri- 
ate qualifications as chief of the outpatient serv- 
ice. This service may be subdivided into an 
administrative branch and branches of each of 
the clinical services represented in the hospital. 

11-41. Pediatric Service 

(1) The service shall provide and coordinate 
inpatient support relative to the examination, 
diagnosis, and care and treatment of eligible 
dependent members of the Armed Forces, active 
and retired. The service collaborates with the 
other clinical services as necessary in providing 
this care. It shall be subdivided into a diagnostic 
branch and a therapeutic branch. 

11-42. Pharmacy Service 

(1) The service shall plan and supervise the 
pharmaceutical activities of the hospital; oper- 
ate the pharmacy; advise and make recommenda- 
tions on policies, standards, practices, and re- 
quirements concerning pharmaceutical matters; 
compound and dispense drugs and medicines as 
prescribed by medical and dental officers; main- 
tain adequate stocks of medicinal supplies and 
substances; manufacture stock medicinal prepara- 
tions; inform professional personnel of new 
medicinal and biological preparations available 
for the treatment of disease; preserve drugs to 
insure potency; inspect ward drug storage; estab- 
lish safeguards for storing and issuing poisons, 
narcotics, and alcoholic drugs; inventory nar- 
cotics and alcoholic liquors at least monthly. The 
service may be subdivided into a compounding 
and dispensing branch, stock control branch, 
manufacturing branch, and dependents branch. 
The pharmacy officer shall be a member of the 
drug and therapeutic committee. 

11-43. Physical Medicine Service 

(1) The service shall provide for, develop, and 
administer the physical medicine rehabilitation 
programs of the hospital, including those related 
to physical training, physical therapy, and oc- 
cupational therapy. The service shall conduct 
physical reconditioning activities, including 
therapeutic and corrective exercises, to aid re- 
covery, prevent physical deterioration, and en- 
courage the psychological readjustment of all 
types of patients. The service may be subdivided 



11-16 

Change 29 



11-43 



CHAPTER 11. NAVAL HOSPITALS 



11-48 



into a physical therapy branch and an occupa- 
tional therapy branch. 

11-44. Radiology Service 

(1) The, service shall provide support for the 
hospital mission through diagnostic and thera- 
peutic radiology, radioactive isotope diagnosis 
and therapy, and radiation safety. It may be sub- 
divided into a diagnostic branch, a therapeutic 
branch, a radioactive isotope branch, and a radia- 
tion safety branch. 

11-45. Surgical Service 

(1) The service shall provide and coordinate 
services relative to the examination, diagnosis, 
care, and treatment of all surgical patients cared 
for by the subspecialty clinical branches assigned 
to it; furnish support to the outpatient service 
in rendering surgical care to eligible outpatients; 
maintain administrative control over all of the 
branches assigned to it; and plan and promulgate 
the surgical operating schedule and operating 
room assignments in close coordination with the 
anesthesiology service, other services and all 
surgical branches. 

(2) The organization of the surgical service 
will vary, depending upon the size and charac- 
teristics of the hospital. In large hospitals there 
may be one or more of the following branches: 
thoracic surgery, dependent surgery, and proctol- 
ogy. In smaller hospitals neurosurgery and 
plastic surgery will not be separate services, but 
would be assigned to the general surgery branch. 

11-46. Urology Service 

(1) The service shall provide for the special- 
ized care and treatment of genitourinary condi- 
tions. It shall be subdivided into a surgery 
branch and a diagnostic branch. 

11-47. Ward Medical and Dental Officers 

(1) Medical and dental officers in charge of 
wards, under the supervision of their respective 
chiefs of service, shall be responsible for their 
wards and shall have administrative authority 
over the staff and patient personnel assigned 
thereto. They shall be responsible for the neat- 
ness and orderliness of the wards under their 
charge and appurtenances thereto. They shall 
exercise personal supervision over the sick and 
require officers of the Nurse Corps and hospital 
corpsmen to be considerate and attentive in the 
care of all patients and punctilious in the ad- 
ministration of medicines. They shall be re- 
sponsible for doctor's orders, ward books, records, 
and forms. They shall sign the doctor's orders, 
and morning reports of the sick and shall report 
to the proper authority all patients who, in their 
opinion, are ready for duty, convalescent detail, 



or survey. They shall be responsible for the 
careful and proper use and correct inventory of 
all ward property. They shall verify the ward 
inventory monthly, when relieving another offi- 
cer in charge of the ward and upon relief from 
ward duty. They shall require compliance with 
all instructions or orders regarding the custody, 
issue, and administration of alcohol, narcotics, 
and poisons in the wards under their charge. 

(2) They shall visit the sick at prescribed 
hours and shall make additional visits whenever 
necessary. They shall consult with the chief of 
service as necessary and keep him advised regard- 
ing the patients in their wards. (In an emer- 
gency, any available medical or dental officer may 
be called in consultation.) They shall accompany 
inspection parties through their wards and invite 
attention to matters of professional or adminis- 
trative interest. They shall inform the officer of 
the day before leaving the hospital of the condi- 
tion of the patients under their care who may 
need special attention during their absence. They 
shall prepare a daily list of the seriously or very 
seriously ill under their care for submission to 
the executive officer and the commanding officer. 

(3) They shall familiarize themselves with the 
fire bill and instructions and orders regarding 
procedures to be followed in case of fire. In the 
event of fire, they shall supervise and assist in 
the removal of helpless and bed-ridden patients 
from the wards under their charge, using any 
personnel available. 

(4) They shall give personal supervision to the 
diets and messing of patients, exercising care to 
keep special diets to a minimum consistent with 
the patients' welfare and frequently observing 
the food service in their wards. 

11-48. Residents 

(1) Medical residents shall not be considered 
as having regular working hours. They must be 
regarded as being on duty 24 hours a day except 
that they may be permitted to be off watch every 
other night. It is mandatory that residents make 
ward rounds, attend autopsies, present medical 
papers, and attend staff or departmental medical 
conferences. The working hours and the general 
and special duty requirements for dental resi- 
dents shall be prescribed by the committee on 
graduate medical and dental training, 

(2) The resident-training program shall be the 
responsibility of the commanding officer and the 
committee on graduate medical and dental train- 
ing. This committee shall consist of the com- 
manding officer, the executive officer, the chief 
of the surgical service, the chief of the medical 
service, a member of the lecturer staff, the senior 
member of the intern committee, and the chief 



11-17 

Change Jj,l 



11-48 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



11-50 



of the dental service when a dental residency 
program is being conducted in the hospital. 

11-49. Patients 

(1) For administrative purposes, patients are 
attached to the hospital and come under the 
direct supervision of the medical or dental officer 
in charge of their ward. They shall be required 
to comply with all lawful orders and instructions 
governing their conduct and treatment. 

(2) Convalescent service patients may be de- 
tailed for light duty. A patient shall be assigned 
duty only with the approval of the ward medical 
or dental officer in charge of the case. The nature 
of the duties the patient is to perform shall be 
carefully denned and clearly understood by the 
ward medical or dental officer who approves the 
detail and by the person who will be in charge of 
the patient's work. 

(3) Patients may be granted sick leave only in 
accordance with the current directives of the 
service concerned. 

11-50. Disposition of Patients 

(1) Discharge to Duty. — Military personnel on 
active duty shall be discharged to duty promptly 
upon recovery, and shall be transferred in accord- 
ance with the current directives of the service 
concerned. As soon as it is determined that an 
enlisted person in the naval service will not be 
returned to the command from which received, 
the commanding officer of the hospital shall 
promptly notify the command concerned, stating 
the reasons therefor. 

(2) Transfer for Medical Reasons. — Patients 
may be transferred between Armed Forces medi- 
cal facilities to facilitate recovery or to effectively 
use available bed spaces. Detailed transfer pro- 
cedures are contained in current Instructions in 
the 6320 series concerning the subjects of medical 
regulating in United States, dependents' medical 
care, and transfer of patients to Veterans Admin- 
istration hospitals. Although Armed Forces pa- 
tients are normally transported by aircraft, travel 
by other means (including privately owned vehi- 
cles) may be permitted when travel by air is 
medically contraindicated. Travel by private 
means, including privately owned vehicles, if not 
medically contraindicated may be permitted 
when requested, but at no additional expense to 
the Government other than that authorized for 
travel by Government aircraft. 



(3) Transfer for Personal Reasons. — When an 
active-duty, inactive-duty, or retired member of 
the naval service desires for personal reasons to 
be transferred from one Armed Forces medical 
facility to another, he may submit a request for 
transfer. The request shall include a statement 
to the effect that he agrees to pay all transporta- 
tion and subsistence expenses involved in the 
transfer without reimbursement by the Govern- 
ment. An inactive-duty or retired member shall 
include in his request a statement to the effect 
that he is willing to pay any return transporta- 
tion and subsistence costs involved upon his 
subsequent disposition from the sick list. An 
active-duty member of the naval service should 
address his request to the Chief of Naval Person- 
nel, or the Commandant of the Marine Corps as 
appropriate, via the commanding officer of the 
hospitalizing medical facility (who shall make 
appropriate recommendations and state the prob- 
able date the patient will be available for duty), 
via any command carrying his records and ac- 
counts, and via the Chief, Bureau of Medicine 
and Surgery. An inactive-duty or retired member 
of the naval service should address his request 
to the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery via the 
commanding officer of the hospitalizing medical 
facility, who shall make appropriate recom- 
mendations. Intradistrict naval hospital transfers 
of members of the naval service may be effected 
upon approved request to the local district com- 
mandant. 

(4) Restriction. — To safeguard against possible 
later additional travel being required, transfers 
for medical and personal reasons shall be con- 
tingent upon the adequacy of the proposed re- 
ceiving facility to provide required care and 
disposition. In determining the adequacy of the 
receiving facility to provide required disposition, 
careful consideration should be given to the 
possibility that a service member may be re- 
quired to appear before a medical board in 
accordance with chapter 18 or a physical evalua- 
tion board in accordance with the Disability 
Separation Manual. 

(5) Orders and Travel. — The instructions gov- 
erning orders for and travel of naval patients 
and attendants will be found in the Bureau of 
Naval Personnel Manual, the Marine Corps 
Manual, U.S. Navy Travel Instructions, and other 
current directives. 



11-18 

Change 29 



11-51 



Regulations 

The Naval Hospital 

The Officer in Command 

11-61. Regulations 

(1) Hospital ships which are designated as 
such by the Department of the Navy shall be 
employed for the purpose of caring for the sick 
and wounded. They shall be under the general 
cognizance of the Bureau so far as matters per- 
taining to the distinctly hospital features of the 
ships are concerned. They shall be governed by 
the orders of the Secretary of the Navy and other 
competent authority and by the Geneva Con- 
vention for the Amelioration of the Condition 
of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of 
Armed Forces at Sea of August 12, 1949 (see 
art. 1-21 ) . 

11-52. The Naval Hospital 

(1) The naval hospital in a hospital ship shall 
embrace ail of the persons attached to the hospi- 
tal for duty or treatment, all activities within the 
ship which are devoted to the care and treatment 



11-53 



Article 

11-51 
11-52 
11-53 

of the sick and injured, and all parts of the ship 
which are used for the care and treatment of the 
sick and injured, including living quarters for 
persons attached to the hospital for duty and 
spaces for the storage of the supplies and equip- 
ment belonging to the hospital. 

11-53. The Officer in Command 

(1) The officer in command of the hospital in 
a hospital ship shall be the senior officer of the 
Medical Corps attached thereto. He shall be 
guided by the instructions in this chapter for the 
administration of a naval hospital ashore insofar 
as applicable and shall exercise control over its 
administration and organization, the assignment 
of its personnel and the establishment of techni- 
cal methods and procedures. He shall be under 
the military command of the commanding officer 
of the ship. (Also, see U.S. Navy Regulations.) 



CHAPTER 11. NAVAL HOSPITALS 
Section V. HOSPITAL SHIPS 



11-19 
Change 71 



( 



' 1 

o 



O ' 



c 



Chapter 12 

SPECIAL TREATMENT FACILITIES 



Article 

Designation 12-1 

General Transfer Procedures 12-2 

Aural Rehabilitation 12-3 

Bilaterally Blind 12-4 

Psychiatry 12-5 

Oncology 12-6 



12-1, Designation nated to receive patients who require definitive 

(t) The following medical facilities are desig- treatment or specialized medical care: 



Type of treatment or care 


Naval Hospital 


Naval Aerospace 
Medical Center 


VA Hospital 


1 

$ 

m 


0 

0 

s. 

a 


Great Lakes 


Oakland 


■S 
la 
a 

*v 
■O 
_rt 

J= 


Portsmouth, Va. 


St. Albans 


San Diego 


i 

e 
S 


Palo Alto, Calif. 


d 
c 

3 

c* 

> 
n 
X 

£> 










X 


X 






























































































Bilaterally blind 




















.X . 


X 


X 










X 








x . . 
















X 








X 














X 






X 




















X 






X 






X 












Neurology 

Neurosurgery 

Ocular Prosthesis, acrylic 

Oncology 


.X . 

X . 

X . 
.X . 

X 


.X . 




.X . 
.X . 

.X . 


X . 


. .x . 

. .X . 


.X . 
.X . 


.x . . 
.X . . 
.x . . 
.x . . 










Plastic surgery 


.X . 






.X . 




. .X . 


.X . 


.x . . 










Radiation therapy . . , 


























Radioisotope laboratory facilities 

Thoracic and cardiovascular surgery 


X . 
X . 
X 


X . 

.X . 




.X . 
.X . 


X . 


. .X . 
. .X . 


.X . 
.X . 


. X . . 
.X . . 

























































































12-1 

Change 63 



12-2 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



12-5 



12-2. General Transfer Procedures 

(1) Article 11-50 provides for the transfer of 
patients to facilitate recovery and contains gen- 
eral procedures and references applying thereto. 
Accordingly, when a patient requires definitive 
treatment or specialized care beyond the capabili- 
ties of a naval medical facility, he shall, if eligi- 
ble, be transferred to the appropriate facility in- 
dicated in article 12-1. 

12-3. Aural Rehabilitation 

(1) Patients requiring aural rehabilitation 
shall not be transferred to a special treatment fa- 
cility unless the true loss of hearing in the better 
ear is more than 30 decibels in the conversational 
range (256-2048) or unless the hearing of the 
whispered voice in the better ear is less than 3/15. 
Authority for transfer shall be requested as soon 
as it is determined that these conditions exist. 

12-4. Bilaterally Blind 

(I) Patients should be placed in training and 
rehabilitation status as soon as possible after 
blinding injury or disease; accordingly, every ef- 
fort should be made to expedite their direct trans- 
fer to the special treatment facility. 

12-5. Psychiatry 

(1) Preliminary Evaluation, Treatment, and 
Transfer. — Whenever a member of the naval 
service is thought to be suffering from a psychi- 
atric disorder, he shall be referred for evaluation 
and treatment recommendation. 

(a) Following psychiatric consultation, if it 
is recommended that the member does not re- 
quire psychiatric hospitalization at that time, but 
is unsuitable for further military service, the psy- 
chiatrist shall complete Standard Form 513 with 
adequate documentation of the basis for the de- 
termination of unsuitability as a result of mani- 
festing a "duly diagnosed" condition as stipu- 
lated in BUPERS Manual, article 3420180, and 
Marine Corps Separations Manual, 1900.16, para- 
graphs 6016P and 6017P. The recommendation 
will then be made to discharge unsuitable en- 
listed members by an administrative discharge. 

(b) If it is recommended that the member 
be hospitalized for further observation, treatment 
and/or disposition or if the services of a naval 
psychiatrist are not available, he shall be trans- 
ferred to the nearest naval hospital for further 
psychiatric evaluation, treatment and/or disposi- 
tion. 

(c) If, during this hospitalization, it is 
found that the member requires intensive and/or 



prolonged observation and/or treatment, which 
cannot be accomplished at that facility, he shall 
be transferred to a special psychiatric facility. 

(2) Attendants. — When transfer of a psychiat- 
ric patient has been approved, the air transport 
agency will provide flight nurses and aeromedical 
evacuation technicians to insure adequate medical 
attendance while in flight in accordance with 
OPNAV Instruction 4630.9 series. 

(3) Security of Patients During Transfer. — 
During the transfer of psychiatric patients, the 
responsibility for the patient, the patient's valua- 
bles, and his baggage is shared and progressively 
assumed by the (a) originating hospitals; (b) air 
transport agency performing aeromedical evacua- 
tion missions; (c) facilities providing care of pa- 
tients overnight (RON) in transit, such as hospi- 
tals or dispensaries; and (d) destination hospi- 
tals. The detailed instructions under these head- 
ings are contained in OPNAV Instruction 4630.9 
series. 

(4) Notification of Next of Kin. — The notifi- 
cation of next of kin shall be accomplished as 
outlined in BUPERS Manual, article 4210100.15, 
and Marine Corps Casualty Procedures Manual, 
MCO P3040.4, chapters 4 and 5, as applicable to 
psychiatric patients. ^ 

(5) Notification of Final Disposition. — 

(a) When it appears that a member of the 
naval service who requires further observation or 
treatment for a psychiatric disorder may not be 
entitled to such further observation or treatment 
under the cognizance of the Department of the 
Navy, the next of kin shall be notified by the 
naval hospital sufficiently in advance to permit 
the next of kin to indicate preference for the al- 
ternative methods of disposition available. When 
the effective date of separation has been deter- 
mined and if the patient is not to be discharged 
into the immediate custody of the next of kin, the 
latter shall be notified of the following; date and 
place of discharge; whether the patient will be 
discharged into his own custody or into the cus- 
tody of the Veterans Administration, or a State or 
private facility; and the address of the facility to 
which he is being transferred if he is not to be 
discharged into his own custody. The next of kin 
shall further be informed that correspondence 
should be directed to the facility to which the pa- 
tient is being transferred after his anticipated 
date of arrival. 

(b) In those cases where there is no indica- 
tion of incipient psychosis but the individual is 
lacking in social adequacy, is pathologically de- 
pendent, or intellectually retarded, the command- 
ing officer of the hospital should notify parents 
and primary next of kin, if other than the par- 
ents, of all psychiatric patients under 21 years of 
age being discharged through a medical board. 



12-2 

Change 63 



12-6 



CHAPTER 12. SPECIAL TREATMENT FACILITIES 



12-6 



This notification should be along the lines di- 
rected in BUPERS Manual, article 3450100. In the 
letter of notification, the date and the place of 
discharge should be clearly set forth so that the 
parents are fully aware of the course of action 
which is to be followed in the case. If the indi- 
vidual is 21 years old or older, the guidelines in 
article 3450100 should be followed. 

(6) Psychiatric Report (MED-6520-1).— Na- 
val hospitals and hospital ships having a psychia- 
try service shall submit this report monthly on 
form NAVMED 6520/5 to reach BUMED by the 
15 th day of the following month. 

(7) . Psychiatric Outpatient Report 
(MED-6520-3) . — All Navy medical activities 
where psychologists and/or psychiatrists are as- 
signed, except naval hospitals, research units, and 



recruit evaluation units shall submit this report 
monthly on form NAVMED 6520/7 to reach 
BUMED by the 15th day of the following month. 
This reporting requirement has been approved by 
the Chief of Naval Operations. 

12-6. Oncology 

(1) Patients requiring treatment by radium, 
supervoltage X-ray, cobalt radiation or related 
procedures when such treatment is beyond the 
reasonable capabilities of the hospital at which 
they are patients shall be transferred to the ap- 
propriate radiation treatment facility as soon as 
practicable. If available, slides and portions of the 
tissues should be forwarded with each patient. If 
no biopsy. has been performed, a statement to that 
effect shall accompany the patient, 



12-3 

Change 63 



c 



c« 



Chapter 13 

MEDICAL CENTERS 



Sections 

Articles 

I. National Naval Medical Center, Bethesda, Md. 13-1 thru 13-11 

II. Naval Aerospace Medical Center, Pensacola, Fla. 13-25 thru 13-32 

III. Naval Submarine Medical Center, Groton, Conn. ^ 13-50 thru 13-53 

Section I. NATIONAL NAVAL MEDICAL CENTER, BETHESDA, MD. 

Article 

Establishment ■ 13—1 

Organization and Command Relationships , 13- 2 

Consultation Service 13-3 

Administrative Activities of Center Command .13- 4 

Naval Hospital 13- 5 

Naval Medical School . 13— 6 

Naval Medical Research Institute 13-7 

Naval Dental School 13—8 

Naval School of Health Care Administration 13- 9 

Navy Toxicology Unit 13-10 

Library Service 13-11 



13-1. Establishment 

(1) By authority of the Secretary of the Navy, 
the Naval Medical Center, Washington, D.C., 
was established on 20 June 1935. At that time 
the Center consisted of the Naval Hospital and 
the Naval Medical School. On 17 March 1936, 
the Naval Dental School was established as a 
separate command under the jurisdiction of the 
Medical Center. In fiscal year 1939 Congress pro- 
vided for the construction, in the District of 
Columbia or in the immediate vicinity thereof, 
of buildings and facilities to replace the Center 
and its subordinate activities. As a result of 
congressional action and directives of the Depart- 
ment of the Navy, the National Naval Medical 
Center was established at its present location in 
Bethesda, Md., on 5 February 1942. Two addi- 
tional component commands, the Naval Medical 
Research Institute and the Naval School of 
Health Care Administration, were established in 



1942 and 1945, respectively. The Navy Toxicol- 
ogy Unit was established in 1959- 

* 

13-2. Organization and Command Relationships 

(1) The National Naval Medical Center, 
Bethesda, Md., commanded by an officer of the 
Medical Corps, is the parent activity of the fol- 
lowing component commands: 

(a) Naval Hospital 

(b) Naval Medical School 

(c) Naval Medical Research Institute 

(d) Naval Dental School 

(e) Naval School of Health Care Admin- 
istration 

(f) Navy Toxicology Unit 

Each of these activities is headed by a Command- 
ing Officer with the exception of the Toxicology 
Unit, which is under an Officer in Charge. 

(2) This organization, which functions as a 
medical, dental, diagnostic, educational, and re- 



13-1 

Change 57 



13-3 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



13-6 



search center, is under the command and support 
of BUMED. 

13—3. Consultation Service 

(1) The Medical Center maintains liaison with 
other institutions to facilitate promotion of com- 
mon professional interests. It is prepared to 
furnish certain consultation and diagnostic serv- 
ices. Requests for professional assistance should 
be addressed directly to the component command 
concerned. 

13-4. Administrative Activities of Center Com- 
mand 

(1) As the parent activity of the various com- 
ponent commands, the Medical Center command 
exercises direct control over certain administrative 
and logistic activities, including fiscal, public 
works, personnel, security, supply, Navy Ex- 
change, officers' quarters and messes, legal affairs, 
communications, sanitation, duplicating services, 
special services, religious services, civilian per- 
sonnel, transportation, maintenance, laundry, in- 
formation and education, service information (in 
collaboration with the component commands), 
radiological safety, fire protection, and Naval Re- 
serve training, 

13-5. Naval Hospital 

(1) The Hosptal, the major component com- 
mand of the Medical Center, was established as 
a general hospital for the diagnosis, treatment, 
and hospitalization of active and retired person- 
nel of the Navy and Marine Corps and their 
dependents. Hospitalization and outpatient care 
is also afforded those patients authorized by the 
Veterans' Admnistration, to certain groups of 
government officials such as Members of Congress, 
Members of the Cabinet, naval attaches of foreign 
countries on duty in the Washington area, and 
certain individuals specifically designated by the 
Secretary of the Navy. 

(2) The Hospital has been designated as a treat- 
ment center for special types of medical and 
surgical cases as set forth in chapter 12. 

(3) The Commanding Officer of the Hopital, 
as Deputy Commanding Officer of the Medical 
Center, is responsible to the Commanding Officer 
of the Center for coordinating those administra- 
tive and clinical functions of the Center which 
have a direct bearing on the patient-care mission 
of the Hospital. The organization of the clinical 
services is essentially the same as that of other 
naval hospitals, except that laboratory services 
are provided by the Naval Medical School, and 



dental services are furnished by the Naval Dental 
School. 

13-6. Naval Medical School 

(1) The Medical School is fundamentally a 
postgraduate institution that encompasses a num- 
ber of special activities. Its chief objective is the 
training of Medical Corps, Nurse Corps, and 
Medical Service Corps officers, and of hospital 
corpsmen, for service ashore and afloat, with spe- 
cial emphasis upon certain phases and branches of 
medicine and surgery of particular importance and 
peculiar to the Navy. Secondary objectives in the 
specialties include some research, the perform- 
ance of special tests for the Navy as a whole, 
medical photography, audiovisual services, closed- 
circuit television projects, the publication and 
production of manuals, correspondence courses, 
and audiovisual texts. 

(2) Courses available to Medical Department 
personnel are listed in BUMED instructions in the 
1500-1599 series. Various special refresher sym- 
posia, seminars, and workshops based on require- 
ments set forth by BUMED or other authority are 
presented. These are usually of a one-time nature. 

(3) Also, extensive microscopic slide collec- 
tions, topic slide presentations, and collections of 
biological specimens are available for use. 

(4) All general laboratories required to supple- 
ment the work of the adjoining Naval Hospital 
are within the Medical School. These laboratories 
also serve as a consultation center for the Navy 
at large, whenever a laboratory of a hospital, 
dispensary, or ship desires assistance. The general 
laboratories include the facilities of anatomical 
and clinical pathology, parasitology, hematology, 
serology, bacteriology, entomology, epidemi- 
ology, physiological chemistry, general chemistry, 
toxicology, blood collecting, and blood bank. 

(5) Although the School is not primarily a re- 
search facility, residents in pathology have a re- 
quirement to know the principles and methods 
of research. Development research is also neces- 
sary in highly specialized fields, therefore, sev- 
eral projects are usually in progress at any one 
time, 

<6) The Edward Rhodes Stitt Library, consist- 
ing of approximately 35,000 medical books, 
journals, and pamphlets, is the central medical 
library for the Navy Medical Department, and 
comes within the purview of Medical School's 
administration. The services of the library are 
available to other facilities as noted in article 
13-11. 

(7) The Medical Illustration and Medical 
Photography Divisions provide the other neces- 
sary services for completing a well-knit organiza- 



13-2 

Change 57 



13-7 



CHAPTER 13. MEDICAL CENTERS 



13-11 



tion dedicated to advancing professional knowl- 
edge in the Medical Department of the Navy. 

13-7. Naval Medical Research Institute 

(1) The Institute conducts basic and applied 
research in all branches of the biological sciences, 
as well as the medical aspects of the utilization 
of atomic energy. The scientific organization of 
the Institute consists of facilities and scientific 
personnel for conducting research in atomic de- 
fense, aerospace medicine, biochemistry, chem- 
istry, bio-energetics, personnel equipment and 
design thereof, nutrition, pathology, physiology, 
submarine and diving medicine, deep sub- 
mergence, virology, bacteriology, biophysics, ex- 
perimental dentistry, hematology, parisitology, 
pharmacology, toxicology, psychology, education 
and training, and experimental surgery. Research 
in the area of transplant immunology is also con- 
ducted in the Tissue Bank, Experimental Immu- 
nology Division, as noted in chapter 14. In 
addition, there are such service units as animal 
laboratories, technical shops, and instrumentation 
laboratory. 

(2) The Institute trains medical personnel in 
modern research methods and offers opportunities 
for interested and qualified personnel of the 
Medical Department to conduct or participate in 
research projects. Research projects, as at other 
research units, are conducted with the approval 
of the Chief of the Bureau of Medicine and 
Surgery, and are under the administrative direc- 
tion of the Research Division of the Bureau. 

(3) The Institute, upon occasion, sends research 
teams to the field and aboard ships to conduct 
specific investigations, such as outbreaks of 
dysentery. 

13-8. Naval Dental School 

(1) The Naval Dental School conducts con- 
tinuing educational programs for Dental Corps 
officers at the graduate and postgraduate level, 
and other advanced educational programs in the 
various military fields of dentistry and the allied 
sciences; instructs and trains dental technicians 
in various technical specialties; conducts research 
projects; and provides dental support to the Na- 
tional Naval Medical Center and other authorized 
personnel in the geographical area as required 
in the teaching programs. 

(2) Courses available to Medical Department 
personnel are listed in BUMED instructions in 
the 1500-1599 series. 

(3) The School administers, under the cog- 
nizance of BUMED, the correspondence course 
program for dental officers. 



(4) The School prepares manuals, handbooks, 
motion pictures, and other aids for instructional 
purposes. 

(5) The School provides an oral histopathology 
service for all dental facilities ashore and afloat 
and is a designated histopathology center. 

13-9. Naval School of Health Care Administra- 
tion 

(1) This School provides advanced instruction 
in the modern theory and practice of health care 
administration for Medical Service Corps officers 
of the Navy and such other officers as may be 
assigned. The curriculum for the 10 month course 
prepares the students for positions of responsi- 
bility in all management functions of the mil- 
itary health care delivery system. The School is 
an off -campus center of The George Washington 
University, and students successfully completing 
the courses earn academic credit therefrom. 

(2) An indoctrination course is conducted for 
officers commissioned from the Medical Service 
Corps Inservice Procurement Program. An orien- 
tation course is provided Medical Service Corps 
officers receiving direct appointments from civil 
life. 

(3) Educational Counseling Service is available 
to Medical Service Corps officers and hospital 
corpsmen and dental technicians who aspire to 
a commission in the Medical Service Corps. The 
counseling service relates prior experience and 
education to the individual's personal goals and 
assists him in developing a program for inservice 
and outservice education to meet these goals. 

13-10. Navy Toxicology Unit 

(1) The Toxicology Unit provides technical 
and specialized services in the fields of opera- 
tional toxicology and health engineering as re- 
lated to toxicity problems encountered aboard 
ships and in the design and use of new weapon 
systems. The Unit conducts field studies and 
laboratory evaluations of potentially toxic air 
contaminants which may result in the degrada- 
tion of performance of personnel. It also devel- 
ops and provides biological data necessary for 
determining permissible limits so that precau- 
tionary measures, conducive to good health prac- 
tices, may be prescribed. Operational investiga- 
tions are conducted with the approval of the 
Chief of the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, 
and are under the administrative direction of the 
Research Division of the Bureau. 

13-11. Library Service 

(1) Applications frpm Medical Department 
personnel of ships and stations for the temporary 



13-3 
Change 57 



13-11 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



13-11 



loan of books and duplicate copies of current 
periodicals in the Edward Rhodes Stitt Library, 
or obtainable from other sources, should be 
addressed to the Naval Medical School. It is 
desired that the Library be utilized generally, but 
possibility of loss in transit prevents issue of un- 



bound periodicals. There are certain books which 
are so valuable or in such current demand that 
they may not be issued on a loan basis. When 
originals cannot be furnished, it may be possible 
to supply copies of particular articles. 



13-4 

Change 57 



13-25 



CHAPTER 13. MEDICAL CENTERS 



13-30 



Section IL NAVAL AEROSPACE MEDICAL CENTER, PENSACOLA, FLA. 

■ 

Establishment 



Mission - ^ 

Organization and Command Relationships 

Professional Activities of Center Command 

Administrative Activities of Center Command 

Naval Hospital 

Naval Aerospace Medical Institute 

•Naval Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory 

13-25. Establishment 

(1) The Naval Aerospace Medical Center, lo- 
cated at the Naval Air Station, Pensacola, was 
established 8 April 1957, by authority of the 
Secretary of the Navy. Component commands of 
the Center are the Naval Hospital, the Naval 
Aerospace Medical Institute, and the Naval Aero- 
space Medical Research Laboratory. 

13-26. Mission 

(1) The mission of the Center is to administer 
the Naval Aerospace Medical Institute and the 
Naval Hospital, Pensacola, Fla., by direction, co- 
ordination, and professional supervision concern- 
ing aerospace medical training, clinical and hos- 
pitalization services, aerospace medical research, 
and evaluation of aerospace medical equipment. 

13-27. Organization and Command Relation- 
ships 

(1) The Naval Aerospace Medical Center is 
under the command of an officer of the Medical 
Corps and is the parent activity of the Naval 
Hospital and Naval Aerospace Medical Institute. 

(2) The Center is under the command of the 
Chief of Naval Operations, the support of 
BUMED, and the immediate area coordination 
of the Chief of Naval Air Basic Training. The 
Hospital is under the command of BUMED exer- 
cised through the Commanding Officer of the 
Center. 

(3) Official correspondence of a routine or 
technical nature requiring no action, review, or 
comment by the Center command may be for- 
warded directly to the component command con- 
cerned. Official correspondence pertaining to 
policy, personnel, organization, financial man- 
agement, supply support, maintenance, and data 
processing, or matters of official interest or re- 
quiring administrative action, shall be routed via 
the Commanding Officer, Naval Aerospace Medi- 
cal Center. 



Article 

13-25 
13-26 
13-27 
13-28 
13-29 
13-30 
13-31 
13-32 

13-28. Professional Activities of Center Com- 
mand 

(1) In his additional capacity as Staff Medical 
Officer of the Naval Air Training Command, the 
Commanding Officer of the Center maintains 
close liaison with the Chief of Naval Air Train- 
ing. 

(2) A Special Board of Flight Surgeons, con- 
vened at the Center, provides for the examina- 
tion of naval aviation personnel referred to it for 
specialized study for the purpose of determining 
whether such personnel are physically qualified 
and aeronautically adapted for duty involving 
the actual control of aircraft and for duty in- 
volving flying. 

13-29. Administrative Activities of Center Com- 
mand 

(1) As the parent activity, the Center com- 
mand exercises direct control over certain ad- 
ministrative and logistic activities including fiscal 
and supply, transportation, civilian personnel, 
laundry, sanitaton, safety, electric accounting and 
electronic data processing machine service, public 
affairs, and certain phases of the paperwork man- 
agement program. 

(2) As a consumer stock point, the Center pro- 
vides medical supply support to naval activities 
in the Pensacola complex and to other specified 
naval vessels and shore activities. 

13-30. Naval Hospital 

(1) The Naval Hospital provides (a) general 
clinical and hospitalization services for the naval 
shore activities and fleet units of the Operating 
Forces; (b) joint hospitalization services for 
Armed Forces personnel; ( c) general clinical and 
hospitalization services for dependents of Armed 
Forces personnel, and for other authorized per- 
sons; (d) for the reception, screening, treatment, 
and transfer of casualties; (e) for the indoctri- 
nation and training of Medical Department per- 



13-5 
Change 57 



13-31 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



13-32 



sonnel in clinical techniques and specialties and 
in naval procedures and functions; and (f) on- 
the-job and technical training of hospital corps- 
men. 

(2) The administrative organization of the 
Hospital differs from that of most other naval 
hospitals in that the Hospital is a component 
command of the Naval Aerospace Medical 
Center, and receives and provides certain admin- 
istrative and logistic support from and to the 
parent organization. 

(3) The organization of the professional serv- 
ices is essentially the same as that of other naval 
hospitals. The staffing of some services is aug- 
mented by clinical specialists attached to the In- 
stitute who are utilized in their special field of 
competence at the Hospital in an additional duty 
status. 

(4) The Hospital, through its professional 
services, provides instruction in the clinical spe- 
cialties to student naval flight surgeons and na- 
val flight surgeons in residency training for 
certification by the American Board of Preven- 
tive Medicine (Aerospace Medicine). 

13-31. Naval Aerospace Medical Institute 

(1) The Naval Aerospace Medical Institute 
conducts training of aviation medical personnel, 
aviation psychology, aviation physiology, and al- 
lied fields; supports the Naval Air Training Com- 
mand in the selection, indoctrination, and in- 
struction of nonmedical aviation personnel; and 
provides professional and consultation services 
in aviation medical matters as required, 

(a) Training. — The training program con- 
sists of training medical officers in aviation med- 
icine, qualifying them for the designation of 
Naval Flight Surgeon or Naval Aviation Medical 
Examiner; providing postgraduate instruction in 
aviation medicine; conducting a residency pro- 
gram for preparation of applicants for eligibility 
for certification in aerospace medicine by the 
American Board of Preventive Medicine; main- 
taining liaison with the Naval Hospital, Pensa- 
cola, for furtherance of clinical work in resi- 
dency programs; conducting a course in aviation 
experimental psychology for qualified Medical 
Service Corps officers leading to the designation 
of Aviation Experimental Psychologist; conduct- 
ing a course in aviation physiology for qualified 
Medical Service Corps officers leading to the des- 
ignation of Aviation Physiologist; supporting 
the Naval Air Training Command in the psy- 
chological selection of nonmedical aviation per- 
sonnel and their indoctrination and instruction 



in aviation physiology, night vision, emergency 
escape procedure, and other related fields; con- 
ducting a course for enlisted personnel in avia- 
tion medicine technique qualifying them as 
Aviation Medicine Technicians; and conducting 
a course for enlisted personnel in aviation physi- 
ology, qualifying them as Aviation Physiology 
Technicians. 

(b) Repair and Calibration of Aeromedical 
Equipment. — The Institute conducts repair and 
calibration for a variety of acoustical instruments, 
audiometers, audiometric booths, and the like on 
behalf of BUMED. These include items devel- 
oped to meet the special requirements for the 
Hearing Conservation Program of the U.S. Navy. 
They also include such items as the acoustical 
accessories and installations in full pressure suit 
helmets and cockpits. Similar repairs are made 
on many items of oxygen equipment, training 
aids, and survival equipment. 

(c) Aviation Physical Examination, — The 
Institute provides examining facilities to deter- 
mine the physical fitness of personnel for admis- 
sion to and retention in the Naval Aviation 
Training Program and for determining the 
physical fitness for flying of other naval aviation 
personnel; performs physical examinations on 
such other military personnel who require a 
complete physical examination and reporting on 
Standard Form 88 as directed by the Command- 
ing Officer, Naval Aerospace Medical Center; 
and provides professional and clerical assistance 
necessary to process cases referred to the Special 
Board of Flight Surgeons convened by the Com- 
manding Officer, Naval Aerospace Medical 
Center. 

(d) Special Projects. — The Institute cooper- 
ates with other bureaus, commands, offices and 
agencies such as the Naval Air Systems Com- 
mand and the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration in carrying out assigned special 
projects. 

13-32. Naval Aerospace Medical Research Lab- 
oratory 

(1) The Laboratory conducts basic and applied 
research in aerospace medicine and allied fields of 
science. It is staffed with military and civilian 
scientists and is equipped for conducting research 
studies in all fields of aerospace medicine. 

(2) The Laboratory conducts test and evalua- 
tion for a variety of equipment and instruments 
which contribute to the efficiency and safety of 
naval aviators. Such items may have been de- 
veloped within the Laboratory or referred to it 
by other commands, offices, or bureaus. 



13-6 

Change 57 



13-50 CHAPTER 13. MEDICAL CENTERS 

Section III. NAVAL SUBMARINE MEDICAL CENTER, CROTON, CONN. 

Establishment 



Mission 

Command Relationship and Organization 

Functions 

Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory 

13-50. Establishment 

(1) The Naval Submarine Medical Center, a 
tenant activity at the Naval Submarine Base New 
London, Groton, Conn., was established 1 July 
1964, under a Commanding Officer. The Center is 
comprised of the Administrative Department; the 
Clinical Services Department, which was the Sta- 
tion Hospital and was a department of the Sub- 
marine Base; the School of Submarine Medicine, 
which was a department of the Submarine 
School; and the Submarine Medical Research 
Laboratory operating under an Officer in Charge. 

13-51. Mission 

(1) The mission of the Center is to administer 
the various components by direction, coordina- 
tion, and supervision of clinical and hospitaliza- 
tion services, submarine medical training, and 
evaluation of the biomedical aspects of submarine 
and diving medical material. 

13-52. Command Relationship and 
Organization 

(1) The Center is under the command and sup- 
port of BUMED and subject to the area coordina- 
tion of the Commander, Submarine Flotilla 
TWO. 

(2) The Center consists of an Office of the 
Commanding Officer (containing an Executive 
Assistant), three departments (the Administra- 
tive Department, Clinical Services Department, 
and the School of Submarine Medicine), and the 
Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory as 
a component activity with an Officer in Charge. 

13-53. Functions 

(1) General. — The Center performs a variety 
of tasks as outlined in BUMED Instruction 5450.6 
series (NOTAL), including normal Medical De- 
partment command functions and routine clinical 
and hospitalization services which are not de- 
tailed herein. The following subarticles cover 
Center operations that are of general Medical-De- 
partment- wide interest. 



13-54 



Article 

13-50 
13-51 
13-52 
13-53 
13-54 

(2) Specialized Training. — The Center (a) 
trains medical officers in submarine and diving 
medicine and assists in qualifying them for desig- 
nation as Qualified Submarine Medical Officer, 
(b) provides submarine refresher training for in- 
active duty Reserve medical officers, (c) trains 
enlisted personnel for designation as. Submarine 
Medicine Technicians and Nuclear Medicine 
Technicians, and (d) assists in training subma- 
rine personnel in methods of submarine escape 
and in the prevention and treatment of casualties, 
including diving casualties. 

(3) Specialized Services. — The Center (a) fur- 
nishes investigative services and medical assist- 
ance to the Ship and the Ordnance Systems Com- 
mands, Commanders of the Submarine Forces, At- 
lantic and Pacific fleets, and other submarine and 
diving activities as requested; (b) provides sup- 
port for military operations when directed or re- 
quested by competent authority; (c) establishes 
the standards for qualification of, and designates 
eligible officers as, Qualified Submarine Medical 
Officer; and (d) provides technical and medical 
services to the Submarine Base Escape Training 
Tank and medical services whenever the recom- 
pression chambers are in operation. 

13-54. Naval Submarine Medical Research 
Laboratory 

(1) The Laboratory, a component activity of 
the Center: 

(a) Conducts medical and dental research 
and development as it relates to submarine, ship- 
board, anrLdiving environments including hyper- 
baric and engineering. 

(b) Tests and evaluates the biological as- 
pects of submarine, hyperbaric, and diving medi- 
cal and related equipment. 

(c> Provides a source of scientific advisors 
and consultants readily available to operational 
commands. 

(d) Initiates research programs in military 
operations and special projects as needed to meet 
Navy requirements. 

(e) Conducts medical research clerkship 
training for medical students in the Ensign 
(1915) Program. 



13-7 
Change 66 



( 



c 




r 



i 



Chapter 14 

SPECIAL ACTIVITIES 

Sections 

Article! 

I. Aerospace Service 14- 1 *™ l4 ~ 5 

II. Advanced Base Organization 14-10 thru 14-15 

III. Tissue Bank 1 14-20 thru 14-25 



14-1 

Change 71 



■ 

< 



( 



( 



14-1 



CHAPTER 14. SPECIAL ACTIVITIES 



14-2 



Section I. AEROSPACE SERVICE 



Article 

Aerospace Physiology Training Program 14-1 

Responsibilities of Aerospace Physiology Training Unit Personnel 14-2 

Complement of an Aerospace Physiology Training Unit 14-3 

Student Restrictions to Aerospace Physiology Training 14—4 

Reports and Forms 14-5 



14-1. Aerospace Physiology Training Program 

(1) Objectives. — The Bureau of Medicine and 
Surgery directs the Aerospace Physiology Train- 
ing Program. The objectives of the program are 
to: 

(a) Provide definitive instruction in aero- 
space physiology (i.e., respiration, circulation, 
acceleration, spatial orientation, and vision), as it 
applies to the aircrewman and his survival. 

(b) Provide instruction in the accepted op- 
erational procedures for the utilization of oxygen 
breathing systems, emergency egress systems, 
pressure suit systems, and aircrew personal sur- 
vival equipment. 

(c) Provide swimming test, water survival 
training, and survival lectures in accordance with 
type commander instructions. 

(d) Coordinate fleet introduction and evalu- 
ation of aviation personal protective and safety 
equipment between Naval Air Systems Command 
and selected fleet aviation activities. 

(e) Conduct evaluation of aircrew protec- 
tive equipment in accordance with assigned tasks. 

(2) Courses, — BUMED develops courses re- 
quired to meet the instructional objectives of OP- 
NAVINST 3710.7 series. 

(3) Facilities. — The facilities utilized to meet 
the objectives of the training program are: 

(a) Aerospace Physiology Training Units 
(APTU's) located at selected air stations and 
hospitals. 

(b) Selected Navy laboratories and test fa- 
cilities. 

(4) General. — Strict adherence to applicable 
operation and maintenance handbook procedures 
on all training devices used in the Aerospace 
Physiology Training Program must be practiced 
in the interest of safety. 

14—2. Responsibilities of Aerospace Physiology 
Training Unit Personnel 

(1) Aerospace Physiologist (NOEC-0865).— 
He shall: 

(a) Coordinate the training program with 
all organizations and personnel concerned with 
its effective accomplishment. 

(b) Instruct in aviation physiology and su- 
pervise all indoctrination/refresher training 



within the APTU, and supervise and be responsi- 
ble for the safe operation of all physiological 
training devices under his control. 

(c) Conduct fleet introduction and evalua- 
tion of aviator's personal and survival equipment 
in accordance with AIRTASKS assigned to the 
APTU. 

(d) Demonstrate effective administrative 
management through maintenance of adequate 
records on all training, all AIRTASK assign- 
ments, and tfll maintenance procedures. 

(e) Be responsible, because of his special- 
ized training, for the proper management and 
supervision of any emergency incurred during 
training or testing events. 

(f) Provide consultation services on 
aeromedical consideration of human factors in 
aviation safety and accident prevention to flight 
surgeons and aviation safety officers. 

(2) Aviation Physiology Technician 
(NEC-8409).—He shall: 

(a) Serve as a technical assistant to the aero- 
space physiologist in the overall objectives of the 
APTU to which he is assigned. 

(b) Instruct in oxygen equipment, emer- 
gency egress systems, visual problems, low pres- 
sure chambers, personal survival equipment, and 
water survival, as required and assigned. 

(c) Maintain a proficiency in administrative 
duties peculiar to the requirements of the train- 
ing program. 

(d) Be thoroughly knowledgeable in the 
management of emergencies and injuries in- 
curred as a result of low pressure chamber, ejec- 
tion seat, or water training activity. 

(3) The Parachute Rigger (Aircrew Survival 
Equipment Man (NEC-7312)). — He shall: 

(a) Maintain personal survival equipment 
used by the APTU such as full pressure suits and 
ancillary equipment, oxygen masks, protective 
helmets, anti-exposure garments, life rafts, and 
life preservers. He shall conduct preventive main- 
tenance schedules on oxygen and pressure suit 
systems associated with low pressure chambers, 
ejection seat trainers, and water survival trainers 
(i.e., Dilbert Dunkers and pressure suit under 
water ejection seat). 

(b) Instruct in oxygen equipment, pressure 



14-3 

Change 71 



14-3 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



14-5 



suit systems, and personal protective and survival 
equipment. 

(4) TRADEVMAN' fNEC-7533).— He shall: 

(a) Operate training devices assigned to the 
APTU. 

(b) Conduct a prescribed preventive mainte- 
nance schedule on these devices. 

(c) Be responsible for the indoctrination 
and training of newly assigned TRADEVMEN. 

14-3. Complement of an Aerospace Physiology 
Training Unit 

(1) The normal minimum complement is de- 
termined by the physiological training devices 
assigned and the workload of the training unit. 

Title NOBC/NEC Minimum 

requirement 

Aerospace Physiologist 0865 1 

Aviation Physiology Technician 8409 

With Device 9A1/9A2 4 

With Device 9A1C/9U49B _ 5 

With Device 9A9 6 

Aircrew Survival Equipment 

Man . 7312 1 

TRADEVMAN 7533 2 

(2) Activities conducting water survival train- 
ing, under type commander directive, shall re- 
quire two additional personnel qualified as water 
safety instructors and Navy SCUBA divers. In 
addition, one TRADEVMAN (NEC-7533) shall 
be required to operate and maintain the devices 
associated with the water program. 

14-4. Student Restrictions to Aerospace Physi- 
ology Training 
(1) Restrictions to aerospace physiology train- 



ing for students shall be as noted in OPNA- 
VINST 3710.7 series. 

(2) Prior to indoctrination in any phase of the 
training program, the aerospace physiologist 
shall screen all trainees for any condition which 
would contraindicate participation in the low 
pressure chamber flight, ejection seat trainer 
shot, or water training. He shall refer all ques- 
tionable cases to a flight surgeon for clearance. 

14-5. Reports and Forms 

(1) Aerospace Physiology Training Report 
(Report Symbol MED 6410-3).— A single copy 
of this report shall be submitted on NAVMED 
6410/3 to BUMED at the end of each quarter by 
each activity at which aerospace physiology 
training is accomplished. 

(2) Report of Injury. — In the event of any 
personal injury incurred during training, a re- 
port and supporting document shall be submitted 
in accordance with instructions on NAVMED 
6410/3. 

(3) Altitude Chamber Reaction Report 
(NAVMED 6410/4),— A single copy of this 
form for each incident shall be completed in full 
in accordance with the instructions on NAVMED 
6410/3 and submitted to BUMED at the end of 
each quarter as an enclosure to report MED 
6410-3. 

(4) Training Forms. — Forms of record used in 
the Aerospace Physiology Training Program 
shall be uniform as established by the Bureau of 
Medicine and Surgery, Aerospace Physiology 
Branch. These forms are as follows: 



NAVMED 

form Title Stocking Point 

6410/3 Aerospace Physiology Training Report BUMED. 

6410/4 Altitude Chamber Reaction Report BUMED. 

6410/5 Student Screening Form Navy Supply System. 

6410/6 Aerospace Physiology Training Agreement BUMED. 

6410/7 Completion of Training Certificate Navy Supply System. 

6410/8 Aerospace Physiology Training and Low Pressure Chamber Flight Log Navy Supply System. 



(5) Special Medical Abstract (NAVMED 
6150/2). — Entries made on this form, having ap- 
plication to the Aerospace Physiology Training 



Program, shall be uniform as established by arti- 
cle 16-59. 



14-4 

Chang e 71 



14-10 



CHAPTER 14. SPECIAL ACTIVITIES 
Section II. ADVANCED BASE ORGANIZATION 



14-15 



Article 

Definition 14-10 

G Components 14-11 

Hospitals 14-12 

Staff Medical Officer 14-13 

Staff Dental Officer 14-14 

Training 14-15 



14-10. Definition 

(1) Advanced base organization is a generic 
term meaning any advanced base functional com- 
ponent, advanced base unit, or advanced base as- 
sembly either in standard or modified form. 

14-11. G Components 

(1) G components (i.e., advanced base medical 
and dental components) of appropriate size and 
number are generally included in advanced base 
units and advanced base assemblies, and become 
the functioning medical and dental facilities of 
the organization when put into operation. 

14-12. Hospitals 

(1) In the larger advanced base organizations, 
G1A, G2, or G4 components are generally in- 
cluded and, upon assuming an operational status, 
are designated as base hospitals. The facilities are 
designed to support land-based and fleet person- 
nel in the area and to provide general hospital 
facilities. 

(2) Dental support for advanced base hospitals 
is provided by the addition of appropriate dental 
components such as a G13 and G15 or a G29. 

14-13. Staff Medical Officer 

(1) There is normally a staff medical officer 
for each advanced base command. For administra- 
tive purposes he should be the senior medical 
officer of the area and should begin to function 
with the earliest establishment of the base. In 
general the staff medical officer's duties are simi- 
lar to those of a district medical officer but spe- 
cifically he should: 

(a) Supervise and coordinate all Medical 
Department activities of the command except 
dental activities. 

(b) Advise and make recommendations to 
the commanding officer on all medical matters 
affecting the command. 



(c) Initiate and supervise a coordinated pro- 
gram for the reception and evacuation of casual- 
ties and sick. 

(d) Maintain close liaison with other U.S. 
and Allied military activities in the local areas. 

(e) Coordinate, through liaison or other- 
wise, all activities of interest to the public health 
of the area such as malaria control and quaran- 
tine. 

(f) Maintain liaison with the force medical 
officer. 

14_14. Staff Dental Officer 

(1) At advanced bases, the senior dental officer 
in the area may be assigned additional duty on 
the staff of the advanced base commander. The 
staff dental officer shall advise and make recom- 
mendations to the base commander on all matters 
pertaining to the dental support, 

(2) Detailed duties of the staff dental officer 
are outlined in chapter 6. 

14-15. Training 

(1) The tactical training of all personnel on 
assignment for advanced base activities is under 
the cognizance of the Chief of Naval Operations. 
This training is carried out in well-planned in- 
structional courses designed to indoctrinate the 
personnel in sound military tactics, to familiarize 
them with their equipment and the organiza- 
tional setup, and to acquaint them with the con- 
ditions under which advanced base activities op- 
erate. 

(2) Medical Department personnel who are 
interested in advanced bases and desire further 
information should refer to the Table of Ad- 
vanced Base Functional Components (Opnavinst 
4040.22 series), the publication Base Develop- 
ment (NWIP 11-23), and the Catalog of Ad- 
vanced Base Initial Outfitting Lists (abridged) 
(NAVSUP Publication 28). 



14-5 

Change 71 




O ! 



14-20 



Location 

Functions 

Clinical Applications 

Tissue Homografts Available 
Tissue Graft Registry 
Auxiliary Tissue Banks 

14--20. Location 

(1) The Tissue Bank is located at and operated 
by the Naval Medical Center, Bethesda, Md. 
20014, as a Branch of the Experimental Immu- 
nology Division, Clinical Investigation Depart- 
ment. 

14—21. Functions 

(1) The Tissue Bank is responsible for: 

(a) Procuring, processing, and issuing appro- 
priate tissues. 

(b) Providing consultation on tissue trans- 
plantation and immunology problems. 

(c) The special processing of tissues for clin- 
ical and allied research. 

(d) Maintaining the Tissue Graft Registry. 

(e) The operation of tissue culture, tissue 
chemistry, and immunology laboratories. (These 
laboratories shall be engaged primarily in cell, 
tissue, and organ viability and graft response 
studies of a research and development nature.) 

(2) The Tissue Bank shall evaluate the role of 
the homograft in the treatment of military cas- 
ualties and, where necessary, provide tissues to 
approved civilian collaborators to accomplish this 
evaluation. 

14-22. Clinical Applications 

(1) Clinical studies of the homograft show the 
following clinical trends: 

(a) Bone, — The onlay bone graft with or 
without metal screw fixation offers fixation and 
osteogenesis in the treatment of fresh fractures 
and nonunited old fractures. Heterograft material 
has not proved to be clinically acceptable. Pack- 
ing large bone cysts with stored cancellous and 
cortical bone is very helpful in operative treat- 
ment. This is particularly evident in benign cysts 

Tissue 
Bone : 

Cortical strips 

Rib matchsticks 

Ilium strips 

Ground cancellous 

Crushed cortical 

Artery 

Cartilage 

Dura 

Fascia 

Skin 

Heart valves 

Cornea 

Kidney 

Nerve . 

Tendon (sheathed) 



14-23 



Article 

14-20 
14-21 
14-22 
14--23 
14-24 
14-25 

where growth is well removed from the epiphysis 
and where surgical resection is vigorous. Denti- 
gerous cysts and periodontal fixations have been 
successfully treated with ground cancellous bone. 

(b) Skin. — Stored skin grafts used in the 
severely burned patient (30% full thickness or 
greater) may significantly reduce morbidity and 
mortality, particularly when used as a dressing 
with complete changes of grafts every 5 days. 
Allograft skin has also been shown to be valuable 
in the treatment of other acute or chronic skin 
lesions where control of infection and prepara- 
tion of a clean granulation heal are necessary. 

(c) Dura. — Results indicate that freeze-dried 
dura, when used to replace large dural defects, 
constitutes a valuable addition to the neurosur- 
geon's armamentarium. 

(d) Fascia. — Freeze-dried fascia grafts yield 
clinically favorable results when used in repair of 
hernia, racial paralysis, radical breast resections, 
and Lawman-type procedures. 

(e) Heart Valves. — Aortic heart valves have 
proved to be of value in the treatment of aortic 
valvular disease and are available for further 
collaborative studies. 

(f) Cornea. — Fresh corneal tissue is made 
available in the immediate area of the National 
Naval Medical Center. Frozen viable cornea is 
being evaluated and will be available for collab- 
orative evaluation. 

14-23. Tissue Homografts Available 

(1) The folowing grafts are usually available 
within the supply limitations noted (supply varies 
with the availability of donors, and rilling re- 
quests must necessarily be dependent thereon). 



Approximate size or unit 


Availability 


10 x 2 cm 


Unlimited. 


6 pes. 0.5 x 4 cm 


Limited. 


8 x 2 cm 


Limited. 


Yi oz., 1 oz 


Limited. 


l /i oz., 1 oz 


Limited. 




Specific request. 


1 Y« x 6 cm 


Limited. 


7 x 8 cm 


Limited. 


11 x 18 cm 


Limited. 


500 sq. cm _ 


Limited, 


Specific request 


Specific request. 


One 


Specific request. 


One 


Local only. 


Specific request . 


Specific request. 


Specific request 


Specific request. 



14-7 
Change 71 



CHAPTER 14. SPECIAL ACTIVITIES 
Section III. TISSUE BANK 



Preservation method 

Freeze-dried 

Freeze-dried 

Freeze-dried 

Freeze-dried 

Freeze-dried 

Freeze-dried 

Freeze-dried 

Freeze-dried 

Freeze-dried 

Freeze-dried 

Freeze-dried 

Frozen 

Fresh perfusion-hyperbaric 
oxygen treated. 

Freeze-dried 

Freeze-dried 



14-24 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



14--25 



14-24. Tissue Graft Registry 

(1) The Tissue Graft Registry maintained by 
the Tissue Bank shall include data on graft 
donors and recipients. 

(2) Any naval facility installing a graft sup- 
plied by the Tissue Bank shall promptly report 
the case to the Tissue Bank for entry in the Graft 
Registry by completing the withdrawal section of 
the deposit card (Form NDW-NNMC 6143/2A) 
furnished with the graft. Upon discharge or 
transfer of the patient from the activity, a copy of 
the Narrative Summary (Standard Form 502), 
Operation Report (Standard Form 516), pertinent 
X-ray films, and the address(es) where corre- 
spondence is most likely to reach the patient, 
shall be forwarded by the patient personnel offi- 
cer, or one acting in a similar capacity, to the 
Tissue Bank. 

(3) Additional information will be requested 
by the Tissue Bank on a selected case basis. 

(4) The Tissue Bank shall request, receive, and 
copy X-ray films pertaining to recipients of bone 
tissue homografts and return originals to the 
originating activity. 

(5) The Tissue Bank shall forward to each 
patient on whom further followup is needed, a 
followup authorization card indicating the dates 
and nature of studies desired. 

(a) The patient is to present the card at the 
appropriate time to the nearest Federal medical 
facility as authorization for the test requested on 
that card. Arrangements have been made with 
the Army and Air Force Medical Departments 
and with the Veterans Administration and U.S. 
Public Health Service whereby these requests will 
be honored by their hospitals as well as by naval 
medical facilities. 

(b) In case the facility to which the patient 
presents the request for follownp studies cannot 
perform the service on a nonreimbursable or 



courtesy basis, reimbursement is authorized by 
the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. In such 
cases, the activity performing the service shall 
prepare and submit Standard Form 1080 to the 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, Navy Depart- 
ment, Washington, D.C. 20390. No funds are 
currently available for patient travel in connec- 
tion with this followup study. 

(c) Upon completion of the requested 
studies, the original X-rays, visual aid items, ex- 
amination reports, and other materials as may be 
requested on the followup authorization card 
shall be forwarded to the Tissue Bank. Biopsy 
or autopsy specimens on the homograft operative 
site should be forwarded in alcohol-formalin 
fixature. 

14--25. Auxiliary Tissue Banks 

(1) To meet the demand for preserved tissue 
grafts, additional procurement facilities may be 
established at various naval medical installations. 
These auxiliary tissue banks shall be responsible 
for tissue procurement and shall forward the 
human tissue grafts to the Tissue Bank at 
Bethesda for processing, freeze drying, storage 
and documentation within the Tissue Graft 
Registry. All auxiliary tissue banks shall adhere to 
the scientific and legal procurement procedures 
and practices utilized at the Tissue Bank at 
Bethesda. Medical officers and technicians as- 
signed to tissue banks and auxiliary tissue banks 
should first complete a course of instruction in 
tissue banking techniques at the Naval Medical 
School at Bethesda. 

(2) Auxiliary tissue banks may maintain a com- 
plete supply of tissue grafts to dispense within 
the local hospital and regional area. Tissues will 
be dispensed along with a copy of Form NDW- 
NNMC 6 143/2 A so that appropriate clinical in- 
formation can be made readily available to the 
Tissue Graft Registry at Bethesda for inclusion in 
the tissue graft medical record files. 



14-8 

Change 71 



Chapter 15 

PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



SECTIONS 

Article 

r. Physical Standards 15- 1 through 15-25A 

II. Physical Standards for Special Personnel Groups 15-26 through 15- 34 

III. Physical Defects and Waiver 15-35 through 15- 38 

IV. Physical Examinations 15-39 through 15-58A 

V. Aviation 15-59 through 15- 73 

VI. Reserve Components, Navy and Marine Corps 15-74 through 15- 80 

VII. Reporting Results of Physical Examinations 15-81 through 15- 84 

VIII. Methods of Examination 15-85 through 15- 94 

Section I. PHYSICAL STANDARDS 

Article 

Responsibility for Prescribing Standards . 15- 1 

Purpose of Physical Standards 15- 2 

Application of Physical Standards 15- 3 

Interpretation of Physical Standards 15- 4 

Medical History 15- 5 

Physical Standards for Entrance Into the Naval Service 15- 6 

Abdomen and Gastrointestinal System 15- 7 

Blood and BIood-Forming Tissue Diseases 15- 8 

Dental 15- 9 

Ears and Hearing 15- 10 

Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders 15- II 

Extremities 15- 12 

Eyes and Vision 15- 13 

Color Perception . 15-13A 

Genitourinary System 15- 14 

Head and Neck 15- 15 

Heart and Vascular System 

Height, Weight, and Body Build 

Lungs and Chest Wall 

Mouth, Nose, Pharynx, Trachea, Esophagus, and Larynx 

Neurological Disorders , 

Psychoses, Psychoneuroses, Personality Disorders 

Skin and Cellular Tissues 

Spine, Scapulae, Ribs, and Sacroiliac Joints 



15- 16 

15- 17 

15- 18 

, 15- 19 

15- 20 

15- 21 

15- 22 

15- 23 

Systemic Diseases and Miscellaneous Conditions and Defects 15- 24 

Tumors and Malignant Diseases 15- 25 

Venereal Diseases 15-25A 



15-1 
Change 6<J 



15-1 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-3 



15-1. Responsibility for Prescribing Standards 

(1) No person shall be enlisted, appointed, or 
commissioned who does not conform to the physi- 
cal standards prescribed by the Chief of the 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. While the 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery takes the initia- 
tive in their development, the standards represent 
the concurrence of all the interested bureaus 
within the Department of the Navy, and the 
Commandant of the Marine Corps where applica- 
ble. 

15-2, Purpose of Physical Standards 

(1) Physical standards are established to secure 
uniformity in conducting physical examinations 
and in interpreting physical fitness of candidates 
for, and persons in, the naval service. The object 
is to procure and retain personnel who are 
physically fit and temperamentally adaptable to 
the conditions of military life. This is intended 
to preclude from acceptance those individuals 
who present contagious or infectious disease 
which would be likely to endanger the health 
of other personnel; those who are likely to re- 
quire repeated admissions to the sicklist, pro- 
longed hospitalization, or invaliding from 
service; and those who present any condition 
which would be likely to form the basis of a 
claim for physical retirement benefits. The stand- 
ards, therefore, are intended to delineate a degree 
of physical fitness in acceptable applicants that 
will best meet the needs of the naval service and 
yet involve an acceptable minimum of incurred 
risk as concerns liability in regard to health 
hazards, repeated or prolonged medical care or 
hospitalization, assignment problems, and 
eventual pension or retirement benefits. This 
required degree of physical fitness is correlated 
with the available supply of applicants for mili- 
tary service and normal service needs. Depending 
upon the personnel needs of the naval service at 
any given time, these standards are subject to 
change. 

15-3. Application of Physical Standards 

(I ) To determine whether the applicant for en- 
listment, appointment, or commission meets the 
prescribed standards, he or she shall be physically 
examined. All applicants for entry into the naval 
service shall be required to conform to these 
physical standards as they apply to the program 
and rate, rank, or grade involved. In applying 
these basic standards set forth herein, the 
examiner should consult current directives per- 
taining to the particular program involved for 
further orientation as to policy applications. Any 
applicant who doe's not conform to the standards 
shall be rejected unless a waiver is obtained (see 
sec. Ill of this chapter). In submitting a recom- 



mendation for waiver it must be understood 
there are certain physical defects which under 
the established standards are absolutely dis- 
qualifying for appointment to commissioned rank 
(example: loss of an extremity or of useful 
vision); whereas there are defects which are con- 
sidered to be disqualifying but for which a 
recommendation for waiver may be appropriate. 
In the latter category are such defects as dental 
caries; absence acquired, teeth; hernia; flat feet; 
or certain degrees of defective vision. The de- 
cision as to whether such defects are disqualifying 
rests upon many considerations, including the 
amount of investment by the Government in the 
applicant, the need of the naval service for such 
additional personnel at the time of consideration, 
the relative professional qualifications of the 
applicant, and equity responsibilities of the 
service. 

(2) To be acceptable an applicant must possess 
the physical and mental fitness and the per- 
sonality and behavior characteristics necessary 
for adjustment to service life. The total fitness 
of the applicant shall be carefully considered in 
relation to the character of the duties which the 
applicant may be called upon to perform. The 
examiner must appreciate the difference in re- 
quirements between applicants for various pro- 
grams. An applicant for an expensive long-term 
training program (for instance, such as for ad- 
mission to the Naval Academy or the regular 
NROTC program, which are designed to pro- 
duce line officers) must meet a higher standard 
of physical fitness than an applicant who is to be 
accepted for a short-term period of service. The 
presence of slight defects in those who have 
matured may be of less import than in less mature 
persons and may not necessarily be cause for 
rejection. Slight physical defects in applicants 
who have had prior military service have less 
significance than in those who have not demon- 
strated their ability to function satisfactorily 
under service conditions. In general, it is con- 
sidered that relatively minor defects which would 
be disqualifying for original commission direct 
from civilian life are not disqualifying 
for appointment of an applicant from an 
officer candidate training program such as the 
Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps (Regular), 
the U.S. Naval Academy, or the Platoon Leaders 
Class, U.S. Marine Corps. Similarly, minor de- 
fects which would be disqualifying for original 
commission direct from civilian life are not 
disqualifying for appointment of an applicant 
from temporary commissioned rank or from Re- 
serve status to commissioned rank in the Regular 
Navy or Marine Corps, provided such an appli- 
cant has matured sufficiently and has demon- 
strated by satisfactory service that the defect or 



15-2 

Change 18 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-5 



disability has not interfered with the applicant's 
performance of duty. In the cases of applicants 
for Marine Corps officer candidate programs on 
appointment to commissioned grade, it should be 
borne in mind that all newly commissioned Ma- 
rine officers. Regular and Reserve, initially are 
expected to be able to perform all duties normally 
required under field conditions of infantry officers 
or pilots, as appropriate. 

(3) The physical defects or disabilities of ap- 
plicants for reenlistment (see art. 15-27) which 
ordinarily would be cause for rejection for 
original enlistment, are a proper subject for re- 
quest of waiver, provided it has been demon- 
strated that the defect or disability did not inter- 
fere with the performance of duty during the 
original enlistment. However, upon immediate 
reenlistment following discharge from the 
Regular service, request for waiver is not re- 
quired for defects or disabilities incurred as the 
proximate result of service provided the indivi- 
dual concerned can perform the duties of his 
rank, grade or rate. 

15-4. Interpretation of Physical Standards 

(1) Medical examiners should interpret the 
standards with discretion and should not construe 
them too arbitrarily. They should, however, 
avoid a tendency to find qualified the individual 
who is able to meet a particular requirement only 
after coaching or under unusual circumstances. 
In determining visual acuity, blood pressure, or 
pulse rate, for example, the mean performance 
should be considered in recommending ac- 
ceptance or rejection of the applicant. The con- 
ditions listed herein as causes for rejection may 
be absolutely disqualifying or only relatively dis- 
qualifying, dependent upon the nature of the de- 
fect, its significance in the individual applicant, 
and the program for which the applicant is being 
examined. Examiners are expected to use dis- 
cretion in evaluating the degree of severity of 
any defect or disability, but are not authorized to 
disregard defects or disabilities which are dis- 
qualifying in accordance with the standards. In 
the event a defect listed herein as cause for re- 
jection is considered not disqualifying in a par- 
ticular applicant, the examiner should set forth 
the reasons therefor. 

15-5. Medical History 

(1) In order to assist the examiner in conduct- 
ing the physical examination and in applying the 
physical standards, it is required that a careful 
history be obtained. An applicant for entry into 
the naval service, upon reporting for examina- 
tion, shall first be required to complete Standard 
Form 93 (Report of Medical History). The data 
on the completed form shall be reviewed, and 



elaborated upon by the examiner whenever it is 
necessary to present a more complete picture of 
the individual's medical history. 

(2) The complete history of the examination 
shall be inquired into. The following outline is 
indicative of the scope of such inquiry: 
(a) General History. — 

(1) Early Development. — Birth injuries 
and deformities. Age when bedwetting ceased, 
when walking began and when talking began. 
Neurotic traits. Childhood characteristics. 

(2) Home Environment. — Family har- 
mony. Attitude toward parents and siblings. 
Treatment by parents and others. Broken home. 
Conflicts with stepmother or stepfather. Ran 
away from home; reasons. 

(3) Education, — Final grade completed; at 
what age. Progress. Reasons for failures. Con- 
flict with teachers or schoolmates. Truancy. 
Reasons for leaving school. 

(4) Industrial. — Positions held. Wages re- 
ceived. Length of employment in each job. Effi- 
ciency at work. Economic adjustment. 

(5) Past Medical History. — Diseases, in- 
juries, and operations from infancy to present 
time in chronological order, with particular 
references to previous attacks of mental illness 
or nervous disorder. 

(6) Habits.—Vse of, and reaction to, alco- 
hol. Diet, tobacco, coffee, sleep, exercise, recrea- 
tion, etc. 

(7) Sex life. — Excessive or prolonged 
masturbation. Associated conflicts and guilt feel- 
ings. Any changes in sexual powers or interests. 
Impotence. Homosexual tendencies or overt acts. 
Perversions. 

(8) Marital. — Date of marriage. Number 
of marriages. Health of wife. Number of chil- 
dren. Stillbirths and miscarriages. Separation or 
divorce. 

(9) Antisocial Conduct. — Juvenile of- 
fenses. Residence in reformatory. Attitude 
toward authority. Arrests in adult life. Prison 
and jail sentences. Nomadism, hoboism. 

(10) Military. — Combat experience; when 
and where. Courts martial; for what offenses. 
Any disciplinary action pending. Attitude to- 
ward the Service. Promotions. Special duties. 
Previous services in other branches of the mili- 
tary; dates; reason for discharge. 

(b) Personality History, — Information should 
be obtainecTTegarding output of energy, ambi- 
tion, perseverance, moods, general relationships 
with other people, sociability, likes and dislikes, 
eccentricities, tolerance, conscientiousness, sensi- 
tivity, sense of humor, affiliation with religious 
cults, rigidity and perfectionism, seclusiveness, 
and feelings of inadequacy or inferiority. 



15-3 
Change 69 



15-5 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-7 



(c) Family History.-The presence of mental disease, 
neurological disorders, chronic invalidism, neurotic traits, 
epilepsy, personality disorders, disorders of intelligence, 
criminality, suicide, drug addiction, alcoholism, syphilis, 
tuberculosis, diabetes, cancer, kidney disease, heart 
disease, stomach disease, arthritis/rheumatism, asthma, bay 
fever, and hives in the parents, siblings and other collat- 
eral lines should be inquired into. 

15-6. Physical Standards for Entrance Into 
the Naval Service 

(1) The remaining articles in section I (15-7 
through 15-25A) set forth the physical standards 
for entrance into the naval service, except the 
physical standards for enlistment and reenlist- 
ment of male applicants which are set forth in 
article J 5-27. Where the standard differs for 
different groups of personnel as in male and 
female, Regular and Reserve, Navy and Marine 
Corps, the differences will be noted under the 
particular system or in separate articles in this 
chapter. In addition to the statement of the 
standard, there is included under each system a 
list of causes for rejection and where indicated, 
a brief resume of the method for conducting the 
examination. The lists of causes for rejection are 
not intended to be complete, but are representa- 
tive. A specific cause for rejection as listed is 
usually to be considered disqualifying while such 
condition persists. When it is necessary to de- 
scribe the method of examination at length, 
reference will be made to a specific article in 
section VIII of this chapter. 

(2) If an applicant is regarded by the medical 
examiners as physically unfit for naval service by 
reason of a condition not specifically noted in the 
succeeding articles as a cause for rejection, he or 
she shall, nevertheless, be rejected, and a full 
statement of the reason therefor entered on the 
report. 

(3) The term "medical examiners" as used in 
this chapter shall be construed to include an of- 
ficer of the Dental Corps when assigned to the 
duty of conducting the dental examination part 
of a physical examination. Likewise, the term 
"physical examination" shall be construed to in- 
clude the dental examination unless otherwise 
indicated. 

15-7. Abdomen and Gastrointestinal System 

(1) The abdomen shall be examined by inspec- 
tion and palpation and, if necessary, by percussion 
and auscultation. When indicated, X-ray study 
and laboratory tests shall be made. 

(2) The following are causes for rejection: 

(a) Cholecystectomy, sequelae of, such as 
postoperative stricture of the common bile duct, 
reforming of stones in hepatic or common bile 
ducts, or incisional hernia, or post-cholecystec- 
tomy syndrome when symptoms are so severe as 
to interfere with normal performance of duty. 



(b) Cholecystitis, acute or chronic, with or 
without cholelithiasis, if diagnosis is confirmed 
by usual laboratory procedures or authentic medi- 
cal records. 

(c) Cirrhosis regardless, of absence of mani- 
festations such as jaundice, ascites or known 
esophageal varices, abnormal liver function tests 
with or without history of chronic alcoholism. 

(d) Fistula in ano. 

(e) Gastritis, chronic hypertrophic, severe. 

(f) Hemorrhoids: 

(1) External hemorrhoids . producing 
marked symptoms. 

(2) Internal hemorrhoids, if large or ac- 
companied with hemorrhage or protruding in- 
termittently or constantly. 

(g) Hepatitis within the preceding 6 
months, or persistence of symptoms after a 
reasonable period of time with objective evidence 
of impairment of liver function. 

(h) Hernia: 

(1) Hernia other than small asymptomatic 
umbilical or hiatal. 

(2) History of operation for hernia within 
the preceding 60 days. 

(i) Intestinal obstruction, or authenticated 
history of more than one episode, if either oc- 
curred during the preceding 5 years, or if result- 
ing condition remains which produces significant 
symptoms or requires treatment. 

(j) Megacolon of more than minimal de- 
gree, diverticulitis, ileitis, and ulcerative colitis. 
Irritable colon of more than moderate degree. 

(k) Pancreas, acute or chronic disease of, 
if proven by laboratory tests, or authenticated 
medical records. 

(1) Rectum, stricture or prolapse of. 

(m) Resection, gastric or of bowel; or gas- 
troenterostomy; however minimal intestinal re- 
section in infancy or childhood (for example: for 
intussusception or pyloric stenosis) is acceptable 
if the individual has been asymptomatic since the 
resection and if surgical consultation (to include 
upper and lower gastrointestinal series) gives 
complete clearance. 

(n) Scars. 

(1) Scars, abdominal, regardless of cause, 
which show hernial bulging or which interfere 
with movements. 

(2) Scar pain associated with disturbance 
of function of abdominal wall or contained 
viscera. 

(o)Sinuses of the abdominal wall. 

(p) Splenectomy for any cause, other than 
trauma, if unrelated to disease of the spleen, 
hereditary spherocytosis, or disease involving the 
spleen where splenectomy was followed by cor- 
rection of the condition for a period of at least 
5 years. (Also see art. 15-8.) 



15-4 

Change 74\ 



15-7 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-9 



(q) Tumors. (See art, 15-25.) 
<r) Ulcer: 

(1) Ulcer of the stomach or duodenum, 
if diagnosis is confirmed by X-ray examination, 
or authenticated history thereof. 

(2) Authentic history of surgical opera- 
tion(s) for gastric or duodenal ulcer. 

(s) Other congenital or acquired abnormali- 
ties and defects which preclude satisfactory per- 
formance of military duty or which require fre- 
quent and prolonged treatment. 

15-8. Blood and Blood-Forming Tissue 
Diseases 

(1) The following are causes for rejection: 

(a) Anemia: 

(1) Blood loss anemia — until both con- 
dition and basic cause are corrected. 

(2) Deficiency anemia, not controlled by 
medication. 

(3) Abnormal RBC destruction: Hemo- ' 
lytic anemia. 

(4) Abnormal RBC construction: Heredi- 
tary hemolytic anemia, thalassemia and sickle 
cell anemia. 

(5) Myelophthisic anemia: Myelomatosis, 
leukemia, Hodgkin's disease. 

(6) Primary refractory anemia: Aplastic 
anemia, DiGuglielmo's Syndrome. 

(b) Hemorrhagic states: 

(1) Due to changes in coagulation system 
(hemophilia, etc.). 

(2) Due to platelet deficiency. 

(3) Due to vascular instability. 

(4) History of hemorrhagic states if: 

(a) More than one acute episode has 

occurred. 

(b) Less than 7 years have elapsed since 
evidence of single acute attack. 

(c) Less than 7 years have elapsed since 
splenectomy for hemorrhagic condition. 

(c) Leukopenia, chronic or recurrent, as- 
sociated with increased susceptibility to infection. 

(d) Myeloproliferative disease (other than 
leukemia): 

(1) Myelofibrosis. 

(2) Megakaryocyte myelosis.- 

(3) Polycythemia vera. 

(e) Splenomegaly until the cause is 
remedied. 

(f) Thromboembolic disease except for 
acute, nonrecurrent conditions. 

15-9. Dental 

(1) Purpose of Dental Standards. — The pur- 
pose of dental standards for entry into the Navy 
or Marine Corps is to: 

(a) Assure that persons who enter the naval 
service or Marine Corps do not have serious 
dental defects which would permanently and sig- 



nificantly interfere with the performance of the 
duties which are expected of them. 

(b) Assure that candidates for original ap- 
pointment as commissioned officers do not require 
extensive dental treatment which will necessitate 
frequent or prolonged absence from primary duties. 

(c) Assure that candidates for officer train- 
ing programs possess a reasonable level of dental 
health and do not require dental treatment which 
will significantly interfere with their participa- 
tion in the training programs. 

(d) Limit, when feasible, the amount of 
dental treatment needed by persons entering the 
naval service or Marine Corps. This is desirable 
since the strength of the Dental Corps is limited 
by law to a number which is insufficient to pro- 
vide all the dental treatment required by active 
duty personnel. 

(2) General Provision of Dental Standards and 
Dental Examinations. — 

(a) All dental examinations should be per- 
formed, when possible, by dental officers of the 
Navy or the Naval Reserve, even though the 
latter may not be serving on active duty. When 
a dental officer is not available, dental examina- 
tions of persons, other than applicants for admis- 
sion to the U.S. Naval Academy as midshipmen, and candi- 
dates for flight training (arts. 15-62(8) and 15-68(2) 
apply), may be performed by naval medical officers. 

(b) The dental examiner shall indicate on 
the examination form whether or not the exami- 
nee meets the dental standards which apply. 
Whenever an examinee does not meet the stand- 
ards which apply for a specific examination, the 
dental examiner shall enter a detailed description 
of the disqualifying condition. 

(3) Application of Dental Standards. — The 
dental standards shall apply to all persons enter- 
ing the U.S. Navy, US. Naval Reserve, U.S. 
Marine Corps, and US. Marine Corps Reserve, 

(4) Standards for Promotion of an Officer,— 
See BUPERSMAN 2220150, or MARCORPERS- 
MAN paragraph 6201. 

(5) Standards for the Dental Portion of the 
Triennial/ Annual Physical Examination of an 
Officer.— A. dental examination shall be con- 
ducted as a part of this physical examination 
of a commissioned or warrant officer who is on 
active duty. Conservation and promotion of oral 
health is the principal objective of this dental 
examination. When oral disease or dental de- 
fects are discovered, the dental examiner shall 
make suitable recommendations for the insti- 
tution of corrective measures. 

(6) Dental Standards for Duty at a Ship or 
Station Not Having a Dental Officer. — Whenever 
practicable, officers and enlisted personnel who 
are being transferred to ships or stations where 



2^72 



15-5 

Change 76 



15-9 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-9 



the services of a naval dental officer will not be 
available shall be referred to a naval dental officer for 
an examination and necessary treatment before pro- 
ceeding to such ship or station for duty. 

(7) Standards for All Categories of Women. — 

(a) To be accepted for appointment, a candi- 
date shall meet the same requirements as those pre- 
scribed for men. 

(b) To be accepted for original enlistment, an 
applicant must meet the same requirements as those 
prescribed for men. Those individuals with or- 
thorontic appliances attached to the teeth are ad- 
ministratively unacceptable so long as active treat- 
ment is required. Retainer-type orthodontic 
appliances are permissible. Dental examinations shall 
be performed by officers of the Dental Corps or, when 
dental officers are not available, by officers of the 
Medical Corps. 

(8) Standards for Appointment to Warrant or 
Commissioned Rank. — To qualify for appointment 
to warrant or commissioned rank, an applicant must 
have sufficient teeth, natural or artificial, in func- 
tional occlusion to insure satisfactory incision and 
mastication. 

(9) Standards for Appointment, Enrollment, or En- 
listment as Midshipmen, Naval Academy; Naval Avia- 
tion Cadet; Aviation Officer Candidate; Officer 
Candidate and Midshipman, Merchant Marine Re- 
serve; Regular and Contract Student, Naval Reserve 
Officers Training Corps; Naval Academy Preparatory 
School; Reserve Officer Candidate Course; Platoon 
Leaders Class and Officers Candidate Course, U.S. 
Marine Corps Reserve; Officer Candidate School, U.S. 
Naval Reserve; and Other Similar Officer Candidate 
Training Programs. — 

(a) The dental examiner shall familiarize him- 
self with article 15-3. 

(b) A candidate for appointment to one of the 
above listed officer candidate training programs 
must have a minimum of 16 natural permanent teeth 
of which a minimum of 8 must be in each arch. He 
must have all missing teeth which cause unsightly 
spaces or significantly reduced masticatory or incisal 
efficiency replaced by bridges or partial dentures 
which are well designed and in good condition, 
except for civilian aviation officer candidates and 
certain enlisted personnel. (See par. (c) (2) below.) 
He must have received all required dental treatment 
including permanent restoration of teeth damaged 



by dental caries except minor or questionable cari- 
ous areas. 

(c) The following are causes for rejection: 

(1) Apical or periodontal infection which re- 
quires bridges or dentures. 

(2) Carious teeth except minor or questiona- 
ble carious areas. Civilian aviation officer candidates 
in Class II dental condition (not requiring immediate 
treatment) may be considered dentally qualified. Ac- 
tive duty enlisted personnel who are candidates 
should not be disqualified for caries but appoint- 
ments arranged for remedial treatment. 

(3) Failure to have a minimum of eight 
natural permanent teeth in each arch. 

(4) Infectious or chronic diseases of the soft 
tissue of the oral cavity. 

(5) Lack of satisfactory incisal or masticatory 
function. 

(6) Marked malocclusion which requires 
early or prolonged treatment, involves tissue im- 
pingement on either the facial or lingual/palatal gin- 
giva, or in other ways jeopardizes oral health. 

(7) Retainer type orthodontic appliances are 
permissible. Orthodontic appliances attached to 
teeth for continued treatment are disqualifying ex- 
cept as noted below: 

(a) Candidates for the Naval Academy un- 
dergoing active orthodontic treatment will not be 
disqualified by the examining dental officer. Exami- 
nations shall be performed in accordance with 
BUMEDINST 6120.3 series and appropriate com- 
ments shall be made in section 74 of the SF 88 for 
review by the Department of Defense Medical Re- 
view Board. 

(b) Candidates for the Naval Reserve Of- 
ficer Training Corps undergoing active orthodontic 
treatment will be considered on the basis of a certify- 
ing statement concerning completion date of treat- 
ment by the individual's orthodontist. 

(8) Perforations from the oral cavity into the 
nasal cavity or maxillary sinus. 

(9) Tumors or cysts of the oral cavity which 
require treatment or may require treatment in the 
foreseeable future, 

(10) Unreplaced teeth which cause unsightly 
spaces or significantly reduced masticatory function. 

(11) Unsatisfactory restorations, bridges, or 
dentures. 



15-6 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



15-10 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-10 



15-10. Ears and Hearing 

(1) The external ear and masto i region shall 
be examined by inspection, the mastoid region by 
palpation for signs of disease. The external audi- 
tory canal and tympanic membrane shall be ex- 
amined by reflected light or by a self-illuminat- 
ing otoscope. Cerumen, if present, must be re- 
moved prior to attempt to visualize the tympanic 
membrane and prior to determination of auditory 
acuity. 

(a) Audiometer Test. — Auditory acuity shall 
be determined by audiogram in all cases where 
necessary equipment is available. 

(b) Whispered Voice Test. — Auditory 
acuity shall be determined by whispered voice 
test only if audiometric equipment is not availa- 
ble. The examinee shall stand 15 feet from the ex- 
aminer with the ear to be tested turned toward 
him, the other ear being covered or closed by 
pressing the tragus firmly against the meatus. The 
examiner, after full expiration, will whisper a 
number or word and require the examinee to re- 
peat it. If the examinee is unable to hear at 15 
feet, the examiner shall approach until the exam- 
inee is able to distinguish the words or numbers, 
the distance being recorded in feet with 15 as the 
denominator. The same procedure is to be fol- 
lowed with the other ear. 

(c) Individuals who are accepted into the 
naval service upon the basis of the whispered 
voice test shall be given a baseline audiogram 
upon the arrival at the first equipped duty sta- 
tion. 



(2) The Ears. — The following are causes for 
rejection: 

(a) Auditory canal: 

(1) Atresia or severe stenosis of the exter- 
nal auditory canal. 

(2) Tumors of the external auditory canal 
except mild exostoses. 



(3) Severe external otitis, acute or 
chronic. 

(b) Auricle: Agenesis, severe; or severe trau- 
matic deformity, unilateral or bilateral. 

(c) Mastoids: 

(1) Mastoiditis, acute or chronic. 

(2) Residual of mastoid operation with 
marked external deformity which precludes or in- 
terferes with the wearing of a gas mask or hel- 
met. 

(3) Mastoid fistula. 

(d) Meniere's syndrome. 

(e) Middle ear: 

(1) Acute or chronic suppurative otitis 
media. Individuals with a recent history of acute 
suppurative otitis media will not be accepted un- 
less the condition is healed and a sufficient inter- 
val of time subsequent to treatment has elapsed to 
insure that the disease is in fact not chronic. 

(2) Adhesive otitis media associated with 
hearing level by audiometric test in excess of the 
standards in subarticle 15-10(3). 

(3) Acute or chronic otitis media. 

(4) Presence of attic perforation in which 
presence of cholesteatoma is suspected. 

(5) Repeated attacks of catarrhal otitis 
media; intact greyish, thickened drum(s). 

(f) Tympanic membrane: 

(1) Any perforation of the tympanic 
membrane. 

(2) Severe scarring of the tympanic mem- 
brane associated with hearing level by audiomet- 
ric test in excess of the standards in subarticle 
15-10(3). 

(3) Surgery to repair perforated tympanic 
membrane within the past 120 days. 

(g) The total loss of an external ear, marked 
hypertrophy or atrophy, disfiguring deformity of 
the organ, or any acute or chronic disease of the 
external, middle, or internal ear. 

(3) Rearing. — An auditory acuity level in ei- 
ther ear by audiogram in excess of the limits in 
the following table: 



International Standards Organization (ISO) 


Frequency (hz) 


500 1000 2000 
512 1024 2048 


3000 
2896 


4000 
4096 


8000 
8192 


Maximum level in 
decibels in either 
ear. 


Average level in these three frequen- 
cies not greater than 30 db with no 
level greater than 35 db in any one 
frequency. 


45 db 


60 db 


* 



* Recorded for baseline information only. 



10 Feb 75 



15-6a 

Change 83 



15-11 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-11 



15-11. Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders 

(1) Endocrine and metabolic disorders are so 
varied in their manifestations and frequently so 
interrelated that recognition of the pathological 
process is often difficult. In this field the diagnos- 
tician has become increasingly dependent upon 
laboratory investigations for aid in corroboration 
of a clinical diagnosis. It should be emphasized 
that an accurate and comprehensive medical his- 
tory may be of great value in pointing to subclin- 
ical endocrine or metabolic disorders. If sugar is 
found in the urine further specimens voided in 
the presence of the physician or authorized assist- 
ant should be examined. In doubtful cases and in 
the presence of diabetes mellitus in a parent, sib- 
ling, or more than one grandparent, appropriate 
laboratory tests shall be made to rule out the pres- 
ence of diabetes. (See art. 15-94.) 

(2) The following are causes for rejection: 

(a) Adrenal gland, malfunction of, of any 
degree. 

(b) Cretinism. 

(c) Diabetes mellitus ot a history of diabetes mel- 
litus in both natural parents. (See art. 15-11(1) regard- 
ing other familial history.) 

(d) Diabetes insipidus. 

(e) Gigantism or acromegaly. 



(f) Glycosuria, persistent, regardless of 
cause. 

(g) Goiter: 

(1) Simple goiter with definite pressure 
symptoms or so large in size as to interfere with 
the wearing of a military uniform or military 
equipment. 

(2) Thyrotoxicosis. 

(h) Gout. 

(i) Hyperinsulinism, confirmed, sympto- 
matic. 

(j) Hyperparathyroidism and hypoparathy- 
roidism. 

(k) Hypopituitarism, severe. 

(1) Hypothyroidism, spontaneous or post- 
operative (with clinical manifestations and not 
based solely on low basal metabolic rate). 

(m) Nutritional deficiency diseases (includ- 
ing sprue, beriberi, pellagra, and scurvy) which 
are more than mild and not readily remediable or 
in which permanent pathological changes have 
been established. 

(n) Other endocrine or metabolic disorders 
which obviously preclude satisfactory perform- 
ance of duty or which require frequent and pro- 
longed treatment. 



15~6b 
Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



15-12 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-12 



15-12. Extremities 

( 1 ) The extremities shall be carefully exam- 
ined for deformities, old fractures and disloca- 
tions, amputations, partially flexed or anklylosed 
joints, impaired functions of any degree, varicose 
veins, and edema. The feet shall be especially 

examined for flatfoot, corns, ingrowing nails, 
bunions, deformed or missing toes, hyperidrosis, 
bromidrosis, color changes, and clubfoot. When 
any degree of flatfoot is found, the strength 
of the feet should be ascertained by requiring 
the applicant to hop on the toes of each foot for 
a sufficient time and by requiring him to alight 
on the toes afer jumping up several times. To 
distinguish between disqualifying and nondis- 
qualifying degrees of flatfoot, the examiner 
shall consider the extent, impairment of func- 
tion, progressive or stationary nature, appearance 
in uniform, and presence or absence of symp- 
toms. In this connection, it should be remem- 
bered that it is usually not the flatfoot condition 
itself which causes symptoms, but an earlier state 
in which the arches are collapsing and the vari- 
ous structures are undergoing readjustment of 
their relationships. In reporting flatfoot, angles 
of excursion or limitations of motion, compara- 
tive measurements should be stated, and X-rays 
forwarded when made. The series of exercises 
described in article 15-89 will often bring to 
light defects of extremities not otherwise dis- 
cernible. 

(2) Upper Extremities. — The following are 
causes for rejection (also see art. 15-12(4)): 

(a) Limitation of motion. An individual 
will be considered unacceptable if the joint 
ranges of motion are less than the measurements 
listed below: 

(1) Shoulder: 

(a) Forward elevation to 90°. 

(b) Abduction to 90°. 

(2) Elbow: 

(a) Flexion to 100°. 

(b) Extension to 15°. 

(3) Wrist: A total range of 15° (exten- 
sion plus flexion). 

(4) Hand: Pronation to the first quarter 
of the normal arc. Supination to the first quar- 
ter of the normal arc. 

(5) Fingers: Inability to clench fist, pick 
up a pin or needle, and grasp an object. 

(b) Hand and fingers: 

(1) Absence (or loss) of more than Y$ of 
the distal phalanx of either thumb. 

(2) Absence (or loss) of distal and middle 
phalanx of an index or ring finger of either hand 
irrespective of the absence (or loss) of little 



fingers; absence of more than the distal phalanx 
of any two of the following fingers of either 
hand: Index, middle, or ring. 

(3) Absence of hand or any portion thereof 
except for fingers as noted above, 

(4) Hyperdactylia. 

(5) Scars and deformities of the fingers 
and/or hand which impair circulation, are symp- 
tomatic, are so disfiguring as to make the 
individual objectionable in ordinary social rela- 
tionships, or which impair normal function to 
such a degree as to interfere with the satisfactory 
performance of military duty. 

(c) Wrist, forearm, elbow, arm, and 
shoulder: 

(1) Healed disease or injury of wrist, 
elbow, or shoulder with residual weakness or 
symptoms of such a degree as to preclude satis- 
factory performance of duty. 

(3) Lower Extremities, — The following are 
causes for rejection (also see art. 15-12(4) ): 

(a) Limitation of motion. An individual 
will be considered unacceptable if the joint 
ranges of motion are less than the measurements 
listed below: 

(1) Hip: 

(a) Flexion to 90°. 

(b) Extension to 10° (beyond 0). 

(2) Knee: 

(a) Full extension. 

(b) Flexion to 90°. 

(3) Ankle: 

(a) Dorsiflexion to 10°. 

(b) Plantar flexion to 10°, 

(4) Toes: Stiffness which interferes with 
walking, marching, running, or jumping. 

(b) Foot and ankle: 

(1) Absence or loss of: 

(a) Any portion of the foot if function 
of the foot is poor or running or jumping is 
impaired. 

(b) Great toe of either foot. 

(c) Dorsal flexion of great toe(s) if 
function of the foot is impaired. 

(d) Other toe(s) if function of the foot 
is poor or running or jumping is impaired. 

(2) Claw toes precluding the wearing of 
combat service boots. 

(3) Clubfoot. 

(4) Flatfoot, pronounced cases, with 
decided eversion of the foot and marked bulging 
of the inner border, due to inward rotation of 
the astragalus. 

(5) Flatfoot spastic. 

(6) Hallux valgus, if severe and associated 
with marked exostosis' or bunion. 



15-7 

Change 66 



15-12 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-12 



(7) Hammer toe which interferes with the 
wearing of combat service boots. 

(8) Healed disease, injury or deformity 
including hyperdactylia, which precludes run- 
ning, is accompanied by disabling pain, or which 
prohibits wearing of combat service boots. 

(9) Ingrowing toe nails, if severe, and not 
remediable. 

(10) Obliteration of the transverse arch 
associated with permanent flexion of the small 
toes. 

(11) Pes cavus with clawing of the toes 
and calluses beneath the metatarsal heads. 

(c) Leg, knee, thigh, and hip: 

(1) Dislocated semilunar cartilage, loose 
or foreign bodies within the knee joint, or his- 
tory of surgical correction of same if: 

(a) Within the preceding 6 months. 

(b) Six months or more have elapsed 
since operation without recurrence, and there 
is instability of the knee ligaments in lateral or 
anteroposterior directions in comparison with the 
normal knee or there are abnormalities noted on 
X-ray; there is significant atrophy or weakness of 
the thigh musculature in comparison with the 
normal side; there is not acceptable active mo- 
tion in flexion and extension; or there are other 
symptoms of internal derangement. 

(2) Authentic history or physical findings 
of an unstable or internally deranged joint caus- 
ing disabling pain or seriously limiting function. 
Individuals with verified episodes of buckling 
or locking of the knee who have not undergone 
satisfactory surgical correction or if, subsequent 
to surgery, there is evidence of more than mild 
instability of the knee ligaments in lateral and 
anteroposterior directions in comparison with 
the normal knee, weakness or atrophy of the 
thigh musculature in comparison with the nor- 
mal side, or if the individual requires medical 
treatment of sufficient frequency to interfere with 
the performance of military duty. 

(d) General. — 

(1) Deformities of one or both lower ex- 
tremities which have interfered with function to 
such a degree as to prevent the individual from 
following a physically active vocation in civilian 
life or which would interfere with the satisfac- 
tory completion of prescribed training and per- 
formance of military duty. 

(2) Diseases or deformities of the hip, 
knee, or ankle joint which interfere with walk- 
ing, running, or weight bearing. 

(3) Pain in the lower back or leg which is 
intractable and disabling to the degree of inter- 
fering with walking, running, and weight bear- 
ing. 

(4) Shortening of a lower extremity re- 
sulting in any limp of noticeable degree. 



(4) Miscellaneous. — The following are causes 
for rejection (also see arts. 15-12(2) and (3) ): 

(a) Arthritis: 

(1) Active or subacute arthritis. 

(2) Chronic osteoarthritis or traumatic 
arthritis of isolated joints of more than minimal 
degree, which has interfered with the following 
of a physically active vocation in civilian life or 
which precludes the satisfactory performance of 
military duty. 

(3) Documented clinical history of rheu- 
matoid arthritis (atrophic arthritis). 

(4) Traumatic arthritis of a major joint 
of more than minimal degree. 

(b) Disease of any bone or joint, healed, 
with such resulting deformity or rigidity that 
function is impaired to such a degree that it will 
interfere with military service. 

(c) Dislocation, old unreduced; substanti- 
ated history of recurrent dislocations of major 
joints; instability of a major joint, symptomatic 
and more than mild; or if, subsequent to surgery, 
there is evidence of more than mild instability 
in comparison with the normal joint, weakness 
or atrophy in comparison with the normal side, 
or if the individual requires medical treatment 
of sufficient frequency to interfere with the per- 
formance of military duty. 

(d) Fractures: 

(1) Malunited fractures that interfere sig- 
nificantly with function. 

(2) Ununited fractures. 

(3) Any old or recent fracture in which a 
plate, pin, or screws were used for fixation and 
left in place and which may be subject to easy 
trauma; e.g., a tibial plate. 

(e) Injury of a bone or joint within the pre- 
ceding 6 weeks, without fracture or dislocation, 
of more than a minor nature. 

(f) Muscular paralysis, contracture, or 
atrophy, if progressive or of sufficient degree 
to interfere with military service. 

(g) Osteomyelitis, active or recurrent of any 
bone; or substantiated history of osteomyelitis 
of any of the long hones, unless successfully 
treated 2 or more years previously without subse- 
quent recurrence of disqualifying sequelae as 
demonstrated by both clinical and X-ray 
evidence. 

(h) Osteoporosis. 

(i) Scars, neuromas; extensive, deep, or 
adherent scars of the skin and soft tissues or 
neuromas of an extremity which are painful, 
interfere with muscular movements, preclude 
wearing of military equipment, or show a ten- 
dency to break down. 

(j) Chondromalacia, manifested by verified 
history of joint effusion, interference with func- 
tion, or residuals from surgery. 



15-8 

Change 66 



15-13 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-13 



Table 2. Officer Training and Procurement Programs 

Program Visual Acuity Standard Program Visual Acuity Standard 

A. NAVY PROGRAMS: 15. Direct Appointment, Any degree correctable 

1. Naval Academy 100% BVE uncorrected. 1 USN-MC, DC, and to 82% BVE. 

1 tvt i a j n i Intern Program. 

2. Naval Academy Prep. Do. ~. . , 

Srhnnl 16. Direct Appointment, Any degree correctable 

, p, . ™L™ „ , USNR-MC, DC, MSC, to at least 20/30 in the 

3. Project BOOST Do. 1 and Male NC (draft better eys 

4. NROTC, Scholarship Do. 1 liable); Female NC, 

5. NROTC, College Any degree correctable and Intern Program. 

to 100% BVE, 17. Appointment to 

6. NROTC, Scholarship 100% BVE uncorrected. 1 Warrant Officer: 

from College a - Deck, Operations Any degree correctable 

7. NESEP and ROC Any degree correctable & Ordnance to 100% BVE. 

in(W Tt\rv Designators, 

o t id t J; b - A11 ° ther w o - An y de f5 ree correctable 

?£c «f * a j . . Designators. to 82% BVE. 

OCS-RL&SC Any degree correctable , g Direct Appo ; ntraenti Any degree correctable 

OCS Female, RL & SC, Do Merchant Marine to 100% BVE. 

URL. Officer. 

9. NENEP & NEDEP Do. B. MARINE CORPS PROGRAMS: 

10. Merchant Marine 20/100 each eye both 1. PLC (ground), NROTC, 49% BVE correctable to 

Academy. correctable to 20/20. NESEP. 100% BVE. 

11. Augmentation-URL Any degree correctable 2. OCC, ECP, PLC (Law), 20% BVE correctable to 

to 100% BVE. PLC (Graduate Stu- 100% BVE. 

RL & SC Any degree correctable dent and All Other 

to 82% BVE. Direct Entry Programs 

12. JAG, MSC, CHC (19xx) . Do. (male)). 

13. MC, DC, NC (19xx> Do. 3. Commissioning-USMC & Do. 

14. Commissioning: USMCR (male). 

a. USN & USNR-URL Any degree correctable 4. Direct Appointment, All Any degree correctable 

to 100% BVE, Programs (female). to 76% BVE. 

b. USN & USNR-RL Any degree correctable 5. Appointment to Warrant 20% BVE correctable to 

& SC. to 82% BVE. Officer. 100% BVE, 

1 Waivers may be recommended for applicants having any degree of visual acuity correctable to 100% BVE. 



Table 3. Refractive Error Limits 

(In any meridian) 



COLLEGE TRAINING: 

URL ± 5.5 Sphere 
RL-SC ± 5.5 Sphere 
USMC ±3.5 Sphere 
USMMA ± 3.5 Sphere 



COMMISSION: 

URL ± 5.5 Sphere 
RL-SC ± 8.0 Sphere 
USMC ± 5.5 Sphere 
(Waiver may be recom- 
mended to ± 8.0.) 



In addition to the above sphere limitations, the differ- 
ence in the sphere corrections of the two eyes may not 
exceed 3.5. Cylinder correction may not exceed ± 3,0. 



10 Feb 75 



15-10a 

Change 83 



o , 




15-13A 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-14 



15-1 3 A. Color Perception 

(1) Color perception tests shall be adminis- 
tered and recorded on all applicants so that the 
results will be available if the individual is con- 
sidered for assignment to duty requiring normal 
color perception. Applicants for programs other 
than those listed in subarticle 15-13A(5) shall be 
qualified irrespective of defects of color percep- 
tion. Color perception tests shall be administered, 
but for record purposes only. 

(2) Farnsworth Lantern Test. — 

(a) Color perception shall be determined by 
Farnsworth Lantern Test (FALANT) in all cases 
where necessary equipment is available. The re- 
sults obtained by FALANT shall be considered 
final in the resolution of all cases of questionable 
color perception. 

(b) Detailed instructions for the administra- 
tion of the Farnsworth Lantern Test, as well as 
criteria for passing the test, are engraved on a 
metal plate which is permanently attached to the 
instrument and shall be followed without excep- 
tion. 

(3) Pseudoisochromatic Plate Test. — 

(a) Color perception shall be determined by 
pseudoisochromatic plate test only if a Farns- 
worth Lantern is not available. 

(b) When the pseudoisochromatic plates are 
used, a color vision lamp with a daylight filter 
or a fluorescent light with a daylight tube shall 
be used for illumination. The examinee shall not 
be allowed to trace the patterns or otherwise 
touch the plates. The plates shall be shown at a 
distance of 30 inches and 2 seconds allowed to 
identify each plate. If the examinee hesitates, he 
should be asked again to "read the numbers." If 
he fails to respond, the examiner must turn to 
the next plate without comment. 

(c) Qualification of examinees using the 
pseudoisochromatic plates is ascertained as fol- 
lows: 

(1) When the old 20-plate test set (former 
stock number N3-885-960) is used and the 
examinee reads correctly 17 of the 20 plates, 
demonstration plates excluded, he is qualified. 

(2) When the 18-plate test set (former 
stock number 6515-388-6606) is used and the 
examinee reads correctly 14 of the 18 plates, 
demonstration plate excluded, he is qualified. 

(3) When the 15 -plate test set (number 
6515-299-8186) is used and the examinee reads 
correctly 10 of the 14 plates, demonstration plate 
excluded, he is qualified. 



(4) The results of color perception testing 
shall be recorded in block 64 of Standard Form 
88. Entries shall be in a format similar to the 
following: For Farnsworth Lantern — Passed 
FALANT or Failed FALANT. For pseudoiso- 
chromatic plates— PIP 18 of 18, PIP 10 of 18, 
PIP 14 of 14, PIP 5 of 14, etc. 

(5) Defective color perception is a cause for 
rejection for the following: 

(a) Applicants for appointment as commis- 
sioned officers of the unrestricted line of the Navy 
or Naval Reserve. 

(b) Applicants for the Naval Academy. 

(c) Applicants for NESEP, except USMC 
NESEP. 

(d) Applicants for Regular NROTC, except 
that 16 2/3% of each class may have defective 
color perception if selected for eventual appoint- 
ment in the Marine Corps. 

(e) Applicants for appointment as limited 
duty officers in designators: 600x; 601x; 6l5x; 
6l6x; and 657x. 

(f) Applicants for appointment to warrant 
officers in designators: 71 3x; 714x; 7l6x; 72 3x; 
724x; 733x; and 757x. 

(g) Applicants for other officer candidate 
training programs the primary mission of which 
is the training of candidates for appointment in 
the unrestricted line of the Navy or Naval Re- 
serve. 

(h) Applicants for training leading to the 
designation of Naval Aviator or for training in 
diving, submarines, or other specialized schools 
requiring normal color perception. 

15-14. Genitourinary System 

(1) Methods of Examination. — Evidence of ve- 
nereal disease or malformation shall be searched 
for. The glans penis and corona shall be exposed 
and the penis stripped. Both sides of the scrotum 
and the inguinal glands shall be palpated. Rou- 
tine urinalysis to determine the absence or pres- 
ence of albumin and sugar shall be done on all 
examinees, the urine being voided in the presence 
of one of the examiners. Microscopic study of the 
urine shall be done when indicated. See article 
15_34 with respect to the examination of females. 

(a) Procedure When Albumin or Casts Are 
Found.— When albumin, casts, hemoglobin, or 
red blood cells are found in the urine, the appli- 
cant shall not be accepted unless further study 
proves such findings to be of no significance. 
Such further study, if desired, should include 



10 Feb 75 



15-11 

Change 83 



15-14 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-14 



24 hour urine specimen for total protein. If urine 
contains between }0 and 200 mgs of albumin per 24 
hours, the following tests are required: 12 hour re- 
cumbent urine for total protein (milligrams percent 
and total volume), urine culture, creatinine clear- 
ance, microscopic examination of urine sediment, 
and an intravenous pyelagram, unless the presence 
of albumin and casts is associated with enlargement 
of the heart, high blood pressure, or other evidence 
of cardiovascular disease of such degree that a diag- 
nosis of renal disease may be made immediately. 
When albumin is constantly or intermittently pres- 
ent, the underlying pathological condition should, if 
possible, be determined and stated as the cause for 
rejection. 

(b) Procedure When Gtycosuris Is Detected. — If 
glucose is found in the urine, further specimens 
voided in the presence of the physician or authorized 
assistant should be examined. In doubtful cases the 
employment of appropriate laboratory tests to dem- 
onstrate the possible existence of diabetes shall be 
made. (See art. 15-94.) If applicant is to be found 
qualified, the glycosuria must be shown to have been 
transient and not a persistent condition. 

(2) Genitalia. — The following are causes for re- 
jection (also see art. 15-14(3)): 

(a) Bartholinitis, Bartholin's cyst. 

(b) Cervicitis, acute or chronic, manifested by 
leukorrhea. 

(c) Dysmenorrhea, incapacitating to a degree 
which necessitates recurrent absences of more than a 
few hours from routine activities. 

(d) Endometriosis, or confirmed history 
thereof. 

(e) Hermaphroditism. 

(f) Hydrocele, if large or painful. 

(g) Menopausal syndrome, either physiologic 
or artificial if manifested by more than mild con- 
stitutional or mental symptoms, or artificial 
menopause if less than 13 months have elapsed since 
cessation of menses. In all cases of artificial 
menopause, the clinical diagnosis will be reported; if 
accomplished by surgery, the pathologic report will 
be obtained and recorded. 

(h) Menstrual cycle, irregularities of, includ- 
ing menorrhagia, if excessive; metrorrhagia; 
polymenorrhea; amenorrhea, except as noted above. 

(i) New growths of the internal or external 
genitalia except single uterine fibroid, subserous, 
asymptomatic, less than 3 centimeters in diameter, 
with no general enlargement of the uterus. 

(j) Oophoritis, acute or chronic, 
(k) Ovarian cysts, persistent and considered to 
be of clinical significance. 
(1) Pregnancy. 

(m) Salpingitis, acute or chronic, 
(n) Testicle(s): 

(1) Absence or nondescent of both testicles, 

(2) Undiagnosed enlargement or mass of tes- 
ticle or epididymis. 



(3) Undescended testicle which lies within 
the abdomen or inguinal canal. 

(o) Urethritis, acute or chronic, 
(p) Uterus: 

(1) Cervical polyps, cervical ulcer, or marked 
erosion. 

(2) Endocervicitis, more than mild. 

(3) Generalized enlargement of the uterus if 
more than mildly symptomatic. 

(q) Vagina: 

(1) Congenital abnormalities or severe lacer- 
ations of the vagina. 

(2) Vaginitis, acute or chronic, manifested 
by leukorrhea. 

(r) Varicocele, if large or painful, 
(s) Vulva: 

(1) Leukoplakia. 

(2) Vulvitis, acute or chronic. 

(t) Major abnormalities and defects of the 
genitalia such as a change of sex, a history thereof, or 
complications (adhesions, disfiguring scars, etc.) re- 
sidual to surgical correction of these conditions. 

(3) Urinary Syst em. — The following are causes 
for rejection (also see art. 15-14(2)): 

(a) Albuminuria if persistent or recurrent. If 
the individual has some residual proteinuria under 
normal activity that does not exceed 200 mg/24 
hours, he should be accepted if there is no protein 
(less than 30 mg) in the urine specimen collected 
following 12 hours of recumbency and if the other 
examinations required by art. 15-14(1) (a) are nor- 
mal. 

(b) Cystitis, chronic. Individuals with acute 
cystitis are unacceptable until the condition is cured. 

(c) Enuresis determined to be a symptom of 
an organic defect (also see art. 15-21(4)(c)(2)). 

(d) Congenital malformation of the penis: 

(1) Epispadias. 

(2) Hypospadias, when accompanied by evi- 
dence of infection of urinary tract or if unable to void 
normally. 

(e) Hematuria, pyuria, cylindruria, or other 
findings indicative of renal tract disease. 

(f) Incontinence of urine. 

(g) Kidney: 

(1) Absence of one kidney, regardless of 

cause. 

(2) Acute or chronic infections of the kidney. 

(3) Cystic or polycystic kidney, confirmed 
history of. 

(4) Hydronephrosis or pyonephrosis. 

(5) Nephritis, acute or chronic. 

(6) Pyelitis, pyelonephritis. 

(h) Penis, amputation of, if the resulting stump 
is insufficient to permit micturition in a normal 
manner. 

(i) Prostate gland, hypertrophy of, with uri- 
nary retention. 

(j) Renal calculus: 



15-12 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



15-15 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-15 



(1) Substantiated history of bilateral renal 
calculus at any time. 

(2) Verified history of renal calculus at any 
time with evidence of stone formation within the 
preceding 12 months, current symptoms or positive 
X-ray for calculus. 

(k) Skeneitis. 
(1) Urethra: 

(1) Stricture of the urethra. 

<2) Urethritis, acute or chronic, 
(m) Urinary fistula. 

(n) Other diseases and defects of the urinary 
system which obviously preclude satisfactory per- 
formance of duty or which would require frequent 
and prolonged treatment. 

15-15. Head and Neck 

(1) The head shall be carefully inspected, and 
palpated for evidence of injury, deformity, and 
tumor growth. The cause of scars and deformity 
should be inquired into. The examination of the 
neck shall include careful inspection and palpation 
for glandular enlargement, deformity, creptitus, 
limitation of motion, and asymmetry. If grossly en- 
larged, the circumference may be measured and the 
figure recorded. 

(2) Head. — The following are cause for rejection: 
(a) Abnormalities which are apparently 

temporary in character resulting from recent injuries 
until a period of 3 months has elapsed. These include 
severe contusions and other wounds of the scalp and 
cerebral concussion. 



(b) Deformities of the skull in the nature of 
depressions, exostoses, etc., of a degree which 
would prevent the individual from wearing a gas 
mask or military headgear, or which affect the mili- 
tary appearance of the candidate. 

<c) Deformities of the skull of any degree as- 
sociated with evidence of disease of the brain, spinal 
cord, or peripheral nerves. 

(d) Depressed fractures near central sulcus 
with or without convulsive seizures. 

(e) Loss or congenital absence of the bony 
substance of the skull which has been corrected by 
reconstructive material: 

(1) All cases involving absence of the bony 
substance of the skull which have been corrected, 
but in which the defect is in excess of 1 square inch 
or the size of a 25 cent piece, shall be referred to 
BUMED together with a report of consultation; 

(2) The report of consultation shall include 
an evaluation of any evidence of alteration of brain 
function in any of its several spheres; i.e., intelli- 
gence, judgment, perception, behavior, motor con- 
trol and sensory function, as well as any evidence of 
active bone disease or other related complications. 
Current X-rays and other pertinent laboratory data 
shall accompany such a report of consultation. 

(f) Unsightly deformities, such as large 
birth marks, large hairy moles, extensive scars, and 
mutilations due to injuries or surgical operations; 
ulcerations; fisculae, atrophy, or paralysis of part of 
the face or head. 



10 Feb 75 



15-13 

Change 83 



15-16 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-16 



(3) Neck. — The following are causes for rejec- 
tion: 

(a) Cervical ribs if symptomatic or so ob- 
vious that they are found on routine physical ex- 
amination. (Detection based primarily on X-ray 
is not considered to meet this criterion.) 

(b) Congenital cysts of branchial cleft ori- 
gin or those developing from the remnants of the 
thyroglossal duct, with or without fistulous tracts. 

(c) Fistula, chronic draining, of any type. 

(d) History of tuberculous lymphadenitis 
that has not been treated with at least 2 years of 
dual drug anti tuberculous therapy. 

(e) Nonspastic contraction of the muscles of 
the neck or cicatricial contracture of the neck to 
the extent that it interferes with the wearing of a 
uniform or military equipment or so disfiguring 
as to make the individual objectionable in 
common social relationships. 

(f) Spastic contraction of the muscles of the 
neck, persistent, and chronic. 

(g) Tumor of thyroid or other structures of 
the neck. (See art. 15-25(l)(b)(5).) 

15-16. Heart and Vascular System 

(1) For methods of examination refer to arti- 
cle 15-88. 

(2) The following are causes for rejection: 

(a) All organic valvular diseases of the 
heart, including those improved by surgical pro- 
cedures. 

(b) Coronary artery disease or myocardial 
infarction, old or recent or true angina pectoris, 
at any time. 

(c) Electrocardiographic evidence of major 
arrhythmias such as: 

(1) Atrial tachycardia, flutter, or fibrilla- 
tion, ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation. 

(2) Conduction defects such as first degree 
atrio-ventricula block and right bundle branch 
block. (These conditions occurring as isolated 
findings are not unfitting when cardiac evaluation 
reveals no cardiac disease.) 

(3) Left bundle branch block, 2d and 3d 
degree AV block. 

(4) Unequivocal electrocardiographic evi- 
dence of old or recent myocardial infarction; cor- 
onary insufficiency at rest or after stress; or evi- 
dence of heart muscle disease. 

(d) Hypertrophy or dilation of the heart as 
evidenced by clinical examination or roentgeno- 
graphic examination and supported by electrocar- 
diographic examination. Care should be taken to 
distinguish abnormal enlargement from increased 
diastolic filling as seen in the well conditioned 
subject with a sinus bradycardia. Cases of en- 
larged heart by X-ray not supported by electro- 



cardiographic examination will be forwarded to 
BUMED for evaluation. 

(e) Myocardial insufficiency (congestive cir- 
culatory failure, cardiac decompensation) ob- 
vious or covert, regardless of cause. 

(f) Paroxysmal tachycardia within the pre- 
ceding 5 years, or any time if recurrent or disa- 
bling or if associated with electrocardiographic 
evidence of accelerated A-V conduction (Wolff- 
Parkinson-White). 

(g) Pericarditis; endocarditis; or myocardi- 
tis, history or finding of, except for a history of 
a single acute idiopathic pericarditis or coxsackie 
with no residuals. 

(h) Tachycardia, persistent with a resting 
pulse rate of 100 or more, regardless of cause. 

(i) Congenital or acquired lesions of the 
aorta and major vessels, such as syphilitic aortitis, 
demonstrable atherosclerosis which interferes 
with circulation, congenital or acquired dilata- 
tion of the aorta (especially if associated with 
other features of Marfan's syndrome), and pro- 
nounced dilatation of the main pulmonary artery. 

(j) Hypertension evidenced by predominant 
blood pressure readings of 150-mm or more sys- 
tolic in an individual over 35 years of age or pre- 
ponderant readings of 140-mm or more systolic in 
an individual 35 years of age or less. Preponder- 
ant diastolic pressure over 90- mm diastolic is cause 
for rejection at any age. 

(k) Marked circulatory instability as indi- 
cated by orthostatic hypotension, persistent tachy- 
cardia, severe peripheral vasomotor disturbances 
and sympatheticotonia. 

(1) Peripheral vascular disease including 
Raynaud's phenomena, Buerger's disease (throm- 
boangiitis obliterans), erythromelalgia, arterio- 
sclerotic and vascular diseases. Special tests will 
be employed in doubtful cases. 

(m) Thrombophlebitis: 

(1) History of thrombophlebitis with per- 
sistent thrombus or evidence of circulatory ob- 
struction of deep venous incompetence in the in- 
volved veins. 

(2) Recurrent thrombophlebitis. 

(n) Varicose veins, if more than mild, or if 
associated with edema, skin ulceration, or resid- 
ual scars from ulceration. 

(o) Aneurysm of the heart or major vessel, 
congential or acquired. 

(p) History and evidence of a congential ab- 
normality which has been treated by surgery but 
with residual abnormalities or complications, for 
example: Patent ductus arteriosus with residual 
cardiac enlargement or pulmonary hypertension; 
resection of a coarctation of the aorta without a 
graft when there are other cardiac abnormalities 



15-14 
Change 66 



25 May 71 



15-17 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-17 



or complications; closure of a secundum type 
atrial septal defect when there are residual abnor- 
malities or complications. 

(q) Major congenital abnormalities and de- 
fects of the heart and vessels unless satisfactorily 
corrected without residuals or complications. Un- 
complicated dextrocardia and other minor asymp- 
tomatic anomalies are acceptable. 

(r) Substantiated history of rheumatic fever 
or chorea within the previous 2 years, recurrent 
attacks of rheumatic fever or chorea at any time, 
or with evidence of residual cardiac damage. 

15-17. Height, Weight, and Body Build 

(1) Height. — The applicant's height shall be 
measured in inches to the nearest one-half inch 
(aviation to the nearest tenth of an inch, art. 
15-62(4)(a)(3)), without shoes, by a measuring 
scale known to be accurate. The table below sets 
forth the minimum and maximum heights accept- 
able for the several categories of naval service. 

(2) Weight. — The applicant shall be weighed 
(males without clothing, females without shoes) 
on a standard set of scales which is known to be 
correct. The weight shall be recorded in pounds 



Minimum and maximum standards of height 



Category 



Minimum Maximum 



L 


Officer Training Programs: 








a. Unrestricted Line Input. . . , 


62" 


78" 




b. Restricted Line & Staff 










60" 


78" 




c. Marine Corps, All 










66" 


78" 


2. 


Appointment; USN & USNR: 










62" 


78" 




b. Restricted Line & Staff 










60" 


78" 




c. Warrant Officer & Limited 








Duty Officer: 








(1) Deck, Operations & 








Ordnance Designators 


62" 


00 00 




(2) All Other Designators . . 


60" 


3. 


Appointment, USMC, USMCR: 








a. All Categories, Including 




78" 




WO 


66" 


4. 


Navy and Marine Corps, 
Females: 










60" 


72" 



(fractions of pounds shall not be recorded). The 
applicant's weight should be well distributed and 
in proportion to age, sex, and skeletal structure. 
The following tables (1, 2, and 3) set forth the 
suggested minimum and maximum weight limits 
as related to age and height. The tables are pro- 
vided as a guide to medical- examiners and should 
not be construed too strictly. For example, an in- 
dividual may fall between the extremes of the 
minimum and maximum and be not qualified be- 
cause of marked variations in physical propor- 
tions. An applicant, however, whose weight falls 
at the extremes of either the minimum or maxi- 
mum range is acceptable only if he is obviously 
active, of firm musculature, and evidently vigor- 
ous and healthy. In cases where doubt exists as to 
proper proportionment, photographs taken in 
appropriate attire (such as bathing suit) to show 
trunk and limb development should be forwarded 
with the physical examination report to the Bu- 
reau for consideration; this applies also to cases 
of individuals above the maximum weight who 
present proper proportionment and are evidently 
vigorous and healthy. 

(3) Body Build. — A thorough, general inspec- 
tion of the entire body shall be made, noting the 
proportion and symmetry of the various parts of 
the body, the chest development, the condition 
and tone of the muscles, and general nutrition. 
The build shall be recorded as slender, medium, 
heavy, or obese. The following are causes for 
rejection. 

(a) Congenital malformation of bones and 
joints. 

(b) Deficient muscular development which 
would interfere with the completion of required 
training. 

(c) Evidences of congenital asthenia (slen- 
der bones; weak thorax; visceroptosis; severe, 
chronic constipation; or "drop heart" if marked 
in degree). 

(d) Obesity. Even though the individual's 
weight is within the maximum shown in article 
15-17(2) (tables 1, 2, and 3) he shall be reported 
as not physically qualified when the examining 
physician considers that the weight in relation to 
the body structure and musculature constitutes 
obesity of such a degree as to interfere with the 
satisfactory completion of required training. 



15-15 
Change 66 



15-17 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-17 



Table I. Weight standards for male officers and officer candidates Navy and Marine Corps, 

except aviation personnel 



Weight according to age and height 

Maximum 



Height (inches) 


Minimum 
(regardless 












41 years 


of age) 


16-20 


21-24 


25-30 


31-35 


36-40 


and over 






103 


1 73 

1 73 


173 


173 


168 


164 




luz 


1/1 




175 


175 


17 1 


166 


62 _ 


103 


174 


178 


178 


177 


173 


j \ij 


63 - - 


104 


178 


182 


181 


180 


176 


171 


64 __ 


105 


183 


184 


185 


185 


180 


175 


65 „ 


[06 


187 


190 


191 


190 


185 


180 


66 _ _ 


107 


191 


196 


197 


196 


190 


185 


67 _ _ 


111 


196 


201 


202 


201 


195 


190 


68 


115 


202 


207 


208 


207 


201 


195 


69 


119 


208 


213 


214 


212 


206 


200 


70 . 


123 


214 


219 


219 


218 


211 


205 


71 


127 


219 


224 


225 


223 


216 


210 


72 


131 


225 


231 


232 


230 


224 


216 


73 - 


135 


231 


239 


238 


237 


230 


223 


74 __ 


139 


237 


246 


246 


243 


236 


229 


75 - - 


143 


243 


253 


253 


251 


243 


235 


76 


147 


248 


260 


260 


257 


250 


241 


77 — . _ 


151 


254 


267 


267 


264 


256 


248 


78 ___ _ 


153 


260 


275 


273 


271 


263 


254 



Table 2. Weight standards for Navy and Marine Corps aviation personnel, 
including aviation officer candidates 



Height (inches) 



Weight (pounds) 

Minimum 

Maximum 



64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 



105 106 107 111 115 119 123 127 131 135 139 143 147 151 153 
160 165 170 175 181 186 192 197 203 209 214 219 225 230 235 



Table 3. Weight standards for all categories of women 



Weight according to age and height 



Maximum 



Height (inches) 


(regardless 
of age ) 


18-20 


21-24 


25-30 


31-35 


36-40 


41 years 
and over 


58 

59 - 

60 _ 

61 


90 
92 
94 
96 


121 

123 
125 
127 


123 
125 
127 
129 


126 
129 
132 
135 


124 
126 
128 
131 


135 
139 
142 
145 


135 
138 
141 
141 


62 _ 

63 - . ____ 

64 _ 

65 . 


98 
100 
102 
104 


129 
135 
136 
140 


132 
136 
140 
144 


139 
141 

144 
148 


132 
136 
140 

145 


148 
151 
155 
159 


147 
150 
154 
158 


66 

67 

68 

69 


106 
109 
112 
115 


144 
147 
152 
158 


149 
151 
158 
160 


151 

156 
159 
164 


150 
154 
159 
162 


164 
168 
172 
176 


163 
167 
171 
175 


70 

72 : ------ -- 


118 
122 
125 


162 
168 
171 


166 
171 
175 


168 
171 
176 


167 

171 
175 


181 
185 
189 


180 
184 
188 



15-16 

Change 66 



15-18 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-18 



15-18. Lungs and Chest Wall 

(1) A history pertaining to past pulmonary dis- 
eases shall be obtained from the applicant; the 
chest shall be examined by inspection, palpation, 
percussion and auscultation; and finally a photo- 
fluorographic or roentgenographic examination 
of the chest shall be made (see art. 15-90) as part 
of the examination to determine physical fitness 
for entry into the service. 

(a) History.— The applicant shall be ques- 
tioned regarding contact with tuberculosis. Fa- 
milial tuberculosis may indicate a constitutional 
predisposition to the disease as well as opportu- 
nity for infection. Since pleurisy, with or with- 
out effusion, is a frequent indication of early 
tuberculosis, the greatest care should be taken in 
examining applicants who have apparently re- 
covered from pleurisy. An occupational history 
of mining, sandblasting or other enclosed ex- 
posure to dust should make the pneumoconioses 
suspect. A history of any of the following symp- 
toms, especially when protracted, should give 
suspicion of significant pulmonary pathology: 
fever, malaise, night sweats, cough and expectora- 
tion, hemoptysis, wheezing, dyspnea, hoarseness, 
loss of appetite, loss of strength, loss of weight, 
or any decrease in activity tolerance. 

(b) Examination. — The applicant should be 
seated in a comfortable relaxed position with 
direct light falling upon the chest. Careful com- 
parison of the findings elicited over symmetrica! 
areas on the two sides of the chest gives the most 
accurate information regarding the condition of 
the underlying structures. 

(c) Inspection. — Observe for asymmetry of 
the thoracic cage, abnormal pulsations, atrophy 
of the shoulder girdle or pectoral muscles, 
limited or lagging expansion on forced inspira- 
tion. The large, rounded, relatively immobile 
"barrel" chest may be regarded as evidence of 
significant pulmonary emphysema. 

(d) Palpation. — Observe for tumors of the 
breast or thoracic wall, enlarged cervical, supra- 
clavicular, or axillary lymph nodes, deviation of 
the trachea in the suprasternal notch, and thrills 
associated with respiration or the cardiac cycle. 
Instruct the examinee to repeat such a word as 
"moon" or "ninety-nine" in a deep voice and 
palpate symmetrical areas over the two lungs for 
differences in the intensity of tactile fremitus. 

(e) Percussion. — Light percussion should be 
used with the pleximeter finger held lightly 
against the chest parallel to the ribs. Thus slight 
changes in the percussion note are best felt and 
heard when symmetrical areas of the two lungs 
are percussed. Note mobility of the diaphragm by 
percussing the lung bases at forced inspiration 
and again at forced expiration. 



(f) Auscultation. — Instruct applicant to 
breathe freely but not deeply through his mouth. 
Listen to an entire respiratory cycle before mov- 
ing the stethoscope bell to another area. Note 
wheezing, rales or friction rubs. Compare the 
pitch and intensity of breath sounds heard over 
symmetrical areas of the two lungs. Instruct ap- 
plicant to whisper such words as "one-two-three." 
Note increase or decrease in intensity of whis- 
pered voice conduction over symmetrical areas 
of the two lungs. There is normally an increase 
in pitch and intensity of the breath sounds and 
whispered voice over the apex of the right lung 
as compared to the left because of the closer 
proximity of the trachea to the former. Instruct 
applicant to exhale, cough lightly and immedi- 
ately inhale, Auscultate the chest during this 
process. Note any rales, paying particular atten- 
tion to moist rales that "hreak" with the cough 
or fine rales heard at the beginning of inspira- 
tion immediately after cough. 

(g) Functional Examination, — 

(1) A careful history of functional capac- 
ity under stress and exercise shall be taken. Any 
applicant presenting a history suggestive of 
chronic pulmonary disease or functional incapac- 
ity shall be carefully examined in that respect. 

(2) The ability to ascend and descend a 
full flight of stairs is a rough test of functional 
capacity. The applicant will be observed during 
this exercise and any cyanosis, dyspnea, unusual 
respiratory distress, or other abnormal findings 
will be noted. 

(3) Where airway obstruction is a ques- 
tion, the "match" test may be used. The ap- 
plicant is asked to blow out a half-burned match, 
held 6 inches from the mouth (fully open). The 
applicant is asked to take a full breath and blow 
out the match with a single, maximal expiration 
(mouth wide open, lips not pursed). Individuals 
unable to extinguish the match should be con- 
sidered to have a significant degree of airway 
obstruction. 

(2) General. — The following are causes for re- 
jection: 

(a) Abnormal elevation of the diaphragm on 
either side. 

(b) Acute abscess of the lung. 

(c) Acute bronchitis until the condition is 
cured. 

(d) Acute fibrinous pleurisy, associated with 
acute nontuberculous pulmonary infection. 

(e) Acute mycotic disease of the lung such 
as coccidioidomycosis and histoplasmosis. 

(f) Acute nontuberculous pneumonia. 

(g) Foreign body in trachea or bronchus. 

(h) Foreign body in the chest wall causing 
symptoms. 



15-17 
Change 18 



15-19 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-19 



(i) Lobectomy, history of, for a nontubercu- 
lous, nonmalignant lesion with residual pulmo- 
nary disease. Removal of more than one lobe is 
cause for rejection regardless of the absence of re- 
siduals. 

(j) Other traumatic lesions of the chest and 
its contents. 

(k) Pneumothorax or history thereof within 
1 year of date of examination if due to simple 
trauma or surgery; within 3 years of date of ex- 
amination if of spontaneous origin. Surgical 
correction is acceptable if no significant residual 
disease or deformity remains and pulmonary 
function tests are within normal limits. 

(1) Significant abnormal findings on physi- 
cal examination of the chest. 

(m) Significant pulmonary functional inca- 
pacity. 

(3) Tuberculous Lesions. — The following are 
causes for rejection (see also art. 15-24): 

(a) Active tuberculosis in any form or loca- 
tion. 

(b) Pulmonary tuberculosis, active within 
the past 5 years. 

(c) Substantiated history or X-ray findings 
of pulmonary tuberculosis of more than minimal 
extent at any time; or minimal tuberculosis not 
treated with at least 24 months' of approved 
chemotherapy consisting of at least two antituber- 
culous drugs or combined chemotherapy and sur- 
gery (surgery at least 1 year prior to discontinua- 
tion of therapy and the antituberculous chemo- 
therapy being no less than 24 months' duration 
and utilizing at least two antituberculous drugs). 

(4) Nontuberculous Lesions. — The following 
are causes for rejection: 

(a) Acute mastitis, chronic mastitis, if more 
than mild. 

(b) Bronchial asthma or recurrent asthmatic 
bronchitis since 12th birthday. 

(c) Bronchitis, chronic, with evidence of 
pulmonary function disturbance. 

(d) Bronchiectasis. 

(e) Bronchopleural fistula. 

(f) Bullous or generalized pulmonary em- 
physema. 

(g) Chronic abscess of lung. 

(h) Chronic fibrous pleural adhesions of suf- 
ficient extent to interfere with pulmonary func- 
tion or obscure the lung field in the roentgeno- 
gram. 

(i) Chronic mycotic diseases of the lung in- 
cluding coccidioidomycosis; residual cavitation or 
more than a few small sized inactive and stable 
residual nodules demonstrated to be due to 
mycotic disease. 

(j) Congential malformations or acquired 
deformities which result in reducing the chest 
capacity and diminishing the cardiac or respira- 



tory functions to such degree as to interfere with 
vigorous physical exertion, or that produce dis- 
figurement when the applicant is dressed. 

(k) Empyema, residual sacculation or un- 
healed sinuses of chest wall following operation 
for empyema. 

(1) Extensive pulmonary fibrosis from any 
cause. 

(m) Foreign body in the lung or medias- 
tinum causing symptoms or active inflammatory 
reaction. 

(n) Multiple cystic disease of the lung or 
solitary cyst which is large and incapacitating. 

(o) New growth of breast; history of mas- 
tectomy. 

(p) Osteomyelitis of rib, sternum, clavicle, 
scapula, or vertebra. 

(g) Pleurisy with effusion of unknown ori- 
gin within the previous 2 years. 

(r) Sarcoidosis. (See 15-24.) 

(s) Suppurative periostitis of rib, sternum, 
clavicle, scapula, or vertebra. 

15-19. Mouth, Nose, Pharynx, Trachea, 
Esophagus, and Larynx 

(1) A complete examination by reflected light 
shall be made of the anterior and posterior nares, 
the nasopharynx and pharynx, and when neces- 
sary, the larynx. When considered necessary, 
transillumination and X-ray shall be employed. 

(2) The Mouth. — The following are causes for 
rejection: 

(a) Hard palate, perforation of. 

(b) Harelip, unless satisfactorily repaired by 
surgery. 

(c) Leukoplakia, if severe. 

(d) Lips, unsightly mutilations of, from 
wounds, burns, or disease. 

(e) Ranula, if extensive. For other tumors, 
see also article 15-25. 

(3) Nose. — The following are causes for rejec- 
tion: 

(a) Allergic manifestations. 

(1) Chronic atrophic rhinitis. 

(2) Hay fever, if severe. 

(b) Choana, atresia, or stenosis of, if sympto- 
matic. 

(c) Nasal septum, perforation of: 

(1) Associated with interference of func- 
tion, ulceration of crusting, and when the result 
of organic disease. 

(2) If progressive. 

(3) If respiration is accompanied by whis- 
tling sound. 

(d) Sinusitis, acute. 

(e) Sinusitis, chronic: 

(1) Evidenced by chronic purulent nasal 
discharge, large nasal polyps, hyperplastic 



15-18 

Change 66 



15-20 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-20 



changes of the nasal tissues and other signs and 
symptoms. 

(2) Confirmed by transillumination or X- 
ray examination or both. 

(4) Pharynx, Trachea, Esophagus, and Larynx. 
— The following are causes for rejection: 

(a) Dysphonia due to plica ventricularis. 

(b) Esophagus, organic diseases of, such as 
ulceration, varices, achalasia, peptic esophagitis, 
if confirmed by appropriate X-ray or esophago- 
scopic examinations. 

(c) Laryngeal paralysis, sensory or motor, 
due to any cause. 

(d) Larynx, organic disease of, such as neo- 
plasm, polyps, granuloma, ulceration, and chronic 
laryngitis. 

(e) Tracheostomy or tracheal fistula. 

(5) Other Dejects and Diseases. — The follow- 
ing are causes for rejection: 

(a) Aphonia. 

(b) Deformities or conditions of the mouth, 
throat, pharynx, larynx, esophagus, and nose 
which interfere with mastication and swallowing 
of ordinary food, with speech, or with breathing. 

(c) Destructive syphilitic disease of the 
mouth, nose, throat, larynx, or esophagus. 

(d) Pharyngitis and nasopharyngitis, 
chronic, with positive history and objective evi- 
dence, if of such a degree as to result in excessive 
time lost in the military environment. 

15-20. Neurological Disorders 

(1) The neurological examination shall be 
conducted as follows: The individual shall walk a 
straight line at a brisk pace with his eyes open, 
stop, and turn around. He shall then return in the 
same manner with his eyes closed, stop, and turn 
around. Look for spastic, ataxic, incoordinate, or 
limping gait; absence of normal associated move- 
ments; deviation to one side or the other; the 
presence of abnormal involuntary movements; 
undue difference in performance with the eyes 
open and closed. The individual shall then stand 
erect, feet together, arms extended in front. Look 
for unsteadiness and swaying, deviation of one or 
both of the arms from the assumed position, 
tremors, or other involuntary movements. With 
eyes closed, the candidate shall then touch his 
nose with the right and then the left index finger. 
Look for ataxia, tremors, overshooting, particu- 
larly at the end of the movement. Examine joint 
and spine movements and muscle condition. Look 
for muscle atrophy or pseudohypertrophy, muscu- 
lar weakness, limitation of joint movement, and 
spine stiffness. As to pupils, look for irregularity, 
inequality, diminished or absent contraction to 
light, movements of eyes, facial muscles, and 
tongue. Look for strabismus, ptosis, sustained nys- 



tagmus, tremors of retracted lips, asymmetry or 
tremors of face or tongue. Sensation shall be ex- 
amined by pricking lightly each side of the fore- 
head, bridge of nose, and chin, across the volar 
surface of each wrist, and dorsum of each foot. 
Look for inequality of sensation right and left. If 
these sensations are abnormal, vibration sense 
should be tested at ankles and wrists by tuning 
fork. With eyes closed, the candidate shall move 
each heel down the other leg from knee to ankle. 
Test sense of movement of great toes and thumb. 
Look for diminution or loss of vibration and 
sense of position, and ataxia. Knee jerks and 
plantar reflexes should be tested. When indicated, 
appropriate laboratory tests and X-ray examina- 
tions shall be made. 

(2) The following are causes for rejection: 

(a) Degenerative disorders: 

(1) Cerebellar and Friedreich's ataxia. 

(2) Cerebral arteriosclerosis. 

(3) Encephalomyelitis, residuals of, which 
preclude the satisfactory performance of military 
duty. 

(4) Huntington's chorea. 

(5) Multiple sclerosis. 

(6) Mascular atrophies and dystrophies of 
any type. 

(b) Miscellaneous: 

(1) Congenital malformations if asso- 
ciated with neurological manifestations and men- 
ingocele even if uncomplicated. 

(2) History of chronic motion sickness. 

(3) Migraine, when frequent and incapac- 
itating. 

(4) Paralysis or weakness, deformity, dis- 
coordination, pain, sensory disturbance, intellec- 
tual deficit, disturbance of consciousness, or per- 
sonality abnormality regardless of cause which is 
of such a nature or degree as to preclude the satis- 
factory performance of military duty. 

(5) Tremors, spasmodic torticollis, atheto- 
sis or other abnormal movements more than mild. 

(c) Neurosyphilis of any form (general pa- 
resis, tabes dorsalis, meningovascular syphilis). 

(d) Paroxysmal convulsive disorders, dis- 
turbances of consciousness, all forms of psycho- 
motor or temporal lobe epilepsy or history there- 
of except for seizures associated with toxic states 
or fever during childhood up to the age of 12. 

(e) Peripheral nerve disorder: 

(1) Polyneuritis. 

(2) Mononeuritis or neuralgia which is 
chronic or recurrent and of an intensity that is 
periodically incapacitating. 

(3) Neurofibromatosis. 

(f) Spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
verified history of, unless cause has been surgi- 
cally corrected. 



25 May 71 



15-19 
Change 66 



15-21 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-21 



15-21. Psychoses, Psychoneuroses, and 
Personality Disorders 

(1) Examination Technic. — 

(a) The diagnosis of most psychiatric disor- 
ders depends upon an adequate longitudinal his- 
tory. When necessary, this information should be 
corroborated by supplemental information from 
family, family physician, schools, churches, hospi- 
tals, social service or welfare agencies, and courts. 

(b) Mental and personality difficulties are 
most clearly revealed in the candidate's behavior 
toward those with whom he feels relatively at 
ease. The most successful approach is one of 
straightforward professional inquiry, coupled 
with real respect for the individual's personality 
and due consideration for his feelings. 

(c) The psychiatric examination should be 
conducted out of hearing of other persons. Signif- 
icant historical information might be withheld 
when the individual feels that he must be imper- 
sonal and give replies that will not impress listen- 
ers with his peculiarity. The examiner should pay 
close attention to the content and implication of 
everything said and to any other clues, and, in a 
matter-of-fact manner, follow up whatever is not 
self-evident or within acceptable limits of nor- 
mal. 

(d) The Standard Form 93 shall be carefully 
reviewed before the candidate is examined by the 
medical officer. If any of the last 5 items in ques- 
tion 11 are checked "yes", the examiner should be 
alerted to possible psychiatric difficulties in the 
candidate. There are, in addition, other items 
which could possibly indicate emotional difficul- 
ties. For example, "yes" answers to several of the 
following might be indicative of anxiety, depres- 
sion, or frustration in interpersonal relationships: 
dizziness or fainting spells, shortness of breath, 
palpitation or pounding heart, bed wetting since 
age 12, attempted suicide, been a sleepwalker, or 
stutters or stammers habitually. 

(e) In an attempt to predict how an individ- 
ual will adjust in the future, a review of his past 
adjustment is the most accurate guideline on 
which to base an opinion. Therefore, his occupa- 
tional, school and previous (if any) military rec- 
ords should be thoroughly investigated. The can- 
didate's ability to adhere to the expected social 
mores is further evidence of emotional stability; 
therefore, civilian disciplinary records should be 
carefully evaluated. 

(f) To evaluate the applicant's ability to ad- 
just to the demands of military service, it is desir- 
able to estimate his capacity for duty under the 
following conditions; (1) separation from home 
and family; (2) restricted environment aboard 
ship; (3) necessity for obedience to military dis- 



cipline; (4) lack of privacy; (5) extremes of cli- 
mate; (6) exhaustion; and (7) the possibility of 
bodily injury. 

(g) It is fully appreciated that a candidate's 
motivation for service cannot always be deter- 
mined. In fact, the candidate's motivation may be 
sincere, under the less stressful demands of serv- 
ice, only to become unmotivated during periods 
of rigorous training or arduous duty, with a dem- 
onstration of his basic psychopathology. 

(h) The examiner, during the course of a 
routine physical examination of the candidate, 
has ample opportunity to be aware of the follow- 
ing: (1) inability to understand and execute re- 
quests promptly and adequately; (2) lack of nor- 
mal response; (3) abnormal anxiety; (4) silly in- 
appropriate laughter; (5) abnormal seclusive- 
ness; (6) over displays of hostility or stubborn- 
ness; (7) retarded psychomotor activity; (8) ab- 
normal shyness; (9) paranoid tendencies; (10) 
obviously below normal I.Q.; (11) a history of 
enuresis or sleep-walking persisting into late 
childhood or adolescence (see also art. 15-21(4) 
(c); and (12) abnormal autonomic nervous sys- 
tem responses; i.e., giddiness, fainting, blushing, 
excessive sweating. Note also the lack of such 
normal anxiety or autonomic responses as might 
reasonably be expected under circumstances of ex- 
amination and other processing. 

(i) The psychiatric member of the formal 
physical examination board for the U.S. Naval 
Academy and the ROTC Four-Year Scholarship 
Program shall administer the below Reading 
Aloud test to each candidate. For other officer 

candidates, the test shall be administered by a 
psychiatrist (if available), or the medical exam- 
iner, if there is evidence or history of speech im- 
pediment of any degree. The test shall be admin- 
istered as follows: (1) have the candidate stand 
erect, face the medical examiner across the room 
and read aloud, as if he were confronting a class 
of students; (2) if he pauses, even momentarily, 
on any phrase or word the medical examiner im- 
mediately and sharply says, "What's that?", and 
requires the examinee to start over again wfth the 
first sentence of the test; (3) on the second trial, 
the true stammerer usually will halt again at the 
same word or phonetic combination and will 
often reveal serious stammering. 

Reading Aloud Test 

You wished to know all about my grandfather. 
Well, he is nearly 93 years old; he dresses himself 
in an ancient black frock-coat, usually minus sev- 
eral buttons; yet he still thinks as swiftly as ever. 
A long, flowing beard clings to his chin, giving 
those who observe him a pronounced feeling of 
the utmost respect. When he speaks, his voice is 
just a bit cracked and quivers a trifle. Twice each 



15-20 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



15-22 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-22 



day he plays skillfully and with zest upon our 
small organ. Except in winter when the ooze or 
snow or ice is present, he slowly takes a short 
walk in the open air each day. We have often 
urged him to walk more and smoke less, but he 
always answers, "Banana Oil." Grandfather likes 
to be modern in his language. 

(2) Psychoses, — The following are causes for 
rejection: 

(a) Psychosis. 

(b) Authenticated history of psychotic ill- 
ness other than of a brief duration associated with 
a toxic or infectious process. 

(3) Psycboneuroses. — The following are causes 
for rejection: 

(a) History of psychoneurotic reaction 
which causes: 

(1) Hospitalization. 

(2) Prolonged care by a physician. 

(3) Loss of time from normal pursuits for 
repeated periods even if of brief duration, or — 

(4) Symptoms or behavior of a repeated 
nature which impaired school or work efficiency. 

(b) History of a brief psychoneurotic reac- 
tion or nervous disturbance within the preceding 
12 months which was sufficiently severe to require 
medical attention or absence from work or school 
for a brief period. 

(4) Personality Disorders. — The following are- 
causes for rejection: 

(a) Personality disorders or mental retarda- 
tion as listed in International Classification of 
Diseases, 8th Revision, vol. I, PHS Publication 
No. 1693, categories 301 and 310 to 315, and as 
evidenced by — 

(1) Frequent encounters with law enforce- 
ment agencies, or antisocial attitudes or behavior 
which, while not a cause for administrative rejec- 
tion, are tangible evidence of an impaired charac- 
terological capacity to adapt to the military serv- 
ice. 

(2) Overt homosexuality or other forms of 
sexual deviant practices such as exhibitionism, 
transvestitism, voyeurism, etc. 

(3) Chronic alcoholism or alcohol addic- 
tion. 

(4) Drug addiction. 

(b) Character and behavior disorders where 
it is evident by history and objective examination 
that the degree of immaturity, instability, person- 
ality inadequacy, and dependency will seriously 
interfere with adjustment in the military service 
as demonstrated by repeated inability to maintain 
reasonable adjustment in school, with employers 
and fellow-workers, and other society groups. 

(c) Other symptomatic immaturity disorders 
such as: 



(1) Stammering, stuttering, or lisping 
which interferes with the individual's ability to 
pronounce and enunciate words promptly and 
clearly. 

(2) Enuresis or history thereof persisting 
into late childhood or adolescence. (See also arti- 
cle 15-l4(3)(c).) 

(3) Sleepwalking or history thereof per- 
sisting into late childhood or adolescence. 

(d) Specific learning defects as listed in In- 
ternational Classification of Diseases, 8th Revi- 
sion, vol. 1, PHS Publication No. 1693, categories 
306.1 and 781.5. 

15-22. Skin and Cellular Tissues 

(1) The skin shall be carefully inspected for 
evidence of disease. The examination should be 
conducted in a well-lighted room, preferably by 
daylight. The condition of the skin often reflects 
the presence of pathology in other parts of the 
body as well, and for this reason the dermatologi- 
cal examination is important in evaluating the 
general physical condition of the individual and 
as a clue to the existence of leisons elsewhere in 
the body. As a general rule, applicants who are 
extensively infested with vermin, and filthy in 
person and clothing, should be rejected as un- 
suited for military service. 

(2) The following are causes for rejection: 

(a) Acne: Severe, when the face is markedly 
disfigured, or when extensive involvement of the 
neck, shoulders, chest, or back would be aggra- 
vated by environmental conditions or interfere 
with the wearing of military equipment. 

(b) Atopic dermatitis (neurodermatitis dis- 
seminata): With active or residual lesions in 
characteristic areas (face and neck, antecubital 
and popliteal fossae, occasionally wrists and 
hands), or documented history thereof. 

(c) Cysts: 

(1) Cysts, other than pilonidal, of such a 
size or location as to interfere with the normal 
wearing of military equipment. 

(2) Pilonidal cyst or sinus, if evidenced by 
presence of readily palpable tumor mass, or if 
there is a history of inflammation or of purulent 
discharge. 

(d) Dermatitis factitia. 

(e) Dermatitis herpetiformis. 

(f) Eczema: Any type which is chronic and 
resistant to treatment. 

(g) Elephantiasis or chronic lymphedema. 

(h) Epidermolysis bullosa. 

(i) Fungal infections, systemic or superficial 
types (if extensive and not amenable to treat- 
ment). 

(j) Furunculosis: Extensive, recurrent, or 
chronic. 



15-21 
Change 66 



15-23 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-24 



(k) Hyperhidrosis of hands or feet: Chronic 
or severe. 

(1) Ichthyosis: Severe, 
(m) Leprosy: Any type. 

(n) Leukemia cutis; mycosis fungoides; 
Hodgkin's disease. 

(o) Lichen planus. 

(p) Lupus erythematosus (acute, subacute, 
chronic, or chronic discoid) or any other derma- 
tosis aggravated by sunlight. 

(q) Neurofibromatosis (Von Recklinghau- 
sen's disease). 

(r) Nevi or vascular tumors: If extensive, 
unsightly, or exposed to constant irritation. 

(s) Pemphigus. 

(t) Psoriasis or a verified history thereof, 
(u) Radiodermatitis. 

(v) Scars which are so extensive, deep, or ad- 
herent that they may interfere with the wearing 
of military equipment, or that show a tendency to 
ulcerate. 

(w) Scleroderma, diffuse type. 

(x) Tattooing which is obscene, offensive, or 
indecent. 

(y) Tuberculosis. 

(z) Urticaria, chronic. 

(aa) Warts, plantar, on weight bearing areas, 
if symptomatic. 

(bb) Xanthoma: If disabling or accompa- 
nied by hypercholesterolemia or hyperlipemia. 

15-23. Spine, Scapulae, Ribs, and Sacroiliac 
Joints 

(1) Have the applicant perform the exercises 
described in article 15-89. Examine carefully for 
evidence of intervertebral disc syndrome, myositis 
and traumatic lesions of the low back (lumbosa- 
cral and sacroiliac strains). If the examination 
gives any indication of congenital deformity, ar- 
thritis, spondylolisthesis, or significant degree of 
abnormal curvature, special orthopedic consulta- 
tion and X-ray examination should be obtained. 

(2) Spine and Sacroiliac Joints. — The follow- 
ing are causes for rejection: 

(a) Arthritis (see art. 15-12(4)(a)). 

(b) Complaint of disease or injury of the 
spine or sacroiliac joints either with or without 
objective signs and symptoms which have pre- 
vented the individual from successfully following 
a physically active vocation in civilian life. 

(c) Deviation or curvature of the spine from 
normal alignment, structure, or function (sco- 
liosis, kyphosis, or lordosis, spina bifida occulta, 
spondylolysis, spondylolisthesis, etc.), if: 

(1) Mobility and weight-bearing power 
are poor. 

(2) More than moderate restriction of 
normal physical activities is required. 



(3) Of such a nature as to prevent the in- 
dividual from following a physically active voca- 
tion in civilian life. 

(4) Of a degree which will interfere with 
the wearing of a uniform or military equipment. 

(5) Symptomatic, associated with positive 
physical finding(s) demonstrable by X-ray. 

(d) Diseases of the lumbosacral or sacroiliac 
joints of a chronic type and obviously associated 
with pain referred to the lower extremities, mus- 
cular spasm, postural deformities or limitation of 
motion in the lumbar region of the spine. 

(e) Granulomatous diseases either active or 
healed. 

(f) Fracture of the spine: 

(1) Healed fracture or dislocation of the 
spine in which there are residuals such as signifi- 
cant wedging, malalignment, or abnormal neuro- 
logical findings present to a degree which would 
preclude satisfactory performance of service. 

(g) Malformation and deformities of the 
pelvis sufficient to interfere with function. 

(h) Ruptured nucleus pulposus (herniation 
of intervertebral disk) or history of operation for 
this condition. 

(3) Scapulae, Clavicles, and Ribs. — The fol- 
lowing are causes for rejection: 

(a) Fractures, until well healed, and until 
determined that the residuals thereof will not 
preclude the satisfactory performance of military 
duty. 

(b) Injury within the preceding 6 weeks, 
without fracture, or dislocation, of more than a 
minor nature. 

(c) Osteomyelitis. 

(d) Prominent scapulae interfering with 
function or with the wearing of uniform or mili- 
tary equipment. 

15-24. Systemic Diseases and Miscellaneous 
Conditions and Defects 

(1) Systemic Diseases. — The following are 
causes for rejection: 

(a) Dermatomyositis. 

(b) Genodermatosis with visceral involve- 
ment (adenoma sebaceum, neurofibromatosis 
(Von Recklinghausen's disease), etc.). 

(c) Leprosy: Any type. 

(d) Lupus erythematosus: Acute, subacute, 
chronic, or chronic discoid. 

(e) Reiter's disease. 

(f) Sarcoidosis. 

(g) Progressive systemic sclerosis. 

(h) Tuberculosis: 

(1) Active tuberculosis in any form or lo- 
cation or substantiated history of active tubercu- 
losis within the previous 2 years. 



15-22 

Change 66 



15-25 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-25 



(2) Substantiated history of one or more 
reactivations or relapses of tuberculosis in any 
form or location or other definite evidence of 
poor host resistance to the tubercle bacillus. (See 
also art. 15-18(3).) 

(3) Residual physical or mental defects 
from past tuberculosis that would preclude the 
satisfactory performance of duty. 

(i) Vasculitis: Chronic or severe (periarteri- 
tis, malignant papulosa atrophicans, pityriasis 
lichenoides et varioliformis). 

(2) General and Miscellaneous Conditions and 
Defects. — The following are causes for rejection: 

(a) Allergic manifestations: 

(1) Allergic rhinitis (hay fever). (See 
also art. 15-19.) 

(2) Asthma. (See also art. 15-18.) 

(3) Alergic dermatoses. (See also art. 

15-22.) 

(4) Visceral, abdominal or cerebral al- 
lergy, if severe. 

(5) Bonafide history of moderate or severe 
generalized (as opposed to local) allergic reac- 
tion to insect bites or stings. 

(6) Bonafide history of severe generalized 
reaction to common foods; e.g., milk, eggs, beef, 
and pork. 

(b) Any acute pathological condition, in- 
cluding acute communicable diseases, until recov- 
ery has occurred without sequelae. 

(c) Any deformity which is markedly un- 
sightly or which impairs general functional abil- 
ity to such an extent as to prevent satisfactory 
performance of military duty, 

(d) Chronic metallic poisoning especially 
beryllium, manganese, and mercury. Undesirable 
residuals from lead, arsenic, or silver poisoning 
make the examinee medically unacceptable. 

(e) Cold injury, residuals of (example: 
frostbite, chilblain, immersion foot, or trench 
foot), such as deep seated ache, paresthesia, hy- 
perhidrosis, easily traumatized skin, cyanosis, am- 
putation of any digit, or ankylosis. 

(f) Unexplained biological false positive 
tests for syphilis (positive S.T.S. with negative 
FTA-ABS). 

(g) Filariasis; trypanosomiasis; amebiasis; 
schistosomiasis; uncinariasis (hookworm) asso- 
ciated with anemia, malnutrition, etc, if more 
than mild, and other similar worm or animal 
parasitic infestations, including the carrier states 
thereof. 

(h) Heat pyrexia (heatstroke, sunstroke, 
etc.): Documented evidence of predisposition 
(includes disorders of sweat mechanism and pre- 
vious serious episodes), recurrent episodes requir- 
ing medical attention, or residual mjury resulting 



therefrom (especially cardiac, cerebral, hepatic, 
and renal), 

(i) Industrial solvent and other chemical in- 
toxication, chronic, including carbon bisulfide, 
trichloroethylene, carbon tetrachloride, and 
methyl celiosolve. 

(j) Mycotic infection of internal organs. 

(k) Myositis or fibrositis, severe, chronic. 

(1) Residuals of tropical fevers and various 
parasitic or protozoal infestations which in the 
opinion of the medical examiner preclude the sat- 
isfactory performance of military duty. 

15—25. Tumors and Malignant Diseases 

(1) Benign Tumors. — The following are 
causes for rejection: 

(a) Any tumor of the: 

(1) Auditory canal, if obstructive. 

(2) Bronchus, lung, pleura or mediastinum. 

(3) Central nervous system and its mem- 
branous coverings unless 5 years after surgery and 
no otherwise disqualifying residuals of surgery or 
original lesion. 

(4) Eye or orbit (see also art. 
15-13(3)(a)(6)). 

(5) Kidney, bladder, testicle, or penis. 

(b) Tumor, benign, of: 

(1) Abdominal wall, if sufficiently large 
to interfere with military duty. 

(2) Bone, if likely to continue to enlarge, 
be subject to trauma during military service, or 
shows malignant potential. 

(3) Breast, thorax, or chest wall, other 
than fibromata, lipomata, and inclusion or seba- 
ceous cysts which do not interfere with military 
duty. 

(4) Female genitalia, internal or external 
(see also art. I5-l4(2)(i». 

(5) Thyroid or other structures of the 
neck (including enlarged lymph nodes) if the 
enlargement is of such degree as to interfere with 
the wearing of a uniform or military equipment. 

(6) Tongue, if it interferes with function. 

(2) Malignant Diseases and Tumors. — The fol- 
lowing are causes for rejection: 

(a) Leukemia, acute or chronic. 

(b) Malignant lymphomata. 

(c) Malignant tumor of any kind, at any 
time, substantiated diagnosis of, even though 
surgically removed, confirmed by accepted labora- 
tory procedures, except as noted in article 
15-13(3)(a)(6). 

15-25A. Venereal Diseases 

(1) All applicants for the naval service shall 
receive a serologic test for syphilis. This test shall 
be conducted at the time" of application if the in- 



15-23 
Change 66 



15-2 5 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-2 5 



dividual is a suspect or presents clinical evidence 
of venereal disease or has a history thereof. If this 
test is not conducted at the time of application, it 
shall be conducted as soon as practicable after re- 
porting to first duty station or Reserve activity, as 
appropriate. 

(2) Procedure When Serological Test for 
Syphilis is Positive. — 

(a) All applicants giving a positive serum 
reaction shall be sufficiently checked, preferably 
by another laboratory, to assure persistence of re- 
action and to minimize chance of error. An 
FTA-ABS test shall be obtained also at the same 
time to further differentiate biological false posi- 
tive reactions from syphilis. If required, the facil- 
ities of local or State health departments may be 
utilized for performing serological tests at the 
time of application. 

(b) The possibility of a false positive sero- 
logic test for syphilis should be considered in 
those applicants who have or are convalescent 
from any acute infectious disease or recent fever 
from any cause (see biologic false positive reac- 
tion, art. 1 5— 24(2) (f ) ). A persistently positive 
serologic test for syphilis may or may not signify 
active syphilis; it may represent a test that is 
sero-fast or biologic false positive. There will be 
applicants, therefore, that may qualify under such 
circumstances; e.g., those with evidence of ade- 
quately treated early syphilis or those with evi- 



dence of adequately treated congential syphilis 
who show no complications or permanent resid- 
ual of the disease, etc. (See art. 15-25A(3)(c).) 
Consultation with a syphilologist should be ob- 
tained if the solution to the problem of a persist- 
ently positive serologic test is not readily appar- 
ent. 

(c) All applicants who have clinical evi- 
dence of venereal disease and all personnel with a 
positive serological test resulting from syphilis 
which existed prior to entrance in the naval serv- 
ice shall be reported (MED-6222-4) to the U.S. 
Public Health Service and the State health de- 
partment, in accordance with BUMED Instruc- 
tion 6222 series. 

(3) Venereal Diseases. — The following are 
causes for rejection; 

(a) Any active venereal infection or any 
active infectious process resulting therefrom. 

(b) Venereal disease which has not satisfac- 
torily responded to treatment. The finding of a 
positive serologic test for syphilis following ade- 
quate treatment of syphilis is not in itself consid- 
ered evidence of venereal disease which has not 
responded to treatment (see art. 1 5-24(2) (f)). 

(c) Complications and permanent residuals 
of venereal disease if progressive or of such na- 
ture as to interfere with the satisfactory perform- 
ance of duty, or if subject to aggravation by mili- 
tary service. 



15-24 
Change 74 



15-26 CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 15-27 

Section II. PHYSICAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL PERSONNEL GROUPS 

Article 

General 15-26 

Induction, Enlistment, and Reenlistment 15-27 

Aviation Personnel 15-28 

Submarine Personnel 15-29 

Nuclear Field _ 15-29A 

Nuclear Shore Power Program 15-29B 

Radiation Workers 15-29C 

Diving Duty 15-30 

Antarctica Duty "... 15—31 

State Department Duty 15—32 

Special Duty, Intelligence Officers . . 15-33 

Women . 15-34 

Ftrefighting Instructor Personnel _ 15.34 A 



15-26. General 

( 1 ) Certain groups of personnel, by reason of 
the particular type of duty to which they will be 
assigned, are required to meet physical standards 
which differ somewhat from those stated in the 
preceding section. Some of these groups and the 
special physical standards which are in effect are 
considered separately in the articles that follow, 

15—27. Induction, Enlistment, and Reenlistment 
(of Males in the U.S. Navy, U.S. Marine 
Corps, or Reserve Components Thereof) 

( 1 ) Chapter 2, Army Regulations 40-501 
(Standard of Medical Fitness) , contains the phys- 
ical standards and causes for rejection for induc- 



tion, enlistment, and reenlistment (or extension 
of enlistment) of males in the U.S. Navy, U.S. 
Marine Corps, or Reserve components thereof. 
When considering an individual for immediate 
reenlistment or extension of enlistment, refer 
to article 15-3(3) and SECNAVINST 1850.3 
series. These standards do NOT apply for the 
enlistment or appointment of females, appoint- 
ment of males in any category, or for the en- 
rollment of officer candidates in any Navy or 
Marine Corps program. For convenience these 
standards with applicable appendices are re- 
printed on the following pages. Attention is 
invited to the BUMED footnotes at the bottom 
of certain pages. (Sample Navy reference for 
the following articles: 15-27-2-3a.) 



10 Feb 75 



15-25 

Change 83 




( 



(J 



15-27-2-3 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-27-2-3 



Section II. ABDOMEN AND GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM 



2-3. Abdominal Organs and Gastrointes- 
tinal System 

The causes for rejection for appointment, enl- 
istment, and induction are — 

a. Cholecystectomy, sequelae of, such as post- 
operative stricture of the common bile duct, 
reforming of stones in hepatic or common bile 
ducts, or incisional hernia, or postchole- 
cystectomy syndrome when symptoms are so 
severe as to interfere with normal performance 
of duty. 

b. Cholecystitis, acute or chronic, with or 
without cholelithiasis, if diagnosis is confirmed 
by usual laboratory procedures or authentic 
medical records. 

c. Cirrhosis regardless of the absence of 
manifestations such as jaundice, ascites or 
known esophageal varices, abnormal liver 
function tests with or without history of 
chronic alcoholism. 

d. Fistula in ano. 

e. Gastritis, chronic hypertrophic, severe. 

/. Hemorrhoids. 

(1) External hemorrhoids producing 
marked symptoms. 

(2) Internal hemorrhoids, if large or ac- 
companied with hemorrhage or protruding in- 
termittently or constantly. 

g. Hepatitis within the preceding 6 months, 
or persistence of symptoms after a reasonable 
period of time with objective evidence of im- 
pairment of liver function. 

h. Hernia: 

(1) Hernia other than small asympto- 
matic umbilical or hiatal. 

(2) History of operation for hernia 
within the preceding 60 days. 

i. Intestinal obstruction or authenticated 
history of more than one episode, if either oc- 
curred during the preceding 5 years or if re- 
sulting condition remains which produces sig- 
nificant symptoms or requires treatment. 

j. Megacolon of more than minimal degree, 



diverticulitis, regional enteritis and ulcerative 
colitis. Irritable colon of more than moderate 
degree. 

k. Pancreas, acute or chronic disease of, if 
proven by laboratory tests, or authenticated 
medical records. 

I. Rectum, stricture or prolapse of. 

m. Resection, gastric or of bowel; or gas- 
troenterostomy; however minimal intestinal 
resection in infancy or childhood (for exam- 
ple: for intussusception or pyloric stenosis) is 
acceptable if the individual has been asympto- 
matic since the resection and if surgical con- 
sultation (to include upper and lower gastroin- 
testinal series) gives complete clearance. 

n. Scars. 

(1) Scars, abdominal, regardless of cause, 
which show hernial bulging or which interfere 
with movements. 

(2) Scar pain associated with disturbance 
of function of abdominal wall or contained vis- 
cera. 

6. Sinuses of the abdominal wall. 

p. Splenectomy, except when accomplished 
for the following: 

(1) Trauma. 

(2) Causes unrelated to diseases of the 
spleen. 

(3) Hereditary spherocytosis. 

(4) Disease involving the spleen when 
followed by correction of the condition for a 
period of at least 2 years. 

q. Tumors. See paragraphs 2-40 and 2-41. 

r. Ulcer: 

(1) Ulcer of the stomach or duodenum if 
diagnosis is confirmed by X-ray examination, 
or authenticated history thereof. 

(2) Authentic history of surgical opera- 
tion (s) for gastric or duodenal ulcer. 

s. Other congenital or acquired abnormali- 
ties and defects which preclude satisfactory 
performance of military duty or which require 
frequent and prolonged treatment. 

15-27 

Change % 



15-27-2-4 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 15-27-2-4 



Section III. BLOOD AND BU 

2-4. Blood and Blood-Forming Tissue 
Diseases 

The causes for rejection for appointment, enl- 
istment and induction are — 

a. Anemia: 

(1) Blood less anemia — until both condi- 
tion and basic cause are corrected. 

(2) Deficiency anemia, not controlled by 
medication. 

(3) Abnormal destruction of RBC's: 
Hemolytic anemia. 

(4) Faulty RBC construction: Hereditary 
hemolytic anemia, thalassemia, and sickle cel- 
lanemia. 

(5) Myelophthisic anemia: Myelomatosis, 
leukemia, Hodgkin's disease. 



DOD-FORMING TISSUE DISEASES 

(6) Primary refractory anemia: Aplastic 
anemia, DiGuglielmo's syndrome. 

b. Hemorrhagic states: 

(1) Due to changes in coagulation system 
(hemophilia, etc.). 

(2) Due to platelet deficiency. 

(3) Due to vascular instability. 

c. Leukopenia, chronic or recurrent, associ- 
ated with increased susceptibility to infection. 

d. Myeloproliferative disease (other than 
leukemia) : 

(1) Myelofibrosis. 

(2) Megakaryocytic myelosis. 

(3) Polycythemia vera. 

e. Splenomegaly until the cause is remedied. 

/. Thromboembolic disease except for acute, 
nonrecurrent conditions. 



15-28 

Change 7Jp 



15-27-2-5 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-27-2-7 



Section IV. 

2-5. Dental 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Diseases of the jaws or associated tissues 
which are not easily remediable and which will 
incapacitate the individual or prevent the satis- 
factory performance of military duty. 

b. Malocclusion, severe, which interferes 
with the mastication of a normal diet. 

Section V. EARS 

2-6. Ears 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Auditory canal. 

(1) Atresia or severe stenosis of the ex- 
ternal auditory canal. 

(2) Tumors of the external auditory canal 
except mild exostoses. 

(3) Severe external otitis, acute or 
chronic. 

b. Auricle. Agenesis, severe; or severe trau- 
matic deformity, unilateral or bilateral. 

c. Mastoids. 

( 1 ) Mastoiditis, acute or chronic. 

(2) Residual or mastoid operation with 
marked external deformity which precludes or 
interferes with the wearing of a gas mask or 
helmet. 

(3) Mastoid fistula. 

d. Meniere's syndrome. 

e. Middle ear. 

(1) Acute or chronic suppurative otitis 
media. Individuals with a recent history of 
acute suppurative otitis media will not be 
accepted unless the condition is healed and a 
sufficient interval of time subsequent to treat- 
ment has elapsed to insure that the disease is in 
fact not chronic, 

(2) Adhesive otitis media associated with 
hearing level by audiometric test of 20 db 
or more average for the speech frequencies 
(500, 1000, and 2000 cycles per second) in 

*lndi vidoal s with orthodontic appliances attached 
as active treatment is required. 



DENTAL 

c. Oral tissues, extensive loss of, in an 
amount that would prevent replacement of 
missing teeth with a satisfactory prosthetic 
appliance. 

*d. Orthodontic appliances. See special ad- 
ministrative criteria in paragraph 7-12. 

c. Relationship between the mandible and 
maxilla of such a nature as to preclude future 
satisfactory prosthodontic replacement. 

AND HEARING 

either ear regardless of the hearing level in 
the other ear. 

(3) Acute or chronic serous otitis media. 

(4) Presence of attic perforation in which 
presence of cholesteatoma is suspected. 

(5) Repeated attacks of catarrhal otitis 
media; intact greyish, thickened drum(s) . 

/. Tympanic membrane. 

(1) Any perforation of the tympanic 
membrane. 

(2) Severe scarring of the tympanic mem- 
brane associated with hearing level by audio- 
metric test of 20 db or more average for the 
speech frequencies (500, 1000, and 2000 cycles 
per second) in either ear regardless of the 
hearing level in the other ear. 

g. Other diseases and defects of the ear 
which obviously preclude satisfactory perform- 
ance of duty or which require frequent and 
prolonged treatment. 

2-7. Hearing 

(See also para 2-6.) 
The cause for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction is — 

Hearing acuity level by audiometric testing 
(regardless of conversational or whispered 
voice hearing acuity) greater than that de- 
scribed in table I, appendix II. There is no ob- 
jection to conducting the whispered voice test 
or the spoken voice test as a preliminary to 
conducting the audiometric hearing test. 

i the teeth ore administratively unacceptable so long 

15-29 

Change 7-4 



15-27-2-8 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 15-27-2-10 



Section VI. ENDOCRINE AND METABOLIC DISORDERS 



2—8. Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Adrenal gland, malfunction of, of any 
degree. 

b. Cretinism. 

c. Diabetes insipidus. 

d. Diabetes mellitus. 

e. Gigantism or acromegaly. 

f. Glycosuria, persistent, regardless of cause. 

g. Goiter. 

(1) Simple goiter with definite pressure 
symptoms or so large in size as to interfere 
with the wearing of a military uniform or mili- 
tary equipment. 

(2) Thyrotoxicosis. 



h. Gout. 

i. Hyperinsulinism, confirmed, symptomatic, 
j. Hyperparathyroidism and hypoparathy- 
roidism. 

k. Hypopituitarism, severe. 

L Myxedema, spontaneous or postoperative 
(with clinical manifestations and not based 
solely on low basal metabolic rate). 

m. Nutritional deficiency diseases (including 
sprue, beriberi, pellagra, and scurvy) which 
are more than mild and not readily remediable 
or in which permanent pathological changes 
have been established. 

n. Other endocrine or metabolic disorders 
which obviously preclude satisfactory perfor- 
mance of duty or which require frequent and 
prolonged treatment. 



Section VII. EXTREMITIES 



2—9. Upper Extremities 

(See para 2-11.) 
The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

■^■a. Limitation of motion. An individual will 
be considered unacceptable if the joint ranges 
of motion are less than the measurements listed 
below (TM 8-640). 

(1) Shoulder. 

(a) Forward elevation to 90°, 
(6) Abduction to 90°. 

(2) Elbow. 

(a) Flexion to 100°. 

(b) Extension to 15°. 

(3) Wrist. A total range of 15° (extension 
plus flexion). 

(4) Hand. 

(a) Pronation to the first quarter of 
normal arc. 

(b) Supination to the first quarter of 
the normal arc. 

(5) Fingers. Inability to clench first, pick 
up a pin or needle, and grasp an object. 

b. Hand and fingers. 

(1) Absence (or loss) of more than % of 
the distal phalanx of either thumb. 

(2) Absence (or loss) of distal and middle 

15-30 

Change 7%, 



phalanx of an index, middle or ring finger 
of either hand irrespective of the absence (or 
loss) of little finger. 

(2.1) Absence of more than the distal 
phalanx of any two of the following fingers, 
index, middle finger or ring finger, of either 
hand. 

(3) Absence of hand or any portion there- 
of except for fingers as noted above. 

(4) Hyperdactylia. 

(5) Scars and deformities of the fingers 
and/or hand which impair circulation, are 
symptomatic, are so disfiguring as to make the 
individual objectionable in ordinary social re- 
lationships, or which impair normal function 
to such a degree as to interfere with the satis- 
factory performance of military duty. 

c. Wrist, forearm, elbow, arm, and shoulder. 
Healed disease or injury of wrist, elbow, or 
shoulder with residual weakness or symptoms 
of such a degree as to preclude satisfactory 
performance of duty. 

2-10. Lower Extremities 

(See para 2-11.) 
The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 



15-27-2-10 



CHAPTER !5. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-27-2-10 



■^a. Limitation of motion. An individual will 
be considered unacceptable if the joint ranges 
of motion are less than the measurements 
listed below (TM 8-640). 

(1) Hip. 

(a) Flexion to 90°. 

(b) Extension to 10° (beyond 0). 

(2) Knee. 

(a) Full extension. 

(b) Flexion to 90°. 

(3) Ankle. 

(a) Dorsiflexion to 10°. 

(b) Plantar flexion to 10°. 

(4) Toes. Stiffness which interferes with 
walking, marching, running, or jumping. 

b. Foot and ankle. 

(1) Absence of one or more small toes 
of one or both feet, if function of the foot is 
poor or running or jumping is precluded, or 
absence of foot or any portion thereof except 
for toes as noted herein. 

(2) Absence (or loss) of great toe(s) or 
loss of dorsal flexion thereof if function of the 
foot is impaired. 

(3) Claw toes precluding the wearing of 
combat service boots. 

(4) Clubfoot. 

(5) Flatfoot, pronounced cases, with de- 
cided eversion of the foot and marked bulging 
of the inner border, due to inward rotation of 
the astragalus, regardless of the presence or 
absence of symptoms. 

(6) Flatfoot, spastic. 

(7) Hallux valgus, if severe and associ- 
ated with marked exostosis or bunion. 

(8) Hammer toe which interferes with 
the wearing of combat service boots. 

(9) Healed disease, injury, or deformity 
including hyperdactylia which precludes run- 
ning, is accompanied by disabling pain, or 
which prohibits wearing of combat service 
boots, 

(10) Ingrowing toe nails, if severe, and not 
remediable. 

(11) Obliteration of the transverse arch 
associated with permanent flexion of the small 
toes. 

(12) Pes cavus, with contracted plantar 
fascia, dorsi flexed toes, tenderness under the 



metatarsal heads, and callosity under the 
weight bearing areas. 

c. Leg, knee, thigh, and hip. 

(1) Dislocated semilunar cartilage, loose 
or foreign bodies within the knee joint, or his- 
tory of surgical correction of same if — 

(a) Within the preceding 6 months. 

(6) Six months or more have elapsed 
since operation without recurrence, and there is 
instability of the knee ligaments in lateral or 
anteroposterior directions in comparison with 
the normal knee or abnormalities noted on 
X-ray, there is significant atrophy or weakness 
of the thigh musculature in comparison with 
the normal side, there is not acceptable active 
motion in flexion and extension, or there are 
other symptoms of internal derangement. 

(2) Authentic history or physical findings 
of an unstable or internally deranged joint 
causing disabling pain or seriously limiting 
function. Individuals with verified episodes of 
buckling or locking of the knee who have not 
undergone satisfactory surgical correction or 
if, subsequent to surgery, there is evidence of 
more than mild instability of the knee liga- 
ments in lateral and anteroposterior directions 
in comparison with the normal knee, weakness 
or atrophy of the thigh musculature in com- 
parison with the normal side, or if the indi- 
vidual requires medical treatment of sufficient 
frequency to interfere with the performance 
of military duty. 

d. General. 

(1) Deformities of one or both lower ex- 
tremities which have interfered with function 
to such a degree as to prevent the individual 
from following a physically active vocation in 
civilian life or which would interefere with the 
satisfactory completion of prescribed training 
and performance of military duty. 

(2) Diseases or deformities of the hip, 
knee, or ankle joint which interfere with 
walking, running, or weight bearing. 

(3) Pain in the lower back or leg which 
is intractable and disabling to the degree of 
interfering with walking, running, and weight 
bearing. 

(4) Shortening of a lower extremity re- 
sulting in any limp of noticeable degree. 

15-31 

Change % 



15-27-2-11 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 15-27-2-12 



2—11. Miscellaneous 

(See also para 2-9 and 2-10.) 
The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Arthritis. 

(1) Active or subacute arthritis, includ- 
ing Marie-Strumpell type. 

(2) Chronic osteoarthritis or traumatic 
arthritis of isolated joints of more than mini- 
mal degree, which has interfered with the fol- 
lowing of a physically active vocation in civilian 
life or which precludes the satisfactory per- 
formance of military duty. 

(3) Documented clinical history of rheu- 
matoid arthritis. 

(4) Traumatic arthritis of a major joint 
of more than minimal degree. 

b. Disease of any bone or joint, healed, with 
such resulting deformity or rigidity that func- 
tion is impaired to such a degree that it will 
interfere with military service. 

c. Dislocation, old unreduced ; substantiated 
history of recurrent dislocations of major 
joints; instability of a major joint, sympto- 
matic and more than mild ; or if, subsequent 
to surgery, there is evidence of more than mild 
instability in comparison with the normal joint, 
weakness or atrophy in comparison with the 
normal side, or if the individual requires med- 
ical treatment of sufficient frequency to inter- 
fere with the performance of military duty. 

d. 'Fractures. 



(1) Malunited fractures that interfere sig- 
nificantly with function. 

(2) Ununited fractures. 

(3) Any old or recent fracture in which 
a plate, pin, or screws were used for fixation 
and left in place and which may be subject to 
easy trauma, i.e., as a plate tibia, etc. 

e. Injury of a bone or joint within the pre- 
ceding 6 weeks, without fracture or disloca- 
tion, of more than a minor nature. 

/. Muscular paralysis, contracture, or atro- 
phy, if progessive or of sufficient degree to 
interfere with military service. 

f. l. Myotonia congenita. Confirmed. 

g. Osteomyelitis, active or recurrent, of any 
bone or substantiated history of osteomyelitis 
of any of the long bones unless successfully 
treated 2 or more years previously without 
subsequent recurrence or disqualifying seque- 
lae as demonstrated by both clinical and X-ray 
evidence. 

h. Osteoporosis. 

i. Scars, extensive, deep, or adherent, of the 
skin and soft tissues or neuromas of an ex- 
tremity which are painful, which interfere 
with muscular movements, which preclude the 
wearing of military equipment, or that show a 
tendency to break down. 

/. Chondromalacia, manifested by verified 
history of joint effusion, interference with func- 
tion, or residuals from surgery. 



Section VIII. EYES AND VISION 



2-12. Eyes 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Lids. 

(1) Blepharitis, chronic more than mild. 
Cases of acute blepharitis will be rejected un- 
til cured. 

(2) Blepharospasm. 

(3) Dacryocystitis, acute or chronic. 

(4) Destruction of the lids, complete or 
extensive, sufficient to impair protection of the 
eye from exposure. 

15-32 

Change 74 



(5) Disfiguring cicatrices and adhesions 
of the eyelids to each other or to the eyeball. 

(6) Growth or tumor of the eyelid other 
than small early basal cell tumors of the eye- 
lid, which can be cured by treatment, and small 
nonprogressive asymptomatic benign lesions. 
See also paragraphs 2-40 and 2-41. 

(7) Marked inversion or eversion of the 
eyelids sufficient to cause unsightly appear- 
ance or watering of eyes (entropion or ectro- 
pion). 

(8) Lagophthalmos. 



15-27-2-12 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15_27-2-12 



(9) Ptosis interfering with vision, 
(10) Trichiasis, severe. 

b. Conjunctiva. 

(1) Conjunctivitis, chronic, including ver- 
nal catarrh and trachoma. Individuals with 
acute conjunctivitis are unacceptable until the 
condition is cured. 

(2) Pterygium: 

(a) Pterygium recurring after three 
operative procedures. 

(b) Pterygium encroaching on the cor- 
nea in excess of 3 millimeters or interfering 
with vision. 

c. Cornea. 

(1) Dystrophy, corneal, of any type in- 
cluding keratoconus of any degree. 

(2) Keratitis, acute or chronic. 

(3) Ulcer, corneal; history of recurrent 
ulcers or corneal abrasions (including her- 
petic ulcers). 

(4) Vascularization or opacification of 
the cornea from any cause which is progres- 
sive or reduces vision below the standards pre- 
scribed in paragraph 2-13. 

d. Uveal tract. Inflammation of the uveal 
tract except healed traumatic choroiditis. 

e. Retina. 

(1) Angiomatoses, phakomatoses, retinal 
cysts, and other congenito-hereditary condi- 
tions that impair visual function. 

(2) Degenerations of the retina to in- 
clude macular cysts, holes, and other degenera- 
tions (hereditary or acquired degenerative 
changes) and other conditions affecting the 
macula. All types of pigmentary degenerations 
(primary and secondary). 

(3) Detachment of the retina or history 
of surgery for same. 

(4) Inflammation of the retina (retinitis 
or other inflammatory conditions of the retina 
'to include Coat's disease, diabetic retinop- 
athy, Eales' disease, and retinitis proliferans) . 

/. Optic nerve. 

(1) Congenito-hereditary conditions of 
the optic nerve or any other central nervous 
system pathology affecting the efficient func- 
tion of the optic nerve. 



(2) Optis neuritis, neuroretinitis, or sec- 
ondary optic atrophy resulting therefrom or 
document history of attacks of retrobulbar 
neuritis. 

(3) Optic atrophy (primary or second- 
ary). 

(4) Papilledema. 

g. Lens. 

( 1 ) Aphakia (unilateral or bilateral ) . 

(2) Dislocation, partial or complete, of 
a lens. 

(3) Opacities of the lens which interfere 
with vision or which are considered to be pro- 
gressive. 

h. Ocular mobility and motility. 

(1) Diplopia, documented, constant or in- 
termittent from any cause or of any degree 
interfering with visual function (i.e., may 
suppress). 

(2) Diplopia, monocular, documented, in- 
terfering with visual function. 

(3) Nystagmus, with both eyes fixing, 
congenital or acquired. 

(4) Strabismus of 40 prism diopters or 
more, uncorrectable by lenses to less than 40 
diopters. 

(5) Strabismus of any degree accompa- 
nied by documented diplopia. 

(6) Strabismus, surgery for the correc- 
tion of, within the preceding 6 months. 

i. Miscellaneous defects and diseases. 

(1) Abnormal conditions of the eye or 
visual fields due to diseases of the central 
nervous system. 

(2 ) Absence of an eye. 

(3) Asthenopia severe. 

(4) Exophthalmos, unilateral or bilateral. 

(5) Glaucoma, primary or secondary. 

(6) Hemianopsia of any type. 

(7) Loss of normal pupillary reflex reac- 
tions to light or accommodation to distance 
or Adies syndrome. 

(8) Loss of visual fields due to organic 
disease. 

(9) Night blindness associated with ob- 
jective disease of the eye. Verified congenital 
night blindness. 

(10) Residuals of old contusions, lacera- 



15-33 

Change 74 



15-27-2-16 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT U.S. NAVY 



15-27-2-18 



o. Other diseases and defects of the urinary 
system which obviously preclude satisfactory 



performance of duty or which require frequent 
and prolonged treatment. 



Section X. HEAD AND NECK 



2-16. Head 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Abnormalities which are apparently tem- 
porary in character resulting from recent inju- 
ries until a period of 3 months has elapsed. 
These include severe contusions and other 
wounds of the scalp and cerebral concussion. 
See paragraph 2-31. 

b. Deformities of the skull in the nature of 
depressions, exostoses, etc., of a degree which 
would prevent the individual from wearing a 
gas mask or military headgear. 

c. Deformities of the skull of any degree as- 
sociated with evidence of disease of the brain, 
spinal cord, or peripheral nerves. 

d. Depressed- fractures near central sulcus 
with or without convulsive seizures. 

e. Loss or congenital absence of the bony 
substance of the skull not successfully cor- 
rected by reconstructive material: 

(1) All cases involving absence of the 
bony substance of the skull which have been 
corrected but in which the defect is in excess 
of 1 square inch or the size of a 25 cent piece, 
will be referred to The Surgeon General*to- 
gether with a report of consultation ; 

(2) The report of consultation will in- 
clude an evaluation of any evidence of altera- 
tion of brain function in any of its several 
spheres, i.e., intelligence, judgment, perception, 
behavior, motor control and sensory function 



as well as any evidence of active bone disease 
or other related complications. Current X-rays 
and other pertinent laboratory data will ac- 
company such a report of consultation. 

/. U?isightly deformities, such as large 
birthmarks, large hairy moles, extensive scars, 
and mutilations due to injuries or surgical op- 
erations; ulcerations; fistulae, atrophy, or pa- 
ralysis of part of the face or head. 

2-1 7. Neck 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Cervical ribs if symptomatic, or so obvi- 
ous that they are found on routine physical ex- 
amination. (Detection based primarily on X- 
ray is not considered to meet this criterion.) 

b. Congenital cysts of branchial cleft origin 
or those developing from the remnants of the 
thyroglossal duct, with or without fistulous 
tracts. 

c. Fistula, chronic draining, of any type. 

d. (Deleted) 

e. Nonspastic contraction of the muscles of 
the neck or cicatricial contracture of the neck to 
the extent that it interferes with the wearing 
of a uniform or military equipment or so dis- 
figuring as to make the individual objectiona- 
ble in common social relationships. 

/. Spastic contraction of the muscles of the 
neck, persistent, and chronic. 

g. Tumor of thyroid or other structures of 
the neck. See paragraphs 2-40 and 2-41. 



Section XI. HEART AND VASCULAR SYSTEM 

2-18. Heart including those improved by surgical proce- 

ctii res 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- & _ Coronary artery Aisease „ myomrdia i in . 
hstment, and induction are- farcUon, old or recent or true angina pectoris, 

a. All organic valvular diseases of the heart, at any time, 

*The Bureau of Medicine and Surgery vice The Surgeon General. 

15-36 

Change % 



15-27-2-19 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-27-2-20 



c. Electrocardiographic evidence of major 
arrhythmias such as — 

(1) Atrial tachycardia, flutter, or fibrilla- 
tion, ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation. 

(2) Conduction defects such as first de- 
gree atrip-ventricular block and right bundle 
branch block. (These conditions occurring as 
isolated findings are not unfitting when cardiac 
evaluation reveals no cardiac disease.) 

(3) Left bundle branch block, 2d and 3d 
degree AV block. 

(4) Unequivocal electrocardiographic evi- 
dence of old or recent myocardial infarction; 
coronary insufficiency at rest or after stress; or 
evidence of heart muscle disease. 

d. Hypertrophy or dilatation of tlie heart as 
evidenced by clinical examination or roentgen- 
ographs examination and supported by elec- 
trocardiographic examination. Care should be 
taken to distinguish abnormal enlargement 
from increased diastolic filling as seen in the 
well conditioned subject with a sinus bradycardia. 
Cases of enlarged heart by X-ray not supported 
by electrocardiographic examination will be for- 
warded to The Surgeon General*for evaluation. 

e. Myocardial insufficiency (congestive cir- 
culatory failure, cardiac decompensation) obvi- 
ous or covert, regardless of cause. 

/. Paroxysmal tachycardia within the pre- 
ceding 5 years, or at any time if recurrent or dis- 
abling or if associated with electrocardiographic 
evidence of accelerated A-T conduction (Wolff- 
Parkinson-White) . 

■g. Pericarditis; endocarditis; or myocarditis, 
history or finding of, except for a history of a 
single acute idiopathic or coxsackie pericarditis 
with no residuals, or tuberculous pericarditis ade- 
quately treated with no residuals and inactive for 
2 years. 

h. Tachycardia persistent with a resting pulse 
rate of 100 or more, regardless of cause. 

2-19. Vascular System 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Congenital or acquired lesions of the 
aorta and major vessels, such as syphilitic aor- 
titis, demonstrable atherosclerosis which inter- 
feres with circulation, congenital or acquired 



dilation of the aorta (especially if associated 
with other features of Marfan's syndrome), and 
pronounced dilatation of the main pulmonary 
artery. 

o. Hypertension evidenced by preponderant 
blood pressure readings of 150-mm or more 
systolic in an individual over 35 years "of age or 
preponderant readings of 140-mm or more sys- 
tolic in an individual 35 years of age or less. 
Preponderant diastolic pressure over 90-mm 
diastolic is cause for rejection at any age. 

c. Marked circulatory instability as indicated by 
orthostatic hypotension, persistent tachycardia, 
severe peripheral vasomotor disturbances and 
sym patheticoton i a. 

d. Peripheral vascular disease including 
Raynaud's phenomena, Buerger's disease 
(thromoboangiitis obliterans), erythromelalgia, 
arteriosclerotic and diabetic vascular diseases. 
Special tests will be employed in doubtful cases. 

e. Thrombophlebitis* 

(1) History of thrombophlebitis with per- 
sistent thrombus or evidence of circulatory ob- 
struction or deep venous incompetence in the 
involved veins. 

(2) Recurrent thrombophlebitis. 

/. Varicose veins, if more than mild, or if 
associated with edema, skin ulceration, or residual 
scare from ulceration. 

2-20. Miscellaneous 

The causes for rejection for appointment, enlist- 
ment, and induction are — 

c. Aneurysm of the heart or major vessel, con- 
genital or acquired. 

b. History and evidence of a congenital ab- 
normality which has been treated by surgery but 
with residual abnormalities or complications, for 
example: Patent ductus arteriosus with residual 
cardiac enlargement or pulmonary hypertension ; 
resection of a coarctation of the aorta without a 
graft when there are other cardiac abnormalities 
or complications; closure of a secundum type 
artrial septal defect when there are residual ab- 
normalities or complications. 

c. Major congenital dbrwrma 1 it leg and defects 
by the heart and vessels unless satisfactorily cor- 
rected without residuals or complications. TJncom- 



*The Bureau of Medicine and Surgery vice The Surgeon Genera!. 



15-37 

Change 74 



15-27-2-21 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 15-27-2-24 



plicated dextrocardia and other minor asympto- chorea within the previous 2 years, recurrent at- 
matic anomalies are acceptable. tacks of rheumatic fever or chorea at any time, or 

d. Substantiated history of rheumatic fever or with evidence of residual cardiac damage. 



Section Xlt. HEIGHT, WEIGHT, AND BODY BUILD 



2-21. Height 

The causes for rejection for appointment, enlist- 
ment, and induction are — 

a. For appointment. 

(1) Men, Regular Army — Height below &6 
inches or over 80 inches. {See administrative cri- 
teria in para 7-13.) Other Height below 60 inches 
or over 80 inches. 

(2) Women. Height below 58 inches or over 
7-2 inches. 

b. For enlistments and induction. 

(1) Men. Height below 60 inches or over 80 
inches for Army and Air Force. 

(2) Men. Height below 60 inches and over 78 
inches for Navy and Marine Corps. 

•(;>) Women* Height below 58 niches or over 
~-2 inches. 

2-22. Weight 

The causes for rejection for appointment, enlist- 
ment, and induction are — 

ft. Weight related to height which is below the 
minimum shown in table I, appendix III for men 
and table II, appendix III for women. 

b. Weight related to age and height which is in 



excess of the maximum shown in table I, appendix 
III for men and table II, appendix III for women. 
See chapter 7 for special requirements pertaining 
to maximum weight standards applicable to women 
enlisting for and commissioned from Army Stu- 
dent Nurse and Army Student Dietician Programs. 

2-23. Body Build 

The causes for rejection for appointment, enlist- 
ment, and induction are — 

a. Congenital malformation of bones and. joints. 
(See para 2-9, 2-10, and 2-11.) 

b. Deficient muscular development which would 
interfere with the completion of required training. 

a. Evidences of congenital asthenia (slender 
bones; weak thorax; visceroptosis; severe, chronic 
constipation ; or "drop heart" if marked in degree) . 

d. Obesity. Even though the individual's weight 
is within the maximum shown in table I or II, as 
appropriate, appendix III, he will be reported as 
medically unacceptable when the medical examiner 
considers that the individual's weight in relation 
to the bony structure and musculature, constitutes 
obesity of such a degree as to interfere with the 
satisfactory completion of prescribed training. 



Section XIII. LUNGS 

2-24. General 

The following conditions are causes for rejection 
for appointment, enlistment and induction until 
further study indicates recovery without dis- 
qualifying sequelae : 

a. Abnormal elevation of the diaphragm, on 
either side. 

h. Acute abscess of the lung. 

c. Acute bronchitis until the condition is cured. 

d. Acute fibrinous pleurisy, associated with 
acute nontuberculous pulmonary infection. 

e. Acute mycotic disease of the lung such as 
coccidioidomycosis and histoplasmosis. 

/. Acute nontuberculous pneumonia, 
g. Foreign body in trachea or bronchus. 

15-38 

Change 7Jf, 



AND CHEST WALL 

h. Foreign body of tlte chest wall causing 
symptoms. 

i. Lobectomy, history of, for a nontuberculous 
nonmalignant lesion with residual pulmonary dis- 
ease. Removal of more than one lobe is cause for 
rejection regardless of the absence of residuals. 

j. Other traumatic lesions of the chest or its 
contents. 

k. Pneumothorax or history thereof within 1 
year of date of examination if due to simple 
trauma or surgery ; within 3 years of date of ex- 
amination if of spontaneous origin. Surgical cor- 
rection is acceptable if no significant residual 
disease or deformity remains and pulmonary func- 
tion tests are within normal limits. 



15-27-2-25 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-27-2-28 



I. Recent fracture of ribs, sternum, clavicle, 
or scapula. 

m. Significant abnormal findings on physical 
examination of the chest. 

2-25. Tuberculous Lesions 

(See para 2-38.) 
The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Tuberculosis, active at any time within 
the past two years, in any form or location. A 
positive tuberculin skin test without other evi- 
dence of active disease is not disqualifying. In- 
dividuals taking prophylactic chemotherapy 
because of recent skin test conversion are not 
disqualified. 

b. Rescinded. 

c. Substantiated history of one or more reac- 
tivations or relapses of pulmonary tubercu- 
losis, or other definite evidence of poor host 
resistance to the tubercle bacillus. 

2-26. Nontuberculous Lesions 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Acute mastitis, chronic cystic mastitis, if 
more than mild. 

b. Bronchial asthma, except for childhood 
asthma with a trustworthy history of freedom 
from symptoms since the 12th birthday. 

c. Bronchitis, chronic with evidence of pul- 
monary function disturbance. 



d. Bronchiectasis. 

e. Bronchopleural fistula. 

f. Bullous or generalized -pulmonary emphy- 
sema. 

g. Chronic abscess of lung. 

h. Chronic fibrous pleuritis of sufficient ex- 
tent to interfere with pulmonary function or 
obscure the lung field in the roentgenogram. 

i. Chronic mycotic diseases of the lung in- 
cluding coccidioidomycosis; residual cavitation 
or more than a few small sized inactive and 
stable residual modules demonstrated to be 
due to mycotic disease. 

/. Empyema, residual sacculation or un- 
healed sinuses of chest wall following opera- 
tion for empyema. 

k. Extensive pulmonary fibrosis from any 
cause, producing, dyspnea on exertion. 

I. Foreign body of the lung or mediastinum 
causing symptoms or active inflammatory re- 
action. 

m. Multiple eys'tic disease of the lung or 
solitary cyst which is large and incapacitat- 
ing. 

ft. New growth of breast; history of mastec- 
tomy. 

o. Osteomyelitis of rib, sternum, clavicle, 
scapula, or vertebra. 

p. Pleurisy with effusion of unknown origin 
within the previous 2 years. 

q. Sarcoidosis. See paragraph 2-38. 
r. Suppurative periostitis of rib, sternum, 
clavicle, scapula, or vertebra. 



Section XIV. MOUTH, NOSE, PHARYNX, TRACHEA, 
ESOPHAGUS, AND LARYNX 



2-27. Mouth 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Hard palate, perforation of. 

b. Harelip, unless satisfactorily repaired by 
surgery. 

c. Leukoplakia, if severe. 

d. Lips, unsightly mutilations of, from 



wounds, burns, or disease. 

e. Ranula, if extensive. For other tumors 
see paragraphs 2-10 and 2-41. 

2-28. Nose 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 



a. Allergic manifestations. 
( 1 ) Chronic atrophic rhinitis. 



15-39 

Change % 



15-27-2-29 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-27-2-31 



(2) Hay fever if severe; and if not con- 
trollable by antihistamines or by desensitiza- 
tion, or both. 

b. Choana, atresia, or stenosis of, if sympto- 
matic. 

c. Nasal septum, perforation of : 

■^-(1) Associated with the interference of 
function, ulceration or crusting, and when the 
result of organic disease. 

(2) If progressive. 

(3) If respiration is accompanied by a 
whistling sound. 

d. Sinusitis, acute. 

e. Sinusitis, chronic, when more than mild: 

(1) Evidenced by any of the following: 
Chronic purulent nasal discharge, large nasal 
polyps, hyperplastic changes of the nasal tis- 
sues, or symptoms requiring frequent medical 
attention. 

(2) Confirmed by transillumination of 
X-ray examination or both. 

2-29. Pharynx, Trachea, Esophagus, 
and Larynx 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Esophagus, organic disease of, such as 
ulceration, varices, achalasia; peptic esopha- 



gitis; if confirmed by appropriate X-ray or 
esophagoscopic examinations. 

b. Laryngeal paralysis, sensory or motor, due 
to any cause. 

e. Larynx, organic disease of, such as neo- 
plasm, polyps, granuloma, .ulceration, and 
chronic laryngitis. 

■fad. Plica dysphonia ventricularis. 
e. Tracheostomy or tracheal fistula. 

2-30. Other Defects and Diseases 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Aphonia. 

b. Deformities or conditions of the mouth, 
throat, pharynx, larynx, esophagus, and nose 
which interfere with mastication and swal- 
lowing of ordinary food, with speech, or with 
breathing. 

c. Destructive syphilitic disease of the 
mouth, nose, throat, larynx, or esophagus 
(para .2-42) 

d. Pharyngitis and nasopharyngitis', chron- 
ic, with postive history and objective evidence, 
if of such a degree as to result in excessive 
time lost in the military environment. 



Section XV. NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS 



2-31. Neurological Disorders 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Degenerative disorders. 

(1) Cerebellar and Friedreich's ataxia. 

(2) Cerebral arteriosclerosis. 

(3) Encephalomyelitis, residuals of, 
which preclude the satisfactory performance 
of military duty. 

( 4 ) H u nti ngton's chorea. 

(5) Multiple sclerosis. 

(6) Muscular atrophies and dystrophies 
of any type. 

* 6. Miscellaneous. 

(1) Congenital malformations if associ- 

ttlndividuals presenting a documented history of repeated episodes of Motion 
Sickness are administratively disqualified for enlistment/induction into 
the Navy and Marine Corps. 

15-40 

Change \74, 



ated with neurological manifestations and 
meningocele even if uncomplicated. 

(2) Migraine when frequent and inca- 
pacitating. 

(3) Paralysis or weakness, deformity, dis- 
coordination, pain, sensory disturbance, intel- 
lectual deficit, disturbances of consciousness, 
or personality abnormalities regardless of 
cause which is of such a nature or degree as 
to preclude the satisfactory performance of 
military duty. 

(4) Tremors, spasmodic torticollis, athe- 
tosis or other abnormal movements more than 
mild. 

c. Neurosyphilis of any form (general pare- 



15-27-2-32 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-27-2-34 



sis, tabes dorsalis, meningovascular syphilis). 

•fad. Paroxysmal convulsive disorders, dis- 
turbances of consciousness, all forms of psycho- 
motor or temporal lobe epilepsy or history 
thereof except for seizures associated with 
toxic states or fever during childhood up to 
the age of 5. 

e. Peripheral nerve disorder. 



(1) Polyneuritis. 

(2) Mononeuritis or neuralgia which is 
chronic or recurrent and of an intensity that 
is periodically incapacitating. 

(3) Neurofibromatosis. 

/. Spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
verified history of, unless cause has been sur- 
gically corrected. 



Section XVI. PSYCHOSES, PSYCHONEUROSES, AND 
PERSONALITY DISORDERS 



2-32. Psychoses 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

Psychosis' or authenticated history of a psy- 
chotic illness other than those of a brief dura- 
tion associated with a toxic or infectious proe- 



2-33. Psychoneu roses 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. History of a psychoneurotic reaction 
which caused — 

(1) Hospitalization. 

(2) Prolonged care by a physician. 

(3) Loss of time from normal pursuits 
for repeated periods even if of brief duration, 
or 

(4) Symptoms or behavior of a repeated 
nature which impaired school or work effi- 
ciency. 

b. History of a brief psychoneurotic reac- 
tion or nervous disturbance within the pre- 
ceding 12 months which was sufficiently se- 
vere to require medical attention or absence 
from work or school for a brief period (max- 
imum of 7 days). 

2-34. Personality Disorders 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Character and behavior disorders', as evi- 
denced by — 



(1) Frequent encounters with law en- 
forcement agencies, or antisocial attitudes or 
behavior which, while not a cause for admin- 
istrative rejection, are tangible evidence of an 
impaired characterological capacity to adapt 
to the military service! 

(2) Overt homosexuality or other forms 
of sexual deviant practices such as exhibition- 
ism, transvestism, voyeurism, etc. 



tion. 



(3) Chronic alcoholism or alcohol addie- 

(4) Drug addiction. . 



b. Character and behavior disorders where 
it is evident by history and objective examina- 
tion that the degree of immaturity, instabil- 
ity, personality inadequacy, and dependency 
will seriously interfere with adjustment in the 
military service as demonstrated by repeated 
inability to maintain reasonable adjustment 
in school, with employers and fellow-workers, 
and other society groups. 

« c. Other symptomatic immaturity reactions 
such as authenticated evidence of enuresis 
which is habitual or persistent, not due to an 
organic condition (para 2-15c) occurring be- 
yond early adolescence (age 12 to 14) and 
stammering or stuttering of such a degree 
that the individual is normally unable to ex- 
press himself clearly or to repeat commands. 

d. Specific learning defects secondary to or- 
ganic or functional mental disorders. 

* Individuals presenting a documented history of sleepwalking persisting into 
late childhood or early adolescence are administratively disqualified for 
enlistment/induction into the Navy and Marine Corps. 

15—41 

Change % 



15-27-2-35 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 15-27-2-35 



Section XVII. SKIN AND CELLULAR TISSUES 



2-35, Skin and Cellular Tissues 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Acne, Severe, when the face is markedly 
disfigured, or when extensive involvement of 
the neck, shoulders, chest, or back would be 
aggravated by or interfere with the wearing 
of military equipment. 

b. Atopic dermatitis. With active or residual 
lesions in characteristic areas (face and neck, 
antecubital and popliteal fossae, occasionally 
wrists and hands), or documented history 
thereof. 

c. Cysts. 

(1) Cysts, other than pilonidal. Of such 
a size or location as to interfere with the 
normal wearing of military equipment. 

(2) Cysts, pilonidal. Pilonidal cysts, if 
evidenced by the presence of a tumor mass 
or a discharging sinus. 

d. Dermatitis factitia. 

e. Dermatitis herpetiformis. 

f. Eczema. Any type which is chronic and 
resistant to treatment. 

f. l Elephantiasis or chronic lymphedema. 

g. Epidermolysis bullosa; pemphigus. 

h. Fungus infections, systemic or super- 
ficial types: If extensive and not amenable to 
treatment. 

L Furunculosis. Extensive, recurrent, or 
chronic. 

/. Hyperkidrosis of hands or feet. Chronic 
or severe. 

k. Ichthyosis. Severe. 
I. Leprosy. Any type. 

m. Leukemia cutis mycosis fungoides; 
Hodgkins' disease. 



n. Lichen planus. 

o. Lupus erythematosus (acute, subacute, or 
chronic) or any other dermatosis aggravated 
by sunlight. 

p. Neurofibromatosis (Von Recklinghausen's 
disease) . 

q. Nevi or vascular tumors. If extensive, un- 
sightly, or exposed to constant irritation. 

r. Psoriasis or a verified history thereof. 
s. Radiodermatitis. 

t. Scars which are so extensive, deep, or ad- r 
herent that they may interfere with the wear- 
ing of military equipment, or that show a 
tendency to ulcerate. 

u. Scleroderma. Diffuse type. 

v. Tuberculosis. See paragraph 2-38. 

w. TJrticaria. Chronic. 

x. Warts, plantar, which have materially 
interfered with the following of a useful vo- 
cation in civilian life. 

y. Xanthoma. If disabling or accompanied 
by hypercholesterolemia or hyperlipemia. 

z. Any other chronic skin disorder of a de- 
gree or nature which requires frequent out- 
patient treatment or hospitalization, inter- 
feres with the satisfactory performance of 
duty, or is so disfiguring as to make the in- 
dividual objectionable in ordinary social rela- 
tionships. 

icaa. When in the opinion of the examining 
physician tattoos will significantly limit ef- 
fective performance of military service the 
individual will be referred to the AFEES 
Commander, for final determination of accept- 
ability. 



15-42 

Ckmge Ik 



15-27-2-36 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-27-2-38 



Section XVIII. SPINE, SCAPULAE, RIBS, AND 
SACROILIAC JOINTS 



2-36. Spine and Sacroiliac Joints 

(See also para 2-11.) 
The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Arthritis. See paragraph 2-lla. 

+b. Complaint of disease or injury of the 
spine or sacroiliac joints either with or with- 
out objective signs which has prevented the 
individual from successfully following a phy- 
sically active vocation in civilian life. Sub- 
stantiation or documentation of the complaint 
without objective signs is required. 

■fcc. Deviation or curvature of spine from 
normal alignment, structure, or function (sco- 
liosis, kyphosis, or lordosis) if — 

(1) Mobility and weight-bearing power 
is poor. 

(2) More than moderate restriction of 
normal physical activities is required. 

(3) Of such a nature as to prevent the 
individual from following a physically active 
vocation in civilian life. 

(4) Of a degree which will interfere with 
the wearing of a uniform or military equip- 
ment. 

■fc(5) Symptomatic associated with pos- 
itive physical findings (s) and demonstrable by 
X-ray. 

d. Diseases of the lumbosacral or sacroiliac 
joints of a chronic type and obviously asso- 
ciated with pain referred to the lower extrem- 
ities, muscular spasm, postural deformities 
and limitation of motion in the lumbar region 
of the spine. 



e. Granulomatous diseases' either active or 
healed. 

/. Healed fracture of the spine or pelvic 
bones with associated symptoms which have 
prevented the individual from following a 
physically active vocation in civilian life or 
which preclude the satisfactory performance 
of military duty. 

g. Ruptured nucleus pulposus (herniation 
of intervertebral disk) or history of operation 
for this condition. 

h. Spondylolysis or spondylolisthesis that is 
symptomatic or is likely to interfere with per- 
formance of duty or is likely to require as- 
signment limitations. 

2-37. Scapulae, Clavicles, and Ribs 

(See para 2-11.) 
The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Fractures, until well-healed, and until 
determined that the residuals thereof will not 
preclude the satisfactory performance of mili- 
tary duty. 

b. Injury within the ' preceding 6 weeks, 
without fracture, or dislocation, of more than 
a minor nature. 

c. Osteomyelitis of rib, sternum, clavicle, 
scapula, or vertebra. 

d. Prominent scapulae interfering with 
function or with the wearing of uniform or 
military equipment. 



Section XIX. SYSTEMIC DISEASES AND MISCELLANEOUS 



2-38. Systemic Diseases 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Dermatomyositis. 



b. Lupus erythematosus, acute, subacute, or 
chronic. 



CONDITIONS AND DEFECTS 

c. Progressive systemic sclerosis. 

d. Reiter's disease. 

e. Sarcoidosis. 

f. Scleroderma, diffuse type, 

g. Tuberculosis. 



15-48 

Change % 



15-27-2-39 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 15-27-2-40 



(1) Active tuberculosis in any form or 
location or substantiated history of active 
tuberculosis within the previous 2 years. 

(2) Substantiated history of one or more 
reactivations or relapses of tuberculosis in any 
form or location or other definite evidence of 
poor host resistance to the tubercle bacillus. 

(3) Residual physical or mental defects 
from past tuberculosis that would preclude the 
satisfactory performance of duty. 

(4) (Deleted). 

2-39. General and Miscellaneous 
Conditions and Defects 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Allergic manifestations. 

(1) Allergic rhinitis (hay fever). See 
paragraph 2-28. 

(2) Asthma. See paragraph 2-266. 

(3) Allergic dermatoses. See paragraph 
2-35. 

(4) Visceral, abdominal, and cerebral al- 
lergy, if severe or not responsive to treatment. 

(5) Bona fide history of moderate or 
severe generalized (as opposed to local) al- 
lergic reaction to insect bites or stings. Bona 
fide history of severe generalized reaction to 
common foods, e.g., milk, eggs, beef, and pork, 

b. Any acute pathological condition, includ- 
ing acute communicable diseases, until recovery 
has occurred without sequelae. 

c. Any deformity which is markedly un- 
sightly or which impairs general functional 
ability to such an extent as to prevent satis- 
factory performance of military duty. 

d. Chronic metallic poisoning especially be- 
ryllium, manganese, and mercury. Undesirable 
residuals from lead, arsenic, or silver poisoning 
make the examinee medically unacceptable. 



+e. Cold injury, residuals of {example: frost- 
bite, chilblain, immersion foot, or trench foot), 
such as deep-seated ache, paresthesia, hyper- 
hidrosis, easily traumatized skin, cyanosis, am- 
putation of any digit, or ankylosis 1 . 

/. Positive tests for syphilis with negative 
*TPI test unless there is a documented history 
of adequately-treated lues or any of the several 
conditions which are known to give a false- 
positive S.T.S. (vaccinia, infectious hepatitis, 
immunizations, atypical pneumonia, etc) or 
unless there has been a reversal to a negative 
S.T.S. during an appropriate followup period 
(3 to 6 months). 

g. Filariasis; trypanosomiasis; amebiasis; 
schistosomiasis; uncinariasis (hookworm) as- 
sociated with anemia, malnutrition, etc., if 
more than mild, and other similar worm or 
animal parasitic infestations, including the 
carrier states thereof. 

h. Heat pyrexia (heatstroke, sunstroke, 
etc.) : Documented evidence of predisposition 
(includes disorders of sweat mechanism and 
previous serious episode), recurrent episodes 
requiring medical attention, or residual injury 
resulting therefrom (especially cardiac, cere- 
bral, hepatic, and renal). 

i. Industrial solvent and other chemical in- 
toxication, chronic including carbon bisulfide, 
tricholorethylene, carbon tetrachloride, and 
methyl cellosolve. 

j. Mycotic infection of internal organs. 

k. Myositis or fibrositis; severe, chronic. 

I, Residuals of tropical fevers and various 
parasitic or protozoal infestations which in the 
opinion of the medical examiner "preclude the 
satisfactory performance of military duty. 



Section XX. TUMORS AND MALIGNANT DISEASES 



2— 40. Benign Tumors 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 
a. Any tumor of the — 

(1) Auditory canal, if obstructive. 

*For Navy, FTA-ABS test. 

15—44 

Change 7 % 



(2) Eye or orbit, (para 2-12a(6)). 

(3) Kidney, bladder, testicle, or penis. 

(4) Central nervous system and its mem- 
braneous coverings unless 5 years after surgery 
and no otherwise disqualifying residuals of 



15-27-2-41 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-27-2-42 



surgery or of original lesion. 

b. Benign tumors of the abdominal wall if 
sufficiently large to interfere with military duty. 

c. Benign tumors of bone likely to continue 
to enlarge, be subjected to trauma during mili- 
tary service, or show malignant potential. 

d. Benign tumors of the thyroid or other 
structures of the neck, including enlarged 
lymph nodes, if the enlargement is of such 
degree as to interfere with the wearing of a 
uniform or military equipment. 

e. Tongue, benign tumor of, if it interferes 
with function. 

/. Breast, thoracic contents, or chest wall, 
tumors, of, other than fibromata lipomata, and 



inclusion or sebaceous cysts which do not in- 
terfere with military duty. 

g. For tumors of the internal or external 
female genitalia see paragraph 2-lAh. 



2-41. Malignant Diseases and Tumors 

The causes for rejection for appointment, en- 
listment, and induction are — 

a. Leukemia, acute or chronic. 

b, Malignant lymphomata. 

j{C. Malignant tumor, except for small early 
basal cell epitheliomas, at any time, even 
though surgically removed, confirmed by ac- 
cepted laboratory procedures. 



Section XXI. VENEREAL DISEASES 



2-42. Venereal Diseases 

In general the finding of acute, uncomplicated 
venereal disease which can be expected to re- 
spond to treatment is not a cause for medical 
rejection for military service. The causes for 
rejection for appointment, enlistment, and in- 
duction are — 

a. Chronic venereal disease which has not 
satisfactorily responded to treatment. The find- 
ing of a positive serologic test for syphilis 



following the adequate treatment of syphilis is 
not in itself considered evidence of chronic 
venereal disease which has not responded to 
treatment (para 2-39/). 

b. Complications and permanent residuals 
of venereal disease if progressive, of such na- 
ture as to interfere with the satisfactory 
performance of duty, or if subject to aggrava- 
tion by military service. 

c. Neurosyphilis. See paragraph 2-3 1c. 



15-45 

Change % 



15-27 App II 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 

APPENDIX II 



15-27 App II 



TABLES OF ACCEPTABLE AUDIOMETRY HEARING LEVEL 



Hearing of all applicants for appointment, enlistment, or induction will be tested by audio- 
meters calibrated to either American Standards Association (ASA), or International Standards 
Organization (ISO) Standards. s 

All audiometric tracings or audiometrie reading recorded on reports of medical examination 
or other medical records will be clearly identified "Results ASA-1951" or "Results ISO." 

Table I. Acceptable Audiometric Hearing Level for Appointment, Enlistment and Induction 



American Standards Association (ASA) International Standards Organization (ISO) 



Cycles per 


Both ears 


Cycles per 


Both ears 


second (hz) 




second (hz) 




500 


Average of the 6 readings (3 per ear) in 


500 


Average of the 6 readings (3 per ear) in 


1000 


the three speech frequencies not greater 


1000 


the speech frequencies not greater than 


2000 


than twenty (20) decibels with no level 


2000 


thirty (30) decibels with no level greater 




greater than twenty-five (25) decibels. 




than thirty-five (35). 


4000 


50 (each ear) 


4000 


55 (each ear) 



OR 



If the average of the three speech frequencies is greater than 20 decibels (ASA) or 30 decibels 
ISO reevaluate the better ear only in accordance with the following table of acceptability. 



1 


ASA 


ISO 


500 (hz) 


15 decibels 


30 decibels 


1000 (hz) 


15 decibels 


25 decibels 


2000 (hz) 


15 decibels 


25 decibels 


4000 (hz) 


30 decibels 


35 decibels 


The poorer ear may be totally deaf. 







Table IV. Conversion Table. (To convert Individual Audiograms from the American Standards Association 

(ASA) to International Standards Organization (ISO)) 



AT ADD 

250 cps 15 db 

500 cps 15 db 

1000 cps 10 db 

2000 cps 10 db 

3000 cps . 10 db 

4000 cps 5 db 

6000 cps 10 db 

8000 cps 10 db 



Identify the results of each audiogram as "ASA" or "ISO." 



15-46 

Change %. 



15-27 App III 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-27 App III 



APPENDIX III 
TABLE OF WEIGHT 



Table I. Table of Militarily Acceptable Weight (in Pounds) as Related to Age and Height for Males — Initial Procurement 



Ilelent (inches) 


Minimum 


Maximum 


(regardless of age) 


16-20 yews 


21-24 years 


25-30 years 


31-35 years 



36-40 years 


41 years and over 


60. 


100 


163 


173 


173 


173 


1 CO 

1 OS 


164 


61 


102 


171 


176 


175. 


175 


171 


166 




103 


174 


178 


178 


177 


173 


169 


63 


104 


178 


182 


181 


180 


176 


171 












64 


105 


133 


184 


185 


185 


180 


175 


65 


106 


187 


190 


191 


190 


185 


180 


66 


107 


191 


196 


197 


196 


190 


185 


67 


111 


196 


201 


202 


201 


195 


190 












68 


115 


202 


207 


208 


207 


201 


195 


69. 


119 


208 


213 


214 


212 


206 


200 


70 


123 


214 


219 


219 


218 


211 


205 


71 — 


127 


219 


224 


225 


223 


216 


210 














72 


131 


225 


231 


232 


230 


224 


216 


73. 


135 


231 


239 


238 


237 


230 


223 


74 


139 


237 


246 


246 


243 


236 


229 


75.... 


143 


243 


253 


253 


251 


243 


235 


76— 


147 


248 


260 


260 


257 


250 


241 


77. 


151 


254 


267 


267 


264 


256 


248 


78 


153 


260 


275 


273 


271 


263 


254 

















15-47 

Change 7& 



15-27 App IV MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 

APPENDIX IV 

JOINT MOTION MEASUREMENT 
(TM 8-640) 



15-27 App IV 



1 ■ THE HIP 



2. THE KNEE 





Figmg s 



FIGURE I 



FLEXIOH 

■ - POSITION - Supine, line* flexed; 

opposite knee and hip atraliht 
b ■ STATIONARY AMI* - Parallel to lonf 

axle of trunk. 

c - HQ vrm A »M* • I" l3nt with Imt ~ 
erel midline of femur. 




FIGURE 2 



EXTENSION AND FLEXIOH 

a - POSITION - Sittinf vtth knee flexed, 
b - STATlONARr ARM * ■ Parallel to femur 

on a line from the lateral condyle 

to greater trochanter . 
c - MOVING ASM * - Parallel to fibula on. 

line with lateral malleolus. 




FIGURE S 



PllHTiK FLEXIOH > DORS I FLEX ION 

a - POSITION ■ Supine with heel over 

cdte of table and knee extended, 
b - STATTONAKY ASH * - Parallel to fibula. 
c - UOVim ASM * • In line with the lateral 
edge of the heel and the head of tha 
Sth metatarsal . 

(*) For purpose* of thle regulation, etatlonary eta and movlm arm refer to the .tationaty and moving 

portloti* of the goniometer. 



EXTENSION 

a ■ POSITION - Prone 

b - STATIONARY ASM* ■ Parallel to long 
axie of trunk. 

c - MOVING ASM * - in "-"n lateral 

midline of femur. 



15^18 

Chmge- % 



15-27 App IV 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 
JOINT MOTION MEASUREMENT - Cent. 



15-27 App LV 



6 ■ THE ELBOW 



%. THE SHOULDER 




— 90° 




FLEX I OK 

a - POSITION - Standing, tit ting or supine 

with elbow extended. Palm facing nedlelly. 
Measure . . oa lateral aspect of body, 

b ■ STATIONARY ARM * - Along mid-axillary Una 
of trunk, 

e - MOVING ARM* - Along lateral midline of 
humerus , 



)0o 



EXTENSION AMD FLEXION 

a - POSITION ■ Standing, sitting or 
supine. Forearm in mld-posltlpa 
between supination and pronation 

b - STATIONARY AMI * - -4ion« midiin* 
of humerus . 

e ■ MOVING ARM * - Aionf midline of 
foraal aspect of forearm. 



70° 




40° 

ADDUCTION AND ABDUCT I OH 

a . POSITION - Standing or alt ting. 

b - STATIONARY ARM* - Parallel to spine 
bat at lateral aapect of body. 

e - MOVING ARM * • Parallel to midline of 
humerus toward olecranon process, 

(*) For purposes of tkla regulation, etatlonary arm and moving arm refer to the stationary aad 

moving portions of the goniometer . 



EXTENSION AMP FLEXION 

m - POSITION - Sitting or standing 
with elbow flexed and forearm 
in pronation, 
b - STATIONARY ARM * ■ Along lateral. 

midline of forearm, 
e . MOVING ARM * - Parallel to 3th 
metacarpal . 



15-^19 

Change % 



f 




15-28 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-29 



15-28. Aviation Personnel 

(1) See section V of this chapter. 

15-29. Submarine Personnel 

(1) In view of the special conditions characteristic 
of the submarine service, all officers and enlisted 
men who are candidates for submarine training shall 
conform to the standards set forth herein. Sub- 
marine candidates are required to establish their 
physical fitness for this duty at the time they apply 
for submarine training. As amplified by current di- 
rectives, each candidate need have only one exami- 
nation, properly recorded and supported by neces- 
sary ancillary studies and consultation reports. 

(2) Standards for first acceptance into the sub- 
marine service are the same as those for general duty 
with especial attention to the following conditions: 

(a) Psychiatric. — Because of the nature of the 
duties and responsibilities of each officer and man in 
a submarine, the psychological fitness of applicants 
for submarine training must be carefully appraised. 
This examination should be conducted by or under 
the direction of an officer trained in submarine 
medicine, psychiatry, or clinical psychology. The 
objective is to elicit evidence of tendencies which 
militate against satisfactory adjustment to sub- 
marine life. Among these are below-average intelli- 
gence, claustrophobic tendencies, unhealthy moti- 
vations, history of past personal ineffectiveness, 
difficulties in interpersonal relations, and lack of 
adaptability. Psychiatric conditions or personality 
traits which might militate against satisfactory ad- 
justment under conditions aboard this type of ship 
shall disqualify. Since an individual's adjustment po- 
tential might change with time in the service, a find- 
ing of limited submarine adaptability at the time of 
one examination shall not in and of itself be cause for 
disqualification on a subsequent examination. 
This portion of the examination may be omitted at 
the time of the preliminary examination referred to 
above if the services of a trained individual are not 
available. If the psychiatric examination has been 
omitted, this fact shall be noted in the Health Rec- 
ord. 

(b) Eyes must b& free from acute or 
chronic diseases and conditions. All lenticular opac- 
ity shall be referred to BLJMED (Code 53) for rec- 
ommendations on enrollment or retention in the 
nuclear submarine program. The minimal visual 



acuity for all categories of submarine personnel shall 
be as follows: 

(1) Officers (except Staff Corps Of- 
ficers). — Any degree correctable to 100% BVE. 
Spherical equivalent (the algebraic sum of the spher- 
ical correction plus one half the cylindrical correc- 
tion) may not exceed plus or minus 4. 50 diopters. 
Cylindrical correction may not exceed plus or minus 
2.00 diopters. 

(2) Staff Corps Officers. — Any degree cor- 
rectable to 90% BVE. Spherical correction may not 
exceed plus or minus 5. 50 diopters. Cylindrical cor- 
rection may not exceed plus or minus 3. 00 diopters. 

(3) QM and Nonrated Enlisted Personnel Not 
Designated as Strikers. — Any degree correctable to 
100% BVE. Spherical equivalent may not exceed 
plus or minus 4. 50 diopters. Cylindrical correction 
may not exceed plus or minus 2.00 diopters. 

(4) Rated Enlisted Personnel and Designated 
Strikers (except QM). — Any degree correctable to 
90% BVE. Spherical correction may not exceed plus 
or minus 5. 50 diopters. Cylindrical correction may 
not exceed plus or minus 3.00 diopters. 

(c) Color Vision. — Normal color perception is 
essential in submarine candidates other than staff 
corps officers and personnel in the YN, SK, SD, and 
CS ratings. Preliminary screening in ships or stations 
shall be conducted with the Farnsworth Lantern or 
one of the pseudoisochromatic plate test sets if the 
Lantern is not available. Candidates are required to 
qualify in accordance with article 15-13A. 

(d) Nose and Throat. — Obstruction to breath- 
ing such as marked deviation of the nasal septum, or 
any chronic inflammatory condition such as 
sinusitis, or hypertrophied tonsils, shall be sufficient 
to reject until such defects are remedied. 

(e) Ears. — A thorough otoscopic examination 
of the auditory canal and membrane tympani shall be 
made. Acute or chronic diseases of the middle or 
internal ear, or ruptured eardrums shall disqualify. 
For all candidates, the audiogram is the only accept- 
able test of auditory acuity. This test shall be ad- 
ministered at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 cps. Stand- 
ards for auditory acuity shall be the same as those in 
article 15-10(3). 

(f) Teeth. — A complete dental examination 
shall be conducted by a dental officer if avail- 
able. If a dental officer is not available, the examina- 
tion shall be conducted by a medical officer. 
Candidates must have sufficient number of natural 
and/or artificial teeth to insure satisfactory mas- 
ticatory and incisal function. Acute infectious 



10 Feb 75 



15-61 

Change 83 



15-29 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-29 



diseases of the soft tissues of the oral cavity are 
disqualifying until remedial treatment is 
completed. Individuals with moderate or 
advanced caries shall have essential dental treat- 
ment completed before transfer to the submarine 
training unit. A candidate who will require 
dental prosthetic restorations during the period 
of training should be considered not physically 
qualified. Malocclusion (crossbite, overjet, or 
overbite with or without impingement) is not 
cause for physical disqualification unless it inter- 
feres with incisal or masticatory function to such 
degree that adequate nutrition cannot be 
obtained from food normally served as a regular 
diet by a general food service. Missing teeth 
replaced by satisfactory bridges or dentures shall 
not be considered disqualifying. 

(g) Respiratory System. — 

(1) Particular effort shall be made to 
detect tuberculosis and other chronic pulmonary 
diseases. The examination must include a review 
of medical history, a 14 X 17 inch chest X-ray 
and, when indicated, a tuberculin test done in 
accordance with article 15-91. Candidates whose 
records disclose no previous test results or whose 
histories indicate that they have had a tuberculin 
test which is recorded as negative shall be 
retested. Candidates who are retested and who 
show a negative response may be considered 
physically qualified. Those retested who show a 
positive response of 10 mm. induration or greater 
shall be considered as "converters" who are not 
physically qualified and who must be treated in 
accordance with current BUMED directives; 
these individuals may be reconsidered for sub- 
marine duty upon completion of the prescribed 
prophylactic therapy course. Candidates having a 
positive tuberculin response without evidence of 
recent conversion shall be considered physically 
qualified for submarine duty provided the chest 
X-ray findings are considered normal. 

(2) Submarine candidates are required to 
complete buoyant submarine escape training. In 
the course of this training, any impairment of 
pulmonary ventilation is likely to produce trau- 
matic air embolism. In view of this, candidates 
with chronic diseases of the lungs and ventilatory 
impairment cannot be accepted. Chronic inflam- 
matory diseases are considered disqualifying in 
any case where activity can be definitely demon- 
strated or reasonably assumed: for example, tu- 
berculosis, sarcoidosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioido- 
mycosis, bronchiectasis, or abscess. Those candi- 
dates who can be reasonably presumed to have 
ventilatory impairment or the potential for air 
trapping must be disqualified: for example, pul- 
monary interstitial fibrosis, extensive parenchy- 
mal scarring or calcification, emphysema, cystic 



disease, fixation of the bony thorax or deformity 
thereof (severe pectus excavatum, Still's disease), 
history of spontaneous pneumothorax within the 
preceding 2 years, any open thoracotomy proce- 
dure, or extensive pleural scarring. A history of 
symptoms of asthma after age twelve is abso- 
lutely disqualifying for submarine duty, 

(h) Cardiovascular System. — A systolic 
blood pressure over 145 or a diastolic blood pres- 
sure over 90 mm., if persistent, shall disqualify. 
Persistent tachycardia, marked arrhythmia except 
of the sinus type, or other significant disturbance 
of the heart or vascular system shall disqualify. 

(i) Gastrointestinal System. — Candidates 
with a history of disease such as colitis, peptic 
ulcer, obstinate constipation, chronic diarrhea, 
shall be excluded unless they have remained 
asymptomatic on an unrestricted diet for 2 years 
and there is no radiographic evidence of active 
disease or resultant scarring which may cause 
obstruction. History of gastrointestinal tract per- 
foration or hemorrhage due to peptic ulcer dis- 
ease shall be cause for rejection. 

(j) Venereal Disease. — No candidate with 
any form of active venereal disease at the time of 
the examination or with a history of repeated 
venereal disease infection shall be accepted. No 
candidate with a history of a second relapse to 
antiluetic treatment or a history of neurologic, 
visceral, or osseous syphilis shall be accepted. 

(k) Offensive Body Odor. — Offensive breath 
and offensive perspiration, if persistent, are 
sufficient to exclude. 

(1) Disease of the Skin. — Any chronic skin 
disease other than milt acne shall be disqualify- 
ing. 

(m) Obesity. — Candidates must meet the 
standards and requirements of article 15-17 (2) 
and (3). 

(n) Ability To Equalize Pressure. — All 
candidates shall be subjected to a pressure of 50 
pounds per square inch in a recompression 
chamber to determine their ability to clear their 
ears effectively and otherwise withstand the 
effects of pressure. Due consideration must be 
given to the presence of an upper respiratory 
infection which may temporarily impair the abil- 
ity to equalize pressure owing to congestion of 
the Eustachian tubes or sinus passages (ostia). In 
such cases the test should be repeated when the 
upper respiratory infection has cleared up. This 
requirement must be satisfied in order that per- 
sonnel shall be qualified for training with the 
submarine-escape appliance. If facilities are 
locally available, all candidates shall be given 
this test at the time of the preliminary examina- 
tion. This test is mandatory upon reporting at 



15-62 
Change 69 



23 Sep 71 



15-29A 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-30 



the Submarine School if previous testing has not 
been accomplished. 

(3) Submarine personnel reporting for duty 
following absence due to serious injury or illness, 
or upon return to submarine duty after a pro- 
tracted absence, shall, at the earliest practicable 
date, be given such physical examination as may 
be required by a submarine medical officer to 
determine their physical fitness to resume sub- 
marine duty. The minimal standards for contin- 
uation of submarine duty shall be the same as 
indicated for the first acceptance. 

15-29A. Nuclear Field 

(1) All candidates for enrollment or retention 
in the nuclear surface ship program shall meet 
the physical standards in section I of this chapter 
with modifications as follows: 

(a) Eyes, — Eyes must be free of all acute 
and chronic diseases and conditions. Any lenticu- 
lar opacity of any sort shall disqualify. Visual 
acuity must be correctable to at least 76% BVE; 
the candidate must have normal visual fields. 

(b) Color Vision. — Normal perception is 
required of all candidates for surface ship nuclear 
power training. 

(c) Teeth. — A complete dental examination 
shall be conducted by a dental officer if available. 
If a dental officer is not available, the examina- 
tion shall be conducted by a medical officer. 
Candidates must have sufficient teeth, natural or 
artificial, in functional occlusion to insure satis- 
factory incision and mastication. Carious teeth 
should be restored prior to transfer of individuals 
to the training units. Acute infectious diseases of 
the soft tissues of the oral cavity are disqualify- 
ing until remedial treatment is completed. 

(d) Genitourinary System. — Candidates who 
have active venereal disease at the time of appli- 
cation physical examination shall be disqualified. 

(e) The Psyche. — Particular emphasis must 
be given to insure that all candidates fully meet 
the standards of article 15-21. 

(2) An exception may be considered and 
waiver recommended in the case of an individual 
who does not meet the above standards if he has 
had previous training and experience which 
render him an outstanding candidate, provided 
the defect is not organic and will not interfere 
with the satisfactory performance of duties to 
which the candidate may be assigned. Recom- 
mendations for such waivers shall be submitted 
on a completed, current SF 88 accompanied by a 
completed, current SF 93 in accordance with 
section III of this chapter. 

15-29B. Nuclear Shore Power Program 

(1) All candidates for the Naval Nuclear 
Shore Power Program shall meet the physical 



standards in article 15-31 with modifications as 
follows: 

(a) Age. — Maximum age for enlisted per- 
sonnel shall be 35. 

(b) Eyes. — Eyes must be free of all acute 
and chronic diseases and conditions. Any lenticu- 
lar opacity of any sort shall disqualify. Visual 
acuity must be correctable to at least 76% BVE; 
the candidate must have normal visual fields. 

(c) Hearing. — Auditory acuity level in 
either ear as determined by audiogram (ISO 
standards) must not be in excess of the limits in 
the following table: 



Frequency 


500 1000 2000 3000 
512 1024 2048 2896 


4000 
4096 


8000 
8192 


Better Ear 


30 25 25 45 


* 


* 


Worse Ear 


30 25 25 45 


* 


* 


* Record for bassline information only. 



Record audiogram results in item 71 on the SF 88 
(Report of Medical Examination). 

(2) Reporting Procedures. — Complete original 
and two copies of the SF 88 and SF 93 (Report 
of Medical History) on each candidate. Forward 
original and one copy with application for 
entrance into the program; one copy to be 
retained in Health Record. Insert in item 5 on 
the SF 88/93 (Purpose of Examination) NAVAL 
NUCLEAR SHORE POWER PROGRAM AND 
DEEP FREEZE CANDIDATE. 

15-30. Diving Duty 

(1) All candidates accepted for training for 
duty involving diving and underwater swimming 
shall conform to the physical standards set forth 
in this article. The SF-88 and SF-93 shall be 
used to report the findings of this examination 
with the signed originals filed in the member's 
Health Record and the copies forwarded to CH- 
BUMED (Code 74) for review. Annual physical 
examinations shall be recorded on the SF-88 
(SF-93 not required for annual diver physical 
examinations). The signed original shall be 
filed in the member's Health Record, and the 
copy shall be forwarded to CHBUMED (Code 74) 
for review. The annual divers physical exami- 
nation shall also be recorded on the NAVMED 
6150/2. 

(a) History of Disease. — Any of the follow- 
ing shall be disqualifying: (1) Tuberculosis, 
asthma, chronic pulmonary disease; (2) chronic 
or recurrent sinusitis, otitis media, otitis externa; 



15-63 

Change 74 



15-30 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-30 



{3) chronic or recurrent orthopedic pathology; 
(4) chronic or recurrent gastrointestinal disor- 
der; (5) chronic alcoholism; and (6) no candi- 
date shall be accepted with a history of syphilis, 
unless there has been adequate treatment and no 
signs of activity or organic involvement are dis- 
covered. 

(b) Age. — Candidates beyond the age of 30 
years shall not be considered for initial training 



in diving, the most favorable age being 20 to 30. 
All divers upon reaching the age of 40 shall be 
examined in accordance with subarticle 
15-30(4). For officers undergoing training in 
deep sea diving for the specific purpose of 
becoming diving supervisors or salvage officers, 
the upper age limit shall be 39 years. In cases 
where the candidate's age is 40 or more, the pro- 
visions of subarticle 15-30(4) below shall apply. 



15-64 

Change 7U 



15-30 



CHAPTER 15, PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-30 



(c) Weight.— 

(1) Diving candidates should be rugged 
individuals without tendency toward obesity. Fat 
absorbs about five times the volume of nitrogen 
as does lean tissue and due to the low circulatory 
rate of fatty tissue the nitrogen is eliminated very 
slowly, thus acting to increase the incidence of 
bends. 

(2) The following table sets forth the 
suggested maximum weights as related to height. 
The table is provided as a guide to medical 
examiners and should not be construed too 
strictly. For example, an individual may fall 
within the maximum extreme and be not quali- 
fied because of marked variations in physical pro- 
portions. An applicant, however, whose weight 
falls at the extreme of the maximum range is 
acceptable only if he is obviously active, of firm 
musculature, and evidently vigorous and healthy. 
In cases where doubt exists as to proper propor- 
tionment, photographs taken in appropriate 
attire (such as bathing suit) to show trunk and 
limb development should be forwarded with the 
physical examination report to the Bureau for 
consideration; this applies also to cases of indi- 
viduals above the maximum weight who present 
proper proportionment and are evidently vigor- 
ous and healthy. Even though the individual's 
weight is within the designated maximum, he 
shall be reported as not physically qualified when 
the examining physician considers that the' 
weight in relation to the body structure and mus- 
culature constitutes obesity of such a degree as to 
interfere with the satisfactory performance of 
diving duty. 



Height 
(inches ) 


Max. 
weight 


Height 
(inches) 


Max. 
weight 


Height 
( inches) 


Max. 
weight 


64 


164 


69 


189 


74 


218 


65 


169 


70 


194 


75 


224 


66 


174 


71 


199 


76 


230 


67 


179 


72 


205 


77 


236 


68 


184 


73 


211 


78 


242 



(d) Vision. — A minimum of 20/30 vision 
bilateral, corrected to 20/20 shall be required. 
This requirement is not made for underwater 
work but for the retention of relatively high 
physical standards for hazardous work in connec- 
tion with diving and salvage operations. 
Ophthalmoscopic examination shall be normal. 

(e) Color Vision. — Normal color perception 
is required of all candidates. Candidates are 
required to qualify in accordance with 15-13A, 

(f) Teeth. — A complete dental examination 
shall be conducted by a dental officer, if availa- 
ble. If a dental officer is not available, the exami- 
nation shall be conducted by a medical officer. 



Acute infectious diseases of the soft tissues of the 
oral cavity are disqualifying until remedial treat- 
ment is completed. Advanced oral diseases and 
generally unserviceable teeth shall be cause for 
rejection. Applicants with moderate malocclu- 
sion, or extensive restorations and replacements 
by bridges or dentures, may be accepted, if such 
do not interfere with effective use of self-con- 
tained underwater breathing apparatus (scuba). 

(g) Ears. — Acute or chronic disease of the 
auditory canal, membrana tympani, middle or 
internal ear shall be disqualifying. Perforation or 
marked scarring and/or thickening of the drum 
shall be disqualifying. The Eustachian tubes must 
be freely patent for equalization of pressure 
changes. Hearing of each ear shall be normal. 

(h) Nose and Throat. — Obstruction to 
breathing or chronic hypertrophic or atrophic 
rhinitis shall disqualify. Septal deviation is not 
disqualifying in the presence of adequate ventila- 
tion. Chronically diseased tonsils shall be disqual- 
ifying pending tonsillectomy. Presence or history 
of chronic or recurrent sinusitis is cause for rejec- 
tion. 

(i) Respiratory System. — The lungs shall be 
normal as determined by physical examination 
and 14- x 17-inch chest X-ray. 

(j) Cardiovascular System. — The cardiovas- 
cular system shall be without significant abnor- 
mality in all respects as determined by physical 
examination and tests as may be indicated. The 
blood pressure shall not exceed 145 mm., systolic 
or 90 mm., diastolic. In cases of apparent hyper- 
tension repeated daily blood pressure determina- 
tions should be made before final decision, bear- 
ing in mind that a valuable indication of unde- 
sirable excitable temperament is often revealed 
by vasomotor manifestations (see (n) below). 
Persistent tachycardia and arrhythmia except of 
sinus type, evidence of arteriosclerosis (an 
ophthalmoscopic examination of the retinal ves- 
sels shall be included in the examination), vari- 
cose veins, and marked or symptomatic hemor- 
rhoids, shall be disqualifying. 

(k) Gastrointestinal System. — Candidates 
subject to gastrointestinal disease shall be dis- 
qualified. 

(1) Genitourinary System. — Chronic or 
recurrent genitourinary disease or complaints 
(normal urinalysis required) shall be disqualify- 
ing. 

(m) Skin. — There shall be no active acute 
or chronic disease of the skin on the basis of 
infectiveness and/or offensiveness in close work- 
ing conditions and interchange of diving apparel. 

(n) Temperament. — The special nature of 
diving duties requires a careful appraisal of the 
candidate's emotional, temperamental, and intel- 



15-64a 
Change 74 



r 



( 



( 



15-31 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-31 



lectual fitness. Past or recurrent symptoms of 
neuropsychiatric disorder or organic disease of 
the nervous system shall be disqualifying. No 
individual with a history of any form of epilepsy, 
or head injury with sequelae, or personality dis- 
order shall be accepted. Neurotic trends, emo- 
tional immaturity or instability and asocial traits, 
if of sufficient degree to militate against satisfac- 
tory adjustment, shall be disqualifying. Stammer- 
ing or other speech impediment which might 
become manifest under excitement is disqualify- 
ing. Intelligence must be at least normal. 

(o) Ability To Equalize Pressure. — All 
candidates shall be subjected in a recompression 
chamber to a pressure of 50 pounds per square 
inch to determine their ability to clear their ears 
effectively and otherwise to withstand the effects 
of pressure. Due consideration must be given to 
the presence of an upper respiratory infection 
which temporarily may impair the ability to 
equalize owing to congestion of the Eustachian 
tube. 

(p) Individual susceptibility to oxygen shall 
be tested by determining candidate's ability to 
breathe oxygen without untoward effects at a 
pressure of 60 feet (27 pounds) for a period of 
30 minutes. 

(2) Reexamination of all divers shall be 
conducted in January of each year in accordance 
with standards set forth above. Pressure and 
oxygen tolerance tests may be omitted from the 
annual physical examination for those divers who 
have maintained their diving qualifications in 
accordance with current BUPERS directives. 



(3) Divers shall ordinarily be examined prior 
to each unusually hazardous dive. Examination of 
divers shall be made at the discretion of the 
medical officer prior to the start of extensive 
rescue, salvage, or diver- training operations. The 
medical officer should make observations, by per- 
sonal interview if possible, of all divers prior to 
their initial dive each day. 

(4) Qualified divers who desire to continue in 
that specialty and are about to reach the age of 
40 shall be examined by a board of medical 
officers appointed by the senior officer present. At 
least one member of the board shall be qualified 
as a deep-sea diver or in submarine medicine. 
The report of the examination on Standard Form 
88 with the recommendation of the board as to 
whether the individual is or is not physically 
qualified to continue as a diver shall be for- 
warded to the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 
for final decision and in time to reach BUMED 
before the man attains the age of 40. A certain 



latitude may be allowed for a diver of long expe- 
rience and a high degree of efficiency in diving, 
He must be free from any diseases of the cardio- 
vascular, respiratory, genitourinary, and gastroin- 
testinal systems, and of the ear. His ability to 
equalize air pressure must be maintained. A mod- 
erate degree of overweight may be disregarded if 
the diver is otherwise vigorous and active. 

15-31. Antarctica Duty 

(1) Purpose, — The purpose of the examina- 
tion is to procure and retain personnel who are 
physically qualified and temperamentally adapted 
for duty in Antarctica", and to disqualify person- 
nel who may require repeated and/or prolonged 
medical treatment. Medical facilities in Antarc- 
tica are limited and prolonged periods of isola- 
tion occur without possibility of evacuation for 
many months. Personnel may be working and 
living as a member of a small group of 8 to 20 
people at a remote station completely isolated for 
8 to 9 months, at altitudes up to 12,000 feet, and 
at ambient temperatures as low as — 123°F. 
Therefore, their adaptability to other people, iso- 
lation, and stressful environs is very important. 

(2) Scope of the Examination. — In all cases 
the examination shall be sufficiently thorough, 
including history-taking, to elicit and afford eval- 
uation of any symptoms of illness and of any 
previous entry suggestive of possible disease, and 
to be reasonably certain the individual is free of 
incipient disease or functional impairment. To 
this end, all personnel shall complete an SF 93, 
Report of Medical History, which shall be 
reviewed by the examiner and all positive 
answers commented upon. For civilian personnel 
completing the SF 93, the examiner shall obtain 
a family history and specifically comment on the 
presence or absence of diabetes, tuberculosis, 
heart disease, neuropsychiatric illness, or familial 
genetic diseases in children, siblings, parents, or 
grandparents. The use of such phrases as "history 
reviewed and found NCD" or similar vague, non- 
committal statements will be considered inade- 
quate. It is suggested that the procedures out- 
lined in article 15-5 be followed in obtaining the 
medical history. The individual's habits as to the 
use of alcohol, and the reaction to same, should 
be carefully investigated. Any history of severe 
illness or major surgical procedure within the 
past 6 months is disqualifying. 

(3) System Examination, Special Considera- 
tions. — All personnel shall undergo a complete 
medical examination, reported on SF 88, and 
shall meet the physical standards in section I of 
this chapter with special attention to the follow- 
ing conditions: 

(a) Age. — Maximum age for enlisted per- 



15-65 

Change % 



15-31 



MANUAL OF THE MEDIC At DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-31 



sonnel shall be 45 with the exception of chief 
petty officers. 

(b) Abdomen and Gastrointestinal System. 
— Chronic appendicitis or history of undiagnosed 
recurrent right lower quadrant pain is disqualify- 
ing. 

(c) Vision. — Minimum visual acuity shall 
be 20/200 correctable to 20/20 each eye under the 
Snellen notation system (20% correctable to 
100% under the Binocular Visual Efficiency 
system). The corrected visual acuity obtained 
with glasses shall be recorded in item 59 and the 
prescription entered in item 60 of the SF 88. 

(d) Hearing. — To determine auditory 
acuity, the following test should be used: 

(1) Audiometer Examination. — An audi- 
ogram should be obtained and recorded on all 
DEEP FREEZE physical examinations, if practic- 
able. The frequencies of 250, 3000, 4000, 6000, 
and 8000 will be for record and research purposes 
only. In general, audiometric loss should not 
exceed the limits set forth in the following table: 



Frequency 




250 
256 


500 
510 


1000 
1024 


2000 
2048 


3000 
2896 


1000 
4090 


6000 
6144 


8000 
8102 




ASA 


















Maximum 


Standards: 


















Better ear 


* 


20 


20 


20 




* 




• 


loss in 


Worse ear 


* 


20 


40 


40 


+ 


* 


* 


* 


decibels 


ISO Standards 
Better ear 
Worse ear 


* 
* 


35 
35 


30 

50 


30 
50 


* 

* 


* 


* 
• 


» 
* 



"No requirement — record for baseline information only. 



(2) Whispered Voice Test.— When an 
audiometer is not available the whispered voice 
test shall be performed. An acuity of 15/15 whis- 
pered voice in each ear is qualifying. If the audi- 
tory acuity is less than 15/15 whispered voice in 
either ear, the spoken voice shall be recorded for 
record and an audiogram must be obtained. 

(e) Endocrine, — The results of a standard 
oral glucose tolerance test shall be submitted 
whenever there is history of diabetes mellitus in 
a parent, sibling, or more than one grandparent. 
An abnormal glucose tolerance curve shall be dis- 
qualifying. (Enter results under notes on SF 88.) 

(f) Extremities, — A history of internal de- 
rangement of the knee or recurring '-.ankle sprains 
is disqualifying. The joint shall be evaluated as 
detailed in article 15-12 and any question clari- 
fied by an orthopedic evaluation as injuries are 
very common due to the icy terrain. 

(g) Genitourinary System. — A history of 
cold urticaria associated with hemoglobinuria, a 
verified history of renal calculus formation 
within the preceding 12 months, or current 
symptoms or positive X-ray for calculus, are dis- 
qualifying. 

(h) Heart and Vascular System.— Personnel 
over age 40 shall have an electrocardiogram. For 
military personnel, file ECG in Health Record. 



For civilian personnel, forward ECG with 
completed SF 88. 

(1) A persistent systolic blood pressure 
above 150, or in a person under 25 years of age, a 
persistent systolic blood pressure over 140, is dis- 
qualifying. A persistent systolic blood pressure 
less than % is disqualifying unless a complete 
evaluation reveals no cardiovascular or other 
abnormalities. 

(2) A persistent diastolic blood pressure 
above 90 before or after exercise is disqualifying. 

(3) Any evidence of peripheral vascular 
disease is disqualifying. 

(i) Lungs. — History or evidence of chronic 
lung disease or decreased vital capacity or any 
evidence thereof from any cause shall be disquali- 
fying. 

(j) Neurological. — History of brain surgery, 
verified history of unconsciousness of more than 
one-half hour, or anesthesia or hypoesthesia of 
the face, hands, or feet is disqualifying. 

(k) Psychiatric. — Psychiatric evaluation on 
all personnel selected for wintering-over will be 
made by BUMED appointed teams during the 
final screening process. 

(1) Skin and Cellular Tissues. — Abnormally 
flushed, pale, or cyanotic skin of hands or feet; 
extensive areas of grafted skin; atrophic scars of 
face, hands, or feet; collagenosis; dyshidrosis 
chronic dermatosis, especially of face, arms, 
hands or feet; severe acne; or any condition 
which tends to compromise the cutaneous circu- 
lation or sensation are disqualifying. 

(m) Spine. — A history of recent back injury 
or recurring back symptoms as noted in article 
15-23 is disqualifying, A special orthopedic 
consultation and X-ray examination should be 
obtained where indicated. 

(n) Dental. — Personnel shall have at least a 
Type 2 examination conducted by a dental 
officer. Any personnel not meeting the dental 
Class 2 standards (see art. 6-101) are disqualified 
unless it is noted by the dental officer on the SF 
88 that the man will be in a Class 2 condition 
prior to transfer or that specific arrangements 
have been made with the next command to 
correct the dental deficiencies to meet Class 2 
standards. 

(o) Laboratory Examination. — The follow- 
ing laboratory examinations shall be performed 
and the complete results reported on the SF 88. 

(1) Complete urinalysis. 

(2) 14 x 17 inch chest X-ray. 

(3) Serology. 

(4) ECG (see (3) (h) above). 

(5) Blood type and Rh factor. 

(6) Complete blood count, including dif- 
ferential (enter results under nfites on SF 88). 



15-66 
Change 69 



I 



15-32 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-33 



(7) Blood hematocrit and/ or hemoglobin 
(.enter results under notes on SF 88). 

(8) Blood cholesterol on personnel over 
40 years of age (enter results under notes on SF 
88 ) . 

(4) , Previous Antarctica Service.— Notation 
shall be made in block 73 on the SF 88 regarding 
any member's previous duty in Antarctica. 
Where applicable, this information shall be listed 
m chronological order by dates and should 
include the unit to which attached and geograph- 
ical location of the station, 

(5) Examination and Reporting Procedures. 

(a) Screening of Military Candidates by 
Local Commands,— The medical records of appli- 
cants for Antarctica duty shall be reviewed to be 
certain the applicant meets the criteria of this 
article. When directed by BUPERS, prior to 
actual transfer of personnel selected for and 
ordered to Operation DEEP FREEZE, a physical 
examination shall be performed in accordance 
with this article. The completed original and one 
copy each of the SF 88 (Report of Medical 
Examination) and SF 93 (Report of Medical His- 
tory) shall be filed in the candidate's Health 
Record prior to his transfer to the final screening 
center. Insert in block 5 of SF 88 and SF 93 the 
purpose of the examination as "DEEP FREEZE 
Candidate". 

(b) Final Screening of Military Candidates. 
—A final physical examination and the psychiat- 
ric examination of selected candidates will be 
done each spring at designated examination 
centers on the east and west coasts. These centers 
shall carefully review the SF 88/93 and obtain 
any additional physical evaluations, consulta- 
tions, or studies necessary and forward the SF 
88/93 along with any consultations obtained to 
the Force Medical Officer, Commander, Antarctic 
Support Activity, Davisville, R.I. 02854. The 
psychiatric history forms and results of the psy- 
chiatric examination shall be forwarded directlv 
to BUMED (Code 313). 

(c) Final Screening of Civilian Candidates 
for Untied States Antarctic Research Program 
{TJSARP).— Civilian personnel shall receive a 
physical examination and, if wintering-over, a 
psychiatric examination at designated naval hos- 
pitals. Women candidates shall, in addition, be 
examined as outlined in article 15-34. Complete 
original and two copies of SF 88 and 93 on each 
candidate and forward within 5 working days 
after examination to the Force Medical Officer, 
Commander, Antarctic Support Activity, Davis- 
ville, R.I. 02854. For personnel wintering-over, 
the completed psychiatric forms and results of 
the psychiatric examination shall be forwarded 
to BUMED (Code 313). 



(6) Procedure for Recommending Waiver.— 
All defects shall be noted and recorded on the SF 
88. If the defect is considered to be disqualifying 
in accordance with the above standards, but the 
candidate's commanding officer considers him 
exeptionally well qualified and in the opinion of 
the medial examiner the member would be able 
to perform the duties of his grade or rating in 
the adverse environment of Antarctica, a recom- 
mendation for waiver of the physical standard (s) 
involved should be included on the SF 88 and 
submitted for consideration. 



15-32. State Department Duty 

(1) Purpose. — To assure that members as- 
signed to duty with the State Department are 
in all respects physically and dentally qualified 
for such assignment, and that all necessary 
medical and dental treatment is accomplished 
prior to transfer to such duty since Armed Forces 
medical facilities at most places of duty with the 
State Department are limited. 

(2) Scope of Examination. — The examination 
shall be sufficiently thorough, including history 
taking to elicit relevant information and afford 
evaluation of any symptoms or illness and of any 
previous entry suggestive of possible disease, and 
to ascertain with reasonable certainty that the 
member is free of incipient disease or functional 
impairment. The examination shall include a 
complete urinalysis, serologic test for syphilis, 
and 14 x 17 inch chest X-ray. 

(3) Evaluation. — A member must be physi- 
cally fit to reasonably perform all the duties of 
his grade or rate in an isolated area where day- 
to-day medical and dental support is not readily 
available. 

( 4 ) Reporting Procedures Record the results 

of the examination (identified as "State Depart- 
ment Physical Examination") on either a SF 88 
or SF 600 and file in the member's Health 
Record. 



15-33. Special Duty, Intelligence Officers 
(163x Designator) 

(1) All candidates shall meet the physical 
standards for restricted line officer and staff corps 
with the following modifications: 

(a) Unaided distant visual acuity shall be 
consistent with the ability to perform duties 
required and if less than 100% BVE shall be 
correctable to 100% BVE. 

(b) Normal color perception is required 
and shall be determined in accordance with 
article 15-1 3 A. 



2 Aug 72 



15-67 

Change 76 



15-34 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-34A 



(c) Normal depth perception and stereoscopic 
vision with or without corrective lenses is required. 

15-34. Women 

(1) The enlistment and appointment of women in 
all branches of the naval service shall be subject to 
the standards stated in section 1, whenever appro- 
priate. The medical history shall be adequate enough 
to determine if the applicant has ever been treated 
for a female disorder or if she has ever had a change 
in menstrual pattern. Any positive answers should 
be investigated. 

(2) The physical examination of females shall be 
conducted with due regard for privacy and in the 
presence of a third person whenever practicable. 
Whenever such examination requires exposure of 
the body, and particularly in conducting chest and 
pelvic examinations, the presence of a female attend- 
ant is required. Drapes and gown shall be used 
when appropriate. The scope of examination shall 
be the same as that prescribed for male personnel 
insofar as is applicable. Physical examinations for 
female personnel shall include inspection of the ex- 
ternal genitalia and the condition of the pelvic or- 
gans shall be determined by either vaginal or rectal 
bimanual palpation as may be appropriate. Visuali- 
zation of the cervix and vaginal canal by speculum 
shall be made in all cases except where rectal exami- 
nation is required because of a nonelastic hymen. 

(3) Psychiatric. — In applying the psychiatric 
standards, due attention shall be paid to differences 
in the manifestation of psychiatric disorders in men 
and women. Emphasis shall be given to elicitation 
and evaluation of evidence of emotional instability 
since a sufficiently mature emotional reaction is a 
necessary prerequisite for successful adjustment to 
military service. 

15-34 A. Firefighting Instructor Personnel 

(1) Purpose. — To assure that members assigned 
duty as firefighting instructors and exposed to 
smoke and its associated constituents are in all re- 
spects physically qualified for such assignment. 

(2) Systems Standards, Special Considera- 
tions. — All personnel shall meet the physical criteria 
required for retention in naval service. Acute condi- 
tions of a temporary nature are disqualifying until 
corrected. Special attention shall be given the follow- 
ing conditions which may preclude duty as a firefight- 
ing instructor: 

(a) Eyes and Vision. — 

(1) Absence of recurrent, acute and chronic 
eye disease is required. 

(2) Uncorrected vision must be at least 
20/80, Snellen, in one eye and at least 20/100, Snel- 
len, in the other. 

(3) Near vision, with glasses, must be suffi- 
cient to read printed material of Jaeger Number 4 
size type without apparent difficulty. 



(b) Ears and Hearing. — Recurrent, acute or 
chronic diseases of the external, middle, or internal 
ear must be absent. 

(c) Nose, Mouth and Throat. — 

(1) Conditions interfering with distinct 
speech or with free breathing required in using 
breathing apparatus are disqualifying. 

(2) Evidence of sinus disease requires an 
ENT consultation and statement which recom- 
mends disposition as regards repeated exposure to 
smoke. 

(d) Lungs. — 

( 1 ) A history of pulmonary tuberculosis with 
more than moderate involvement and arrested or 
healed for less than 2 years is disqualifying. 

(2) A history of respiratory tract allergic re- 
sponse is disqualifying. 

(3) Acute or chronic pleurisy, bronchitis, 
asthma, emphysema, pneumothorax, bronchiectasis 
or other irremediable conditions of the lungs, 
pleura, or mediastinum are disqualifying. 

(e) Heart and Blood Vessels. — Disqualifying 
conditions are: Organic heart diseases; cardiac en- 
largement; history of angina pectoris; persistent 
pulse rate at rest exceeding 1 10 pulses per minute or 
less than 40 pulses per minute; cardiac arrhythmia or 
irregularity other than sinus arrhythmia; arterio- 
sclerosis disproportionate to age; and sitting blood 
pressure reading exceeding 160 mm Hg, systolic, or 
90 mm Hg, diastolic. If the initial blood pressure 
reading exceeds 160 mm Hg, systolic, or 90 mm Hg, 
diastolic, serial blood pressures will be taken and the 
average obtained will be the value to be considered. 

(f) Abdomen. — 

(1) Disqualifying conditions are: Acute or 
chronic disease of the abdomii -' viscera and sig- 
nificant enlargement of the live, or spleen. 

(2) Hernia, of any type except a small umbili- 
cal, is disqualifying until satisfactorily repaired. 

(g) Genitourinary. — Disqualifying conditions 
are: Acute or chronic genitourinary disease includ- 
ing venereal; acute or chronic prostatitis; large or 
painful varicocele or hydrocele until satisfactorily 
repaired. 

(h) Spine, Pelvis, Sacroiliac and Lumbosacral 
Joints. — 

(1) Applicants must have free mobility of the 
spine and pelvic joints. 

(2) Disqualifying conditions are: Significant 
curvature or deformity of the spine which is symp- 
tomatic or interferes with physical activity; history of 
herniated nucleus pulposus with or without surgery. 

(3) History of low back pain, sciatica, ar- 
thritis or suggested pathology may be disqualifying. 

(i) Extremities. — Disqualifying conditions are: 
Ununited fractures and nonreducible dislocations or 
united fractures and reduced dislocations with in- 
complete restoration of function; amputation of 
arm, hand, leg or foot; loss of any portion of the 
thumb on either hand; loss of more than a distal 
phalanx of the index or middle finger of either hand; 



15-68 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



15-34A 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-34A 



ankylosed joints; varicose veins other than mild in 
degree; loss or deformity of great toe or any condi- 
tion which interferes with function or will prevent 
performance of arduous activity. 

(j) Emotional and Nervous System. — 

(1) Applicant must be emotionally stable. 

(2) Disqualifying conditions are: epilepsy; 
chronic alcoholism or drug abuse; and paralysis or 
paresis. 

(k) Skin. — 

(1) Contact allergies of the skin that involve 
substances associated with firefighting are disqual- 
ifying. 

(2) Skin conditions and facial contours 
which interfere with physical activity and the use of 
personal protective equipment are disqualifying. 

(1) Blood and Blood-Forming Tissues. — 
Disqualifying conditions include: Anemia, iron de- 
ficient, hemolytic and myelophthisic; abnormal RBC 
destruction; abnormal RBC construction (thalas- 
semia and sickle cell); polycythemia vera; 
leukopenia, chronic or recurrent; thromboembolic 
disease. 

(m)Endocrine and Metabolic. — Disqualifying 
conditions include: Diabetes mellitus; diabetes in- 
sipidus; adrenal gland malfunction; acromegaly, 
thyrotoxicosis or hypothyroidism; hyperinsulinism; 



hyper or hypoparathyroidism. 

(n) Other Defects. — History of more than one 
episode of diminished heat adaptation capability of 
any other serious deviation from sound physical 
condition is grounds for disqualification until cor- 
rected, if correctable. 

(3) Reporting Procedures, — 

(a) Record the results of medical examination 
on SF 88 and SF 93 and enter into the member's 
Health Record. In the case of personnel found physi- 
cally qualified to assume duty as a firefighting in- 
structor, the following data shall be included: P. A. 
14 X 17 inch chest X-ray; audiogram; vision screen- 
ing; pulmonary function testing (i.e. VC, FVC, and 
FEVi); EKG; CBC (i.e. differential, white blood cell, 
hemoglobin and hematocrit); urinalysis (i.e. albu- 
min, sugar, and microscopic); liver function profile; 
and an exercise EKG, such as the Master's two-step, 
for personnel 35 years of age and older. Appropriate 
entries shall be made on NAVMED 6150/2, Special 
Duty Medical Abstract. 

(b) The full name and Social Security Number 
of members found physically qualified for duty as a 
firefighting instructor will be forwarded to BUMED 
(Code 56). Similar notification is required upon re- 
moval from duty as a firefighting instructor and 
reassignment to other duties. 



10 Feb 75 



15-68a 

Change 83 



c 



< 




15-35 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-38 



Section III. PHYSICAL DEFECTS AND WAIVER 



Article 
15-35 

15-37 
15-38 



Physical Defects 

Relative Significance of Physical Defects 

Procedure for Recommending Waiver 

15-35. Physical Defects 

(1) The term "physical defect" is intended to 
include all defects, disorders, disabilities, or 
conditions which may be of significance in deter- 
mining an applicant's physical fitness to perform 
the duties of his grade or rating. 

(2) When applicants are accepted, all physical 
defects which have been noted shall be recorded. 
Each defect shall be recorded in sufficient detail 
to show clearly its character, degree, and signifi- 
cance. 

(3) When an applicant is rejected, the cause 
or causes must be clearly established and so 
recorded as to be conclusive regarding the pro- 
priety of the rejection. Symptoms of disease are 
not to be noted as cause of rejection if it is 
possible to arrive at a definite diagnosis. 

(4) A number of physical defects are listed 
under specific system headings as causes for rejec- 
tion. Such defects should ordinarily be considered 
disqualifying unless a waiver is approved. The 
various lists of defects are not all inclusive and 
are not intended to be; they contain most of the 
more frequently recurring causes of unfitness for 
performance of duties and indicate the type of 
defects which are to be considered disqualifying. 

Note. — There is no article 15-36. 

15-37. Relative Significance of Physical 
Defects 

(1) Waiver Not Required. — When the exam- 
iner, after evaluating a defect in accordance with 
the standards in this chapter, considers it to be of 
little present or future significance and not to be 
disqualifying, he need only record and describe 
the defect on the report of physical examination. 

(2) Waiver Required.— When a defect is 
considered to be disqualifying in accordance with 
the standards, but is of such nature as not to 
preclude the performance of duty, a waiver may 
be recommended. 

(3) Waiver Not Appropriate. — When a defect 
might constitute a menace to or jeopardize the 
health, general welfare, or safety of the individu- 
al's associates, or of such nature that the individ- 
ual could not reasonably fulfill the purpose of his 
employment, a waiver is not considered appropri- 
ate. 



15-38. Procedure for Recommending Waiver 

(1) When, in the opinion of the medical 
examiner and the commanding officer or officer 
in charge of the examining facility, a waiver of 
the physical standards is warranted, a recommen- 
dation to this effect may be submitted on the 
Standard Form 88 for consideration for the fol- 
lowing: 

(a) Appointment or reappointment of an 
officer in the Navy, Marine Corps, or Naval or 
Marine Corps Reserve. 

(b) Enlistment or reenlistment of a member 
in the Navy, Marine Corps, or Naval or Marine 
Corps Reserve, 

(2) The recommendation for waiver of the 
physical standards shall include the defects to 
which referable and shall be entered on the re- 
verse of the SF 88. In addition, the word 
WAIVER RECOMMENDED shall be stamped, 
printed, or typed in bold type on the upper-right 
margin above item 3 of the SF 88. The command- 
ing officer or officer in charge of the examining 
facility may indicate on the reverse of the SF 88 
his approval or disapproval of the findings of the 
medical examiner. A facsimile stamp may be used 
for this purpose. Final action in any case of 
recommendation for waiver of the physical stand- 
ards is taken by the Chief of Naval Personnel or 
Commandant of the Marine Corps, as appropri- 
ate, upon the recommendation of the Chief, 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. Until such ulti- 
mate findings are made known to the examining 
facility, no change in an examinee's status will be 
accomplished. 

(3) In the case of a physical examination inci- 
dent to assignment of a naval or Marine Corps 
reservist to active duty including active duty for 
training in excess of 30 days, but excluding 
active duty for training of 30 days or less and 
involuntary training duty of 45 days, the 
commanding officer or officer in charge is author- 
ized, upon the recommendation of the medical 
examiner, to grant a conditional waiver of the 
physical standards for any defects which in all 
probability will not interfere with the member's 
performance on the active list. The conditional 
waiver carries with it the authority to consider 
the member physically qualified jr active duty 
including active duty for training in excess of 30 
days prior to final review of the records in the 
Navy Department. When granted, the member 



15-69 

Change 69 



15-38 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-38 



shall be so advised and the conditional waiver 
shall be reported on the reverse of the SF 88. The 
reporting procedure is identical to that applica- 
ble to a recommendation for waiver. 

(4) The circumstances under which a recom- 
mendation for waiver of the physical standards 
may be submitted are to be distinguished from 
those pertaining to a conditional waiver in that a 
recommendation for waiver is applicable to a 



candidate for appointment, enlistment, or re- 
enlistment in any status, whereas a conditional 
waiver is to be considered only in the case of an 
individual who is already a member of the Naval 
or Marine Corps Reserve, and who has been 
examined incident to assignment to active duty 
including active duty for training in excess of 30 
days and found not to meet the current physical 
standards. 



15-70 

Change 69 



15-39 CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 15-40 

Section IV. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 

Article 

General 15-39 

Enlistment or Reenlistment 15-40 

Recruit Screening Examinations 15-40A 

Former Members Physically Disqualified for Reenlistment When Separated 15-41 

Candidates For Commission or Warrant , . . . 15-42 

Candidates for Service Academies, ROTC Four-Year Scholarship Program and 

Naval Academy Preparatory School (NAPS) 15-43 

Retired Members Ordered to Active Duty 15-44 

Physical Examination of Active Duty Officers (Triennial/Annual) 15-45 

Annual Physical Examination of Certain Enlisted Members 15-45A 

Physical Examinations of Naval Academy Midshipmen, and NESEP and NROTC Applicants and Students 15-46 

Promotion of Navy and Marine Corps Officers on Active Duty 15-47 

Separation From Active Duty * 15-48 

Transfer of Personnel (Officer and Enlisted) 15-50 

Weight Control 15-51 

Enlisted Applicants for Service Schools 15-53 

Applicant for Steward Ratings 15-54 

Prisoners 15-55 

Deserters 15-56 

Civil Employees 15-57 

Evidence of Intoxication or Drug Addiction 15-58 

Members on Temporary Disability Retired List I5-58A 

Physical Examination of Firefighting Instructor Personnel 15-58B 



15-39. General 

(1) Physical examinations, unless otherwise pro- 
vided for, shall be conducted by officers of the naval 
Medical Corps, except that dental examinations shall 
be conducted by officers of the naval Dental Corps if 
available. The naval examining officers, unless 
otherwise provided for, shall sign original entries on 
reports of such examinations. Medical examiners, 
regardless of their clinical specialties, shall be famil- 
iar with the physical standards pertaining to naval 
personnel. 

(2) The applicant or candidate shall be questioned 
carefully about his past and present physical condi- 
tion, especially with regard to any serious illness, 
injury, or operation he may have had. Reference to 
the completed Standard Form 93 will materially as- 
sist the examiner in developing the medical history. 
All examiners are enjoined to exercise the greatest 
care in conducting a physical examination and shall 
assure themselves that all findings are fully and ac- 
curately recorded. In doubtful cases, medical ex- 
aminers should employ any additional available 
diagnostic procedure which is indicated in an effort 
to determine the true physical status of the person 
being examined. In reporting the results of the ex- 
amination on Standard Form 88 or Standard Form 
600, whichever is appropriate, all reports of special 
examinations shall be included or appended irres- 
pective of whether or not the reports indicate the 
presence or absence of disease or abnormality. 



15-40. Enlistment or Reenlistment 

(1) Enlistment. — The physical examination of 
applicants for enlistment in the Navy or Marine 
Corps, Regular or Reserve, shall be made by naval 
medical and dental officers, if available; otherwise, 
by medical and dental officers of the Department of 
the Army or of the Department of the Air Force, or 
by civilian physicians when authorized by the Chief 
of Naval Personnel or the Commandant of the 
Marine Corps, as appropriate, upon the recommen- 
dation of the Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. 
Except in the case of members on active duty who are 
applicants for extension of enlistment or for reen- 
listment, civilian physicians may be utilized only on 
a no-cost-to-the-Navy basis. The results of the ex- 
amination shall be recorded in the Health Record. 
Applicants unfit for service by reason of a defect or 
disability not of a serious nature and which can be 
corrected or cured within a short time may be ad- 
vised to seek treatment with a view to enlistment 
upon correction or recovery as the case may be; 
however, no promise or assurance shall be made to 
such applicants that they will thereafter be accepted. 
When applicants arei accepted, aU physical abnor- 
malities shall be recorded. No applicant shall be 
accepted for enlistment, except as provided in article 
15-3, who does not conform to the standards. The 
applications of persons desiring to reenlist who have 
defects or disabilities which would be cause for re- 
jection for original enlistment, but not such as to 



10 Feb 75 



15-71 
Change 83 



15-40A 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-43 



prevent the performance of the duties to be excepted 
of them, shall be referred to BUPERS or CMC, via 
BUMED, with appropriate recommendation regard- 
ing waiver (art. 15-38). 

(2) Reenlisiment. — This pertains to an enlistment 
in the Navy or in the Marine Corps of a person who 
has had prior service in the Navy or in the Marine 
Corps, respectively. Enlistment in either the Navy or 
Marine Corps, of a person without such prior ser- 
vice, subsequent to service in any other branch of the 
Armed Forces does not constitute reenlistment. The 
physical examination shall be conducted as for origi- 
nal enlistment, but in exceptional cases where medi- 
cal officers of the Department of Defense are not 
readily available, a waiver of the physical examina- 
tion is authorized for reenlistment within 24 hours 
following discharge, provided there is no evidence 
in the member's Health Record of recent illness or 
injury and provided further that such reenlistment is 
in the same Regular or Reserve status. However, 
physical examination by a Department of Defense 
medical officer shall be obtained at the earliest op- 
portunity. Appropriate notation shall be made in the 
member's Health Record to insure that the require- 
ment for physical examination is not overlooked. 

15-40A. Recruit Screening Examinations 

(1) Purpose. — To detect physical or mental de- 
fects or active communicable and infectious disease 
processes which may have been concealed or were 
not detected at the time of enlistment or induction; 
and to insure that certain laboratory tests, chest 
X-rays, or other indicated tests are accomplished for 
cases where facilities were not available at the origi- 
nal examining activity. 

(2) When Conducted. — The screening examina- 
tions shall be conducted within 10 working days of 
reporting to the naval training center or Marine 
Corps recruit depot, as applicable. 

(3) Scope of Examination. — All recruits, including 
reservists reporting for accelerated recruit training, 
shall undergo a screening examination upon report- 
ing to the training center or recruit depot. The ex- 
amination shall be sufficiently thorough to insure 
that the recruit is free from communicable and infec- 
tious diseases and physically fit to undergo military 
training. Such diagnostic, consultant, or hospitaliza- 
tion procedures as may be indicated shall be utilized. 
However, hospitalization shall only be effected 
when actually necessary for evaluation of a significant 
abnormality. If not previously reported, X-ray of 
the chest, serology, blood typing, and Rh factor shall 
be included as part of the examination. 

(4) Evaluation. — A recruit should be considered 
for separation from the service when he has demon- 
strated an inability to perform military duty. 

(5) Disposition of those recruits being considered 
for separation from the naval service shall be in 
accordance with chapter 1 8 and the current BUMED 
Instruction in the 1910.2 series. 



(6) Reporting. — In those cases where the recruit is 
not being considered for separation, the results of 
the examination shall be recorded on SF 600 
(Chronological Record of Medical Care) and filed in 
the recruit's Health Record. 

15-41. Former Members Physically Disqualified for 
Reenlistment When Separated 

(1) No former enlisted man who was discharged 
by medical survey or who at time of last discharge 
was not recommended for reenlistment due to phys- 
ical disability shall be enlisted without authority 
from the Navy Department. In requesting authority 
for the enlistment, the medical officer shall submit a 
complete report of notations made on the last dis- 
charge and a statement of the applicant's present 
physical condition, together with the request for 
waiver. 

15-42. Candidates for Commission or Warrant 

(1) The physical examination of candidates for commis- 
sioned or warrant rank should be conducted, if practica- 
ble, by two medical officers and one dental officer of the 
Regular Navy or Naval Reserve or both. In instances 
where two medical officers and one dental officer are not 
readily available, the examination may be conducted by 
one medical officer and one dental officer, or by one 
medical officer if a dental officer is not available. The 
services of medical officers of the Department of the Army 
or of the Department of the Air Force may be utilized only 
in instances where the services of an active or inactive 
naval medical officer are not available. The services of 
civilian physicians and civilian medical facilities may be 
u tilized only when authorized by the Chief of Naval Per- 
sonnel or the Commandant of the Marine Corps, as ap- 
propriate, upon the recommendation of the Chief, Bureau 
of Medicine and Surgery. Except in the case of members of 
the naval service on active duty, the services of civilian 
physicians and civilian medical facilities may be utilized 
only on a no-cost-to-the-Navy basis. Reports of examina- 
tions, recorded on Standard Form 88 (Report of Medical 
Examination) and Standard Form 93 (Report of Medical 
History), shall be submitted to BUMED for review. 

(2) Candidates for, or individuals enrolled in, certain 
officer-training programs who are not on active duty may 
be admitted to a naval medical facility for the purpose of 
conducting special physical examination procedures when 
the requirements of paragraph 7, section C, BUMED In- 
struction 6320.31 series, are met, 

15-43. Candidates for Service Academies, ROTC 
Four- Year Scholarship Program and Naval 
Academy Preparatory School ( NAPS) 

(1) Complete procedures for the administration 
and reporting of physical examinations on candi- 
dates for service academies and ROTC Four- Year 
Scholarship Programs are contained in 
BUMEDINST 6120. 3 series. 



15-72 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



15-43 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-43 



(2) The Department of Defense Medical Review 
Board (DODMRB) is a Department of Defense 
agency with the exclusive responsibility for schedul- 
ing and reviewing all physical examinations on can- 
didates for the service academies and the ROTC 
Four-Year Scholarship Programs. Questions and 
problems regarding these physical examinations 
should be addressed to Director, Department of 



Defense Medical Review Board, P.O. Box 3000, 
U.S. Academy, Colorado 80840. 

(3) All applicants for the Naval Academy Pre- 
paratory School (NAPS) shall be examined in accord- 
ance with BUMEDINST 61 20. 3 series. Their physical 
examination reports shall be clearly marked "NAPS 
CANDIDATE. " Instructions regarding application to 
NAPS are contained in OPNAVINST 1531.3 series. 



10 Feb 75 



15-73 
Change 83 



O j 



c 



(J 



15-44 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-45 



15-44. Retired Members Ordered to Active 
Duty 

(1) A member on the retired list who is 
ordered to active duty, except for short periods of 
temporary active duty, shall be required to 
complete Standard Form 93 (Report of Medical 
History) and shall be examined physically by a 
medical officer who shall submit a report on 
Standard Form 88 in duplicate listing all defects 
or disabilities and expressing an opinion as to the 
type duty the member is physically qualified to 
perform. The Standard Form 93 shall accompany 
the original of Standard Form 88. The examinee 
may be found physically qualified for active duty 
if considered physically qualified to perform the 
duties to which he or she may be assigned. 

15-45. Physical Examination of Active Duty 
Officers (Triennial/ Annual) 

(1) Purpose. — The purpose of this examina- 
tion is to detect disease processes in their inci- 
piency, thereby permitting earlier therapy, and 
to maintain current medical data regarding phys- 
ical fitness of officer personnel. Military person- 
nel are a unique population in that they have 
medical care readily available at all times. It is, 



therefore, presumed that officers suffering minor 
complaints will present these at sick call and the 
condition can be thoroughly evaluated at that 
time. It is not considered necessary that all 
officers be examined on an annual basis during 
the early years of their careers. In view of the 
increased incident of certain disease processes in 
older age groups, the frequency of examination 
should increase in relation to the age of the indi- 
vidual. 

(2) When Conducted. — 

(a) All officers assigned to duty which 
requires performance of frequent aerial flights 
shall receive an annual flight physical examina- 
tion within 30 days of the anniversary of the 
officer's date of birth. 

(b) All officers assigned to duty which 
involves diving, underwater training, or SCUBA 
qualification; or Seal Teams; shall receive an 
annual physical examination during each Janu- 
ary. 

(c) All flag and general officers shall receive 
an annual physical examination within 30 days 
of the anniversary of the officer's date of birth. 

(d) All other Navy and Marine Corps 
officers on active duty shall be examined within 



15-75 
Change 7| 



15-45 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-45 



30 days of the anniversary of the officer's date of 
birth 'at ages 24, 27, 30, 33, 36, and annually 
thereafter. 

(e) A complete physical examination (such 
as: aviation physical per article 15-71(1), or 
examination incident to appointment, or dis- 
charge from hospital upon report by a medical 
board) conducted and reported to BUMED 
during the preceding 12 months will obviate the 
need for the physical examination, except in the 
case of flag and general officers for whom the 
physical examination described by this article 
shall be conducted regardless of previous exami- 
nations during the year. 

(f) Any officer may, at his request, be exam- 
ined at any time such examination is medically 
indicated. 

(g) Commanding officers are responsible for 
instituting whatever procedures may be necessary 
to verify officers' Health Records periodically and 
to insure compliance with this article. 

(3) Conducted by. — The examination may be 
conducted by any medical officer of the Depart- 
ment of Defense on active duty. Whenever possi- 
ble, and particularly for those officers over age 
36, the examination should be conducted by a 
qualified internist (and such other specialists as 
may be available). In the case of aviation person- 
nel, at least one of the examining medical officers 
shall be a flight surgeon or an aviation medical 
examiner. Under exceptional circumstances, in 
foreign countries, other than flight physical 
examinations may be conducted and reported on 
by a civilian physician. 

(4) Scope of the Examination. — The examina- 
tion shall be sufficiently thorough, including 
completion of the NAVMED 6120/2 (Officer 
Physical Examination Questionnaire), to be rea- 
sonably certain that the officer concerned is free 
of incipient disease or functional impairment. 
All positive findings noted on the examination 
and all significant positive answers to the ques- 
tionnaire shall be thoroughly evaluated and any 
clues which might mean functional impairment 
or maladjustment are to be followed with such 
diagnostic, consultant, or hospitalization proce- 
dures as are indicated. Hospitalization should be 
effected whenever necessary for completion of 
indicated studies or for evaluation of the signifi- 
cance of abnormalities. 

(a) All Officers.— 

(1) Vision. — Visual acuity shall be tested 
as outlined in article 15-86. If impairment exists, 
its degree, cause, and correctability shall be 
stated. If possible, the prescription for lenses 
necessary to correct errors of refraction shall be 
recorded. 

(2) Color Vision. — Testing of color per- 



ception is required for all ensigns and lieutenants 
(junior grade) with designator codes llxx, 13xx, 
60xx, and 6lxx. Testing of color perception is 
not required routinely for all other officers. 

(3) Auditory Acuity. — If any impairment 
of auditory acuity has previously been deter- 
mined or is now suspected, audiometric examina- 
tion is required. 

(4) Dental. — A type II dental examina- 
tion shall be provided. (See art. 6-100.) Based on 
the clinical and radiographic findings, the exam- 
iner shall make suitable recommendations for 
corrective care to attain optimal oral health. 

(5) Chest X-ray.— A 14 x 17 film shall be 
included as part of the examination. A 70 mm 
film may be substituted where a 14 x 17 film 
cannot be obtained. 

(6) Cardiovascular. — Upon the occasion 
of an officer's first regularly scheduled physical 
examination an electrocardiographic tracing shall 
be obtained unless his Health Record already 
contains a previous tracing. This tracing shall be 
retained permanently in the officer's Health 
Record to provide a baseline against which 
future studies might be compared. Electrocar- 
diographic tracings shall be performed on all 
officers annually after 36 years of age. 

(7) Urinalysis, — Routine urinalysis, 
including determination of specific gravity, albu- 
min and sugar, and microscopic study, shall be 
performed in all cases. When specific gravity is 
below 1.010, a repeat urinalysis is indicated. 
When albumin, casts, or sugar is found in the 
urine, such other tests as may be indicated shall 
be made. 

(8) Rectal. — Inspection and digital exami- 
nation shall be accomplished. Proctoscopy shall 
be used where indicated. Digital examination of 
the prostate shall be done on all officers 36 years 
of age or over and in all others where indicated. 
Stool examination for occult blood shall be made 
for all officers over age 36. 

(9) Pelvic, Vaginal, and Breasts. — A 
pelvic and breast examination shall be performed 
on all female officers. The presence of a nurse or 
female attendant is required and the examinee 
shall be properly draped. The examination shall 
include bimanual palpation, visual inspection of 
the cervix and vaginal canal by speculum, and a 
Papanicolaou smear. Where hymenal opening is 
smaller than usual, due care is to be given to 
avoid any damage to the existing hymenal ring. 
All female officers below the age of 36 are 
encouraged to request an annual Papanicolaou 
smear and such other examination as may be 
recommended by specialists in Obstetrics and 
Gynecology. 

(10) Intraocular Tension. — Shall be deter- 
mined on all officers who are 36 years of age or 



15-76 

Change 69 



15-45 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-45 



older, and in all others in whom palpation or 
history is suggestive of abnormal pressure. (See 
art. 15-92.) 

(11) Hematology and Serology. — 

(a) Hematocrit level shall be deter- 
mined during the examination and recorded in 
item 50 on the SF 88. Hemoglobin determination 
may be substituted where hematocrit cannot be 
performed. 

(b) Serological test for syphilis, using 
standard serologic technique, shall be required at 
the following ages: 24, 27, 30, 33, 36, 40, and 45 
years, as attained during the calendar year of the 
examinations. In addition, a serologic test for 
syphilis shall be accomplished in any officer with 
a history of urethritis, venereal disease, or non- 
specific penile lesion within the previous report- 
ing period, or with unexplained lymphadenopa- 
thy or other suggestive findings. 

(12) The officer's Health Record shall be 
reviewed for completeness and verified incident 
to this examination. In addition, inoculations 
shall be brought up-to-date in accordance with 
current directives. 

(b) Flag and General Officers. — In the case 
of flag and general officers, the following special 
procedures shall be carried out in addition to 
clinical and laboratory procedures listed above: 

(1) Thorough ENT examination, includ- 
ing audiogram. In those cases where the audi- 
ogram reveals an average loss of hearing in the 
better ear of more than 30 decibels (ISO) in the 
conversational range (500-2000), the officer shall 
undergo speech reception and discrimination test- 
ing, if available, 

(2) X-rays, using 14 x 17 film, of chest at 
inspiration and expiration in the postero-anterior 
view and left lateral view. 

(3) Blood sugar drawn 2 hours after 
breakfast or lunch. 

(4) Appropriate blood chemical tests (12 
channel autoanafyzer series, if available). 

(5) White blood cell count (differential 
to be done if white blood cell count is abnor- 
mal), 

(6) A sigmoidoscopic examination and 
barium enema should be performed if the stool 
examination for occult blood is positive or if a 
need is indicated by history of symptomatology. 

(5) Review and Evaluation. — 

(a) Review. — The examining medical officer 
shall be responsible for the review of all physical 
examinations conducted by him. When he affixes 
his signature to the SF 88, he certifies that the 
information therein is complete and accurate to 
the best of his knowledge and as authentic as his 
professional ability permits. Reviewing medical 
officers at higher levels of command are charged 
with the responsibility of insuring that the SF 88 



is complete and properly executed, and that there 
is adequate documentation to support the exam- 
ining medical officer's findings and recommenda- 
tions. 

(b) Evaluation. — In the clinical evaluation 
of any positive findings, particular care must be 
taken to record a clear, exact, and complete 
report of the condition. This evaluation should 
include all significant objective findings which 
substantiate cunical diagnosis. Adequate informa- 
tion must be given to enable reviewing officials 
to make appropriate determinations. In this 
connection, free use of consultations should be 
made. When made, a report of the consultation 
shall be attached to the SF 88 and a brief descrip- 
tion of the defect which necessitated the consul- 
tation shall be recorded in item 73 on the SF 88. 
An officer who presents either a manifest or 
latent impairment which is likely to render him 
unfit in the near future will be considered to be 
unfit for duty, even though he may be physically 
capable of performing all of his duties at the 
moment. Conversely an officer convalescing from 
an illness or an injury and who is likely to 
recover to a degree which would permit him to 
perform all of his duties in the near future will 
be considered to be fit for duty. In general, an 
officer should be considered unfit when it is 
determined that he is unable because of disease 
or injury to perform all the duties of his office or 
grade in such a manner as to reasonably fulfill 
the purpose of his employment on active duty. In 
the event a defect and/or condition is discovered 
which is later proved to be benign or of no 
significant consequence and which may be a 
recurrent finding on subsequent physical exami- 
nations, a copy of the consultation or narrative 
summary shall be permanently retained in the 
officer's Health Record. Additionally, the officer 
concerned may be provided a copy of the applica- 
ble consultation or narrative summary for his 
personal file. The medical examiner shall inform 
the officer concerned when an enjxy is. made on 
the examination report which may adversely 
affect, in other than a temporary degree, his 
efficiency in the performance of duty. (See U.S. 
Navy Regulations.) 

(6) Disposition. — Disposition depends upon 
many factors, any number of which may apply in 
a case. The object is to institute indicated mea- 
sures early enough to protect the officer's health, 
to protect the command against continuing to 
depend upon an officer who is unable to properly 
perform duty, and yet to interfere in the least 
possible manner with the activities of the officer 
concerned. When no conditions of import are 
noted, no action is required. The discovery of 
conditions of import may only require imparting 
of appropriate clinical advice; or it may require 



15-77 
Change 69 



15-45A 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



1S-45A 



consultations, or continuing observation, or 
ambulatory treatment in a duty status; or hospi- 
talization either immediately or at some oppor- 
tune time in the future. Indiscriminate or 
repeated transfers to a hospital are to be avoided 
with preference given to consultant studies from 
a duty status. Officers hospitalized for study or 
treatment as a result of a physical examination 
shall be further reported upon by a medical 
board prior to discharge from the hospital. 

(7) Reporting.- — In all cases where an exami- 
nation is required, an SF 88 shall be prepared in 
such completeness as necessary and shall contain 
entries regarding opinions and recommendations 
of the examiner. The SF 88 may be either hand- 
written in black or blue-black ink or typed. 
Should the examination not be required, the 
reason shall be entered on an SF 600 and filed in 
the officer's Health Record (see art. 
15-45(2)(e)). The original SF 88 and question- 
naire shall be filed in the officer's Health Record 
except in the following cases: 

(a) Flag and General Officers. — Submit 
original SF 88 and questionnaire to BUMED 
(Code 3322). File copy of SF 88 and question- 
naire in officer's Health Record. 

(b) Special Categories Such as Divers and 
Aviation Personnel. — Submit original SF 88 and 
questionnaire to BUMED in accordance with 
applicable guidelines set forth elsewhere in this 
chapter. File copy of SF 88 and questionnaire in 
officer's Health Record. 

15-45A. Annual Physical Examination of 
Certain Enlisted Members 

(1) Purpose.— The purpose of the examina- 
tion is to detect acute or chronic incipient disease 
processes, thereby permitting early therapy; and 
to determine the presence of defects which might 
be expected to preclude reasonable performance 
of sea or field duty or which might be a hazard 
to the member in the performance of such duty. 

(2) To Whom Applicable.— -Enlisted, active- 
duty, members (both male and female) who 
have not otherwise undergone a complete physi- 
cal examination within 12 months: 

(a) Age 40 and over, Navy and Marine 
Corps, shall receive a physical examination 
within 30 days of their birthdays. 

(1) Applicable aviation personnel, shall 
be examined in accordance with section V of this 
chapter. 

(b) Marines who are 36 years of age or 
older, serving at Marine Corps bases or camps, 
recruit depots, air stations, air facilities, Marine 
Corps Schools at Quantico, and with Fleet 
Marine Force units, shall receive a physical exam- 
ination within 30 days of their birthdays, to 
determine physical fitness for combat readiness. 



(c) Under age 40, female, shall be encour- 
aged to request an annual physical examination 
similar to that for female officers in article 15-45. 
(Instructions concerning the annual physical 
examination of inactive enlisted members of the 
Naval and Marine Corps Reserve are contained in 
article 15-76.) 

(3) Responsibility For.— Commanding officers 
are responsible for instituting whatever proce- 
dures may be necessary to insure that the mem- 
bers in (2) (a) and (b) obtain the required 
examinations. 

(4) Conducted By. — The examination may be 
conducted by any medical officer of the Depart- 
ment of Defense on active or inactive duty. Inso- 
far as practicable, the examination shall be 
accomplished by Medical Department personnel 
organic to the member's unit. Attention is 
directed to article 15-59 for applicable aviation 
personnel. 

(5) Scope of Examination. — The examination 
shall be sufficiently thorough, including 14 x 17 
inch X-ray and history taking, to be reasonably 
certain that the member is free of incipient dis- 
ease or functional impairment. Evidence of func- 
tional impairment or maladjustment is to be 
evaluated with such diagnostic, consultant, or 
hospitalization procedures as are indicated. Hos- 
pitalization should only be effected if necessary 
for completion of indicated studies or for evalua- 
tion of the significance of abnormalities noted. 

(6) Disposition. — When significant defects are 
detected, it shall be the responsibility of the 
examining medical officer to inform the mem- 
ber's commanding officer of the existence of such 
defects and make specific recommendations for 
such corrective or remedial measures as may be 
deemed appropriate. 

(7) Reporting Procedures. — The results of the 
examination shall be recorded on the SF 600, 
except in the case of aviation personnel, The 
entry shall include the date of examination, title 
of the examining activity, all defects noted, 
specific comment as to physical fitness for per- 
formance of duties, at sea, foreign shore, or in 
the field, as appropriate, and the signature of the 
medical examiner. For members in article 
15^5A(2) (a) and (b) not needing a birthdate 
examination by reason of another complete 
examination during the past 12 months, an entry 
as to the obviating examination shall be made on 
the SF 600 during the birthdate period. A copy 
of the report of annual physical examination is 
not required nor desired in BUMED, except in 
the case of aviation personnel. Disposition of SF 
600's shall be in accordance with article 16-48. 

(a) The recording and forwarding of physi- 
cal examinations of applicable aviation personnel 



15-78 
Change 69 



15-46 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-48 



shall be in accordance with article 15-73 or 
15-<59(8)(d). 

15-46. Physical Examination of Naval 

Academy Midshipmen, and NESEP 
and NROTC Applicants and Students 

(1) A periodic and precommissioning physical 
examination of Naval Academy midshipmen 
shall be conducted in accordance with regulations 
governing the Naval Academy and at such time 
as may be determined by the Superintendent. 

(2) Applicants for the NESEP and NROTC 
programs must meet the physical standards of 
article 15-7 through 15-25 A. The completed 
SF-88 and SF-93 shall be submitted in accordance 
with article 15-82. 

(3) An annual physical examination of NESEP 
and NROTC students is not required; however, 
the commanding officer of each unit is responsi- 
ble for insuring that each student completes a 
NAVMED 6120/3 form annually during the fall 
semester, and again during the spring semester 
immediately prior to graduation. In the event a 
student answers "YES" to question one, the com- 
manding officer shall submit copies of abstracts 
of treatment, narrative summaries, or other avail- 
able medical records pertaining to the injury, 
illness, or disease resulting in hospitalization or 
absence from school, to CHBUMED (Code 3322) 
for review. Students answering '"YES" to ques- 
tion two must be referred to the nearest Federal 
medical facility for evaluation of the alleged de- 
fect. A copy of the evaluation report is to be 
submitted to CHBUMED (Code 3322) for review. 
Evaluation reports from civilian consultants are 
acceptable if a Federal medical facility is not 
available. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the 
commanding officer is responsible for submitting 
a report to CHBUMED (Code 3322) on any stu- 
dent who at any time becomes disabled for a sig- 
nificant period of time or contracts a disease or 
injury that may render him "Not Physically 
Qualified" for commissioning. The completed 
NAVMED 6120/3 form is to be filed in the stu- 
dent's field Health Record. NAVMED 6120/3 
forms may be ordered through the supply system 
as directed in NAVSUP PUBLICATION 2002 
for COG II items. 

(4) NROTC AND NESEP students must re- 
ceive a complete physical examination within 1 
year prior to the anticipated date of commission- 
ing. The completed SF-88 and SF-93 are to be 
submitted in accordance with article 15-82, not 
later than 1 October of the year prior to the 
anticipated date of graduation. Embarkation 



points receiving NROTC students for their first 
class cruise shall arrange for precommissioning 
physical examinations to be conducted at the 
local Navy medical facility. NESEP students shall 
receive their precommissioning physical exam- 
ination during their summer indoctrination. 
However, units located in close proximity to 
Navy medical facilities should utilize those facil- 
ities to the maximum extent possible, consistent 
with class schedules, submission date deadline, 
and the 1-year validity period for precommis- 
sioning physical examinations. Orders shall be 
endorsed by the unit commanding officer to indi- 
cate whether or not a precommissioning physical 
examination is required at the embarkation point 
in the case of NROTC students, or during the 
indoctrination session for NESEP students. 

15-47. Promotion of Navy and Marine Corps 
Officers on Active Duty 

(1) See BUPERS Manual article 2220150 and 
MCO P1400.29, paragraph 2405.1b, for current 
policy on promotion physical examinations for 
officers on active duty. 

15-48. Separation From Active Duty 

(1) Prior to separation from active duty, every 
member shall be given a thorough physical 
examination. All necessary tests and examinations 
shall be completed, interpreted, and properly 
recorded to insure that the member is, in fact, 
physically qualified for release from active service 
prior to actual date of release. Pelvic examination 
of female members shall be included as part of 
the examination. (See BUMEDINST 6120.6 
series for further information concerning separa- 
tion physical examinations; and see art. 16-13 for 
examination of member convicted and held by 
civil authorities.) 

(2) Whenever physical conditions are discov- 
ered which may have serious import, the member 
should be referred to a naval hospital for such 
consultations or examinations as may be indi- 
cated to thoroughly evaluate his physical fitness. 
If a physical disability is found which is 
sufficient to disqualify the member for continua- 
tion on active duty, the member shall be reported 
upon by a medical board before separation from 
active duty. 

(3) Results of the examination, listing all 
defects or disabilities noted, shall be reported on 
SF 88 or in the body of the medical board's 
report, as appropriate. 

(4) When a member is examined for transfer 
to the Fleet Reserve, a report of examination (SF 

9- 



15-79 
Change 74 



15-48 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-48 



88) shall be filed in the member's Health Record. 
If the member is physically qualified for duty at 
sea (or at sea and in the field for Marine Corps 
members) and for release from active duty, 
BUPERS or MARCORPS shall be so advised, ref- 
erencing the application for transfer to the Fleet 
Reserve. If the member is not considered physi- 
cally qualified for release, the case shall be 
referred to a medical board for appropriate dis- 
position. 

(5) The member who has appeared before a 
physical evaluation board incident to being sepa- 
rated from active duty need not be reexamined 
physically at the time of separation unless it is 
considered that his physical condition has materi- 
ally changed subsequent to his case being heard 
by the physical evaluation board or unless the 
member alleges that such is the case. 

(6) No member with venereal disease in a 
communicable state shall be released from the 
naval service until the individual has been ren- 
dered noninfectious and is not a menace to the 
public health. (See BUMEDINST 6222.7 series.) 
The following policies shall be strictly adhered 
to: 

(a) A' presumptive and/or standard serologic 
test for syphilis shall be made on all persons 
about to be discharged or released from active 
duty. This test must be made within 30 days of 
the date of separation and the results recorded on 
the Standard Form 600. 

(b) Personnel who on physical examination 
have signs, symptoms, or findings of a venereal 
disease in an infectious state should be retained 
in service and transferred to a naval hospital for 
further diagnostic study and treatment, if neces- 
sary, 

<c) All Health Records shall be thoroughly 
checked and those containing an entry indicating 
that the individual has or has had a venereal 
disease, or that the blood test made just prior to 
separation is reported as positive or doubtful, 
shall be reviewed by a medical officer and the 
individual grouped in one of the following cate- 
gories and handled accordingly. 

(1) Category A. — Includes all personnel 
with a history of venereal infection who have 
completed recommended treatment and have had 
some followup examinations including spinal 
fluid examinations as well as serologic test. These 
individuals shall be personally interviewed and 
given both verbal and printed advice 
(NAVMED-P-5011) relative to their status and 
previous treatment. The Separation Epidemio- 
logic Report (MED-6222-7) (PHS Form 61) is 
not required in these cases. 



(2) Category B. — Includes all personnel 
who have a history of venereal disease infection 
and have completed recommended treatment but 
require further followup examinations. This 
includes cases of treated syphilis that have less 
than 1-year followup examination and also 
includes treated cases of gonorrhea that have not 
had one blood test within 3 months following 
treatment. 

(a) These individuals shall be person- 
ally interviewed and given both verbal and 
printed advice (NAVMED-P-5012) relative to 
their status and previous treatment. 

(b) Indicate on NAVMED-P-5012 the 
exact followup examinations required and when 
these should be done. (Refer to NAVMED-P- 
5052-11A, Treatment and Management of Vene- 
real Diseases, for the exact followup requirements 
for specific diseases.) 

(3) Category C, — Includes all personnel 
who have a positive or doubtful separation blood 
test but no history of venereal infection and 
whose physical examination reveals no clinical 
signs or symptoms of venereal disease. 

(a) These individuals shall be person- 
ally interviewed and given both verbal and 
printed advice (NAVMED-P-5013) relative to 
their status. They should be given either the 
privilege of receiving hospitalization and treat- 
ment or separation from the service. They should 
be informed, however, that if complications 
develop and they have not received treatment 
while in service, it is probable they will be 
declared ineligible for benefits of service-con- 
nected disability. 

(b) If treatment in the service is 
elected, transfer to a naval hospital for diagnostic 
study. If indicated, treatment in the hospital 
should consist of a standard course of therapy. 
An individual need not be held for followup 
examinations but should be instructed to consult 
his private physician or report to a Veterans 
Administration Representative, or Venereal Dis- 
ease Clinic near his place of residence. Upon dis- 
charge from the hospital, handle as in Category 
B. 

(c) If treatment in the service is not 
elected, an individual should be referred to his 
private physician, to a Veterans Administration 
Representative, or to a Venereal Disease Clinic 
for treatment and followup examinations. 

(d) Complete the Separation Epide- 
miologic Report (MED-6222-7) (PHS Form 
691). A notation of any pertinent information 
(recent malaria, smallpox vaccination, infectious 
mononucleosis, etc.) contained in the Health 



15-80 

Change 74 



15-50 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-50 



Record that might explain the serological reac- 
tion should be placed under "Remarks" on this 
form. 

(7) When referring patients to civilian health 
agencies, reference should be made to the latest 
Directory of Venereal Disease Clinics as pub- 
lished by the U.S. Public Health Service. 

Note. — There is no article 15-49. 

15-50. Transfer of Personnel (Officer and 
Enlisted) 

(1) From One Station to Another Within the 
U.S. or From Ship or Ovearseas Station to Duty 
Station Within the U.S. — 

(a) Refer member to cognizant Medical 
Department facility for verification of medical 
acceptability for such transfer. In most cases, this 
verification will consist of (1) review of the 
member's assembled health, dental, and out-pa- 
tient treatment records; and (2) interview of the 
member to insure that he or she is not suffering 
from a condition which would preclude such 
transfer. 

(b) The Health Record shall be brought up 
to date before transfer. 



(2) From Duty Station Within the U.S. to Sea 
Duty or Overseas Shore Station. — 

(a) Refer member to cognizant Medical 
Department facility for such physical examina- 
tion as may be necessary to evaluate the mem- 
ber's physical fitness for such assignment. The 
purpose of this examination is to ensure assign- 
ing those personnel who may reasonably be 
expected to complete such a tour of duty. 

(b) Each member shall be questioned about 
his or her past and present physical condition 
with special inquiry for recent serious illness, 
injury, or operation. In evaluating an individu- 
al's physical fitness for such assignment, the effect 
of any physical conditions which may be found 
should be considered in relation to the member's 
age, experience, motivation, and the type of duty 
to which assigned. The member's health, dental, 
and outpatient treatment records shall be assem- 
bled and reviewed. Members ordered to remote 
or isolated duty stations should have no dental 
defects which are likely to require extensive or 
prolonged treatment. Where necessary, priority 
for dental treatment shall be given to individuals 
scheduled for such assignments to meet the antic- 
ipated transfer date. 



15-80a 

Change 74 



< 



( 



15-53 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-57 



15-53. Enlisted Applicants lor Service Schools 

(1) Enlisted applicants for assignment to 
service schools shall be processed in accordance 
with article 15-50(1) and shall meet such other 
physical requirements as may be set forth else- 
where in this Manual or other current instruc- 
tions. 

(2) Members requiring medical attention or 
who may require extensive dental treatment 
during the period of instruction shall be given 
such care as may be required on a priority basis 
to meet anticipated transfer dates. 

15-54. Applicants for Steward Ratings 

(1) When practicable, applicants for steward 
ratings shall be examined for the presence of 
intestinal parasites, which, if found, shall consti- 
tute cause for rejection. They shall also be exam- 
ined for venereal disease and shall not be 
accepted while such disease exists. To be accepted 
for this rating, applicants must not be subject to 
recurring skin disease, must be neat in appear- 
ance and clean in habits, and must be free of 
dental diseases, especially such conditions as 
heavy calculus deposits, Vincent's infection, gin- 
givitis, and periodontoclasia. Preference should 
be given to those candidates not requiring pros 
thodontic treatment. 

15—55. Prisoners 

< I ) All prisoners arriving at a naval place of 
confinement shall be examined by a Medical 
.Corps officer. (Screening prephysical examina- 
tions may be performed by paramedical person- 
nel.) See SECNAVINST 1640.9, Department of 
the Navy Corrections Manual. 

(2) Neither segregation nor restricted diet 
should be imposed as a disciplinary measure 
unless the medical officer certifies in writing 
that it will probably not result in any serious 
deterioration of the prisoner's health. 

15-56. Deserters 

(1) The physical examination of a deserter 
shall conform to the standards prescribed for 
entrance into the Navy, with special reference to 
the individual's mental condition including, if 
possible, an examination by a psychiatrist. The 
Medical Corps officer making the examination 
shall furnish the commanding officer a report 
thereof, including a statement of the nature and 
cause of any defects or disability found. 

15-57. Civil Employees 

(1) The commandant or commanding officer 
of each naval activity, having a board of U.S. 
Civil Service Examiners shall recommend to the 



U.S. Civil Service Commission, through the 
regional director, a Medical Corps officer of the 
Navy to be designated a member of that board 
for the purpose of conducting physical examina- 
tions and executing medical certificates free of 
charge for applicants for, and in some cases, 
occupants of, groups I, II, III, and IV(a) and 
IV(b) positions. The duties imposed on Medical 
Corps officers are primarily for the protection of 
the Government, and therefore, no fee shall be 
exacted for such examinations. In view of the 
liability under the Employees' Compensation Act 
and the Civil Service Retirement Act, careful exe- 
cution of this work is important. 

(2) Physical examinations of civilian employ- 
ees shall be made in accordance with existing 
rules and regulations of the Civil Service 
Commission, and with instructions issued by or 
under the direction of the Secretary of the Navy 
in regard thereto. 

(3) Reports of physical examinations shall be 
submitted on such forms as are required by the 
Civil Service Commission, and by or under direc- 
tion of the Secretary of the Navy. 

(4) Medical Corps officers shall make physical 
examinations of civilian employees or annuitants 
in connection with disability retirement under 
the Civil Service Retirement Act when requested 
to do so by the commandant or commanding 
officer or by the Civil Service Commission. It 
shall be understood that in no event shall a 
Medical Corps officer be required to leave his 
station for the purpose of making such an exami- 
nation, since only in cases where the applicant is 
able to appear will a Medical Corps officer be 
requested to make an examination. (For duties of 
Medical and Dental Corps officers in connection 
with the Employees' Compensation Act, reference 
should be made to sec. G, BUMEDINST 6320.31 
series.) 

(5) (a) The routine roentgenographic exami- 
nation of the chest of civilian employees of the 
Naval Establishment is authorized by law as part 
of the program for promoting and maintaining 
the health of Federal employees. 

(b) Whenever practicable, a roentgenogra- 
phic examination of the chest shall be made as 
part of the physical examination for employment 
within the Naval Shore Establishment. If it is 
impracticable to obtain the examination or to 
have the examination interpreted, arrangement 
for such examination shall be made at the first 
opportunity. Personnel who have roentgenogra- 
phic findings of possible future clinical signifi- 
cance shall receive the examination every 6 
months, where possible, using 14 x 17 inch film. 
Roentgenographic examination of the chest of all 



10 Feb 75 



15-81 

Change 83 



15-58 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-58B 



persons employed within the Naval Shore Estab- 
lishment shall be made, when practicable, im- 
mediately prior to leaving employment, except when 
such examination has been made, and recorded as 
without defect, within the previous 6 months. 

(c) For processing reports and records, see arti- 
cle 15-90. 

(6) Tuberculin skin testing of all persons employed 
within the Naval Shore Establishment having 
"negative" skin tests (defined in 15-91(3)(c)) shall be 
conducted, if practicable, once a year on a voluntary 
basis. These tests are mandatory for all persons with 
"negative skin tests" employed within the Naval 
Shore Establishment located in the Far East and 
other areas where the rate of tuberculosis is con- 
sidered high. Personnel in these areas who have posi- 
tive tuberculin skin tests must receive an annual chest 
X-ray in lieu of the tuberculin test. 

15-58. Evidence of Intoxication or Drug Addiction 

(1) Reference should be made to BUMEDINST 
6120.20 series for guidance in conducting and re- 
cording fitness-for-duty examinations. 

15-58A. Members on Temporary Disability Retired 
List 

(1) Statutory regulations require that members 
carried on the temporary disability retired list 
(TDRL) be examined at least once every 18 months. 
The examination shall be conducted in accordance 
with the guidelines in chapter 10 of the Disability 
Evaluation Manual. The primary purpose of the ex- 
amination is to evaluate any changes that may have 
occurred in the member's condition since he was last 
examined. The report of examination should include 
a description of any other defects that were incurred 
or discovered after the original retirement. Diagnos- 
tic laboratory and radiological procedures are to be 
employed only to the extent necessary to establish 
accurately the member's current status. The report 
shall include a statement by the examiner as to prog- 
nosis. 

(2) The Chief of Naval Personnel or the Comman- 
dant of the Marine Corps, as appropriate, issues 
orders for the periodic examinations. The original of 
these orders will be married with the applicable 
medical records at the departmental level and for- 
warded to the designated Armed Forces medical 
facility for scheduling and processing. Whenever 
possible, the examination shall be scheduled during 
the month specified on the "orders. 



(3) Upon completion of a periodic examination, 
the report of the examination shall be prepared in 
letter form and forwarded together with the medical 
records, within 15 working days, via the command- 
ing officer of the examining facility, to the Office of 
Naval Disability Evaluation (Team 4), 800 North 
Quincy Street, Arlington, Virginia 22217. 

15-58B. Physical Examination of Firefighting In- 
structor Personnel 

(1) Purpose. — To assure that members assigned 
duty as firefighting instructors and exposed to 
smoke and its associated constituents are in all re- 
spects physically qualified for such assignment. 

(2) When Conducted. — All officer and enlisted 
personnel assigned duty as firefighting instructors 
shall receive a complete medical examination prior 
to assignment for, and detachment from, such duty, 
and at least annually thereafter within 30 days of the 
member's birth date while assigned such duty. 

(3) Scope of the Examination. — The examination 
shall be sufficiently thorough to assure that the 
member is free of incipient disease or functional 
impairment, and continues to meet the physical 
qualifications enumerated in article 15-34A. In addi- 
tion, the following medical surveillance tests will be 
performed and entered in the Health Record: P. A. 
14 X 17 inch chest X-ray; audiogram; vision screen- 
ing; pulmonary function testing (i.e. VC, FVC, and 
FEVi); EKG;CBC(i.e. differential, white blood cell, 
hemoglobin, and hematocrit); urinalysis (i.e. albu- 
min, sugar, and microscopic); and liver function 
profile study. For personnel 35 years of age and 
older, these tests shall be supplemented by an exer- 
cise EKG such as the Master's two-step. 

(4) Evaluation and Disposition. — The evaluation 
should include all significant objective findings 
which substantiate clinical diagnosis. The P. A. 14 X 
17 inch chest X-ray should be read by a diagnostic 
roentgenologist informed of the member's duty as- 
signment. A memberpresenringa manifest or latent 
impairment which renders, or is likely to render, him 
unfit for duty as a firefighting instructor will be 
considered unfit for duty as a firefighting instructor. 
The decision regarding fitness for assigned duties 
and the continuance of duty during correction of 
disqualifying conditions (see article I5-34A) rests 
with the examining medical officer. Recommenda- 
tions for reassignment to other duties will be made 
in accordance with other, applicable directives and 
guidance. 



15-82 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



15-59 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-59 



Section V. AVIATION 

General Provisions 

Restrictions Until Physically Qualified 

Policies on Service Groups for Naval Aviators 

Examination and Standards for Class 1, Service Group I 

Standards for Service Group II 

Standards for Service Group III 

Reporting Examination of Class 1 Personnel 

Special Reporting on Personnel in Flight Training 

Standards for Candidates for Flight Training 

Reporting on Candidates for Flight Training 

Standards for Class 2 Personnel - . 



Examination for and Reporting of Fitness for Flying Duties 

Annual and Promotion Physical Examinations 

Boards of Flight Surgeons 

Recording and Forwarding of Physical Examinations 

15-59. General Provisions s 

(1) To promote safety and to provide uni- ' 
formity and completeness, an aviation physical J 
examination may be performed only by a flight 
surgeon or an aviation medical examiner who is J 
on active duty currently assigned to a flight sur- 
geon or an aviation medical examiner billet or 
aviation activity authorized by the Chief of 
Naval Personnel or by proper authority of the 
Army or Air Force to conduct such examinations. 
Only medical officers who have successfully ' 
passed a course at a school of aviation medicine 
of the U.S. Armed Forces leading to the designa- 
tion of aviation medical examiner or flight sur- ' 
geon are so designated. j 

(2) The object of the aviation examination, 
and the instructions incident thereto, is to select 
for aviation duty only those individuals who are , 
physically and mentally qualified for such duty, 
and to remove from such duty those who may 
become temporarily or permanently unfit because 
of physical or mental defect. The main objective 
in examining candidates for flight training is 
selection of individuals who can fly safely and 
continue to do so for at least 20 years. All present 
conditions or history of diseases which tend to be 
chronic, recurrent, or progressive shall be thor- 
oughly evaluated. After designation for aviation 
duty, the objective changes slightly. The exam- 
iner must now determine if the individual is 
physically and mentally qualified to fly and in 
what service group. Every attempt shall be made 
to protect the Navy's investment in the aviator 
and to keep him flying by use of the best medical 
treatment known. However, at no time must 
safety be compromised or the aviator's health 
endangered. Physical and mental qualifications 
will be based on the flight surgeon's determina- 
tion and opinion of the ability of individual 



Arcicle 
15-59 

15-60 
15-61 
15-62 
15-63 
15-64 
15-65 
15-66 
15-67 
15-68 
15-69 
15-70 
15-71 
15-72 
15-73 

aviation personnel to safely perform prescribed 
duties. In addition to the general service require- 
ments, certain special requirements as embodied 
within this section must be met by the various 
groups of individuals concerned with aviation. 

(3) (a) Through general usage the term 
"physical standards" has come to be interpreted 
too broadly. Specific standards are listed for 
enlistment, for appointment, for commission, and 
for entry into and retention in certain aviation 
programs. Once accepted, other than fulfilling 
specified requirements, the qualifications for 
continuation in any flying category will depend 
on the individual's ability to perform his pre- 
scribed duties. Only specific listed standards can 
be waived. Physical defects found on examina- 
tion cannot be waived and continuation will be 
based on the examining flight surgeon's opinion 
of an individual's qualification to perform his 
prescribed duties. f 

(b) An aviatibn physical examination, 
therefore, is an examination conducted to deter- 
mine whether or not a person is physically quali- 
fied and aeronautically adapted to engage in fre- 
quent aerial flights. The extent of the examina- 
tion is determined by the character of the duty to 
be performed by the person who will make such 
flights. 

(c) The aviation physical examination of a 
candidate for flight training will be more exten- 
sive than that required for a naval flight officer. 
Furthermore, the physical standards upon which 
qualification is based will obviously be more 
rigid for the candidate for flight training leading 
to the designation of naval aviator than those for 
a naval flight officer. Candidates applying for 
training which leads to appointment to a 
commissioned grade must meet the physical 
standards for general service in previous sections, 
unless a waiver of the physical standards is 



15-83 

Change 69 



15-59 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-59 



recommended by the Chief, Bureau of Medicine 
and Surgery, and is granted by the Chief of 
Naval Personnel or the Commandant of the 
Marine Corps, as appropriate. The term "flight 
or aviation physical examination" is technically 
incomplete unless the duty which the examinee is 
to perform is specified. 

(d) The Navy and Marine Corps need the 
best possible candidates. The selection of candi- 
dates involves an evaluation of the "whole man," 
including character, academic standing, refer- 
ences, special skills, motivation, and other attrib- 
utes in addition to the physical profile. Every 
effort shall be made to prevent instances wherein 
candidates are found to be not physically quali- 
fied on arrival at Pensacola. The submission of 
waiver requests, in accordance with article 15-35 
through 15-38, for outstanding candidates is 
encouraged. Such requests must be fully docu- 
mented. 

(e) There are several classifications of avia- 
tion personnel ranging from naval aviator to 
crewmember. The extent of the examination and 
the physical qualifications are technically differ- 
ent for each classification. Through general usage 
it has become the custom in the naval service to 
use the term "aviation physical examination" as 
an entity. When so used, consideration of the 
duties of the person concerned is presumed. For 
example, both a candidate for flight training and 
a naval flight officer are required to take a "flight 
or aviation physical examination," but the extent 
of the examination and the qualifications on 
which "pass" or "fail" is based in each case are 
different. The term "flight physical" or "aviation 
physical" will not be used in item 5 of the Stand- 
ard Form 88 as the purpose of the examination. 

(4) Equipment and personnel for conducting 
the physical examination for flying have been 
provided aboard aircraft carriers, at fleet air 
bases, within certain flag commands, at Navy and 
Marine Corps air stations, and at other aviation 
activities and commands to which flight surgeons 
or aviation medical examiners are attached. 

(5) Aviation personnel include all individuals 
who in the performance of their duty are 
required to make frequent aerial flights and 
certain nonflying personnel. Aviation personnel 
are divided into two classes: 

(a) Class 1. — Aviation personnel engaged in 
the actual control of aircraft, which includes 
naval aviators and student naval aviators. In this 
class are also included student naval flight sur- 
geons who are chosen to perform solo flights. 
Class 1 is further divided into service groups I, 
II, and III, based on the age of the aviator 
concerned and certain physical requirements 
indicated below in this section. 



(b) Class 2. — Aviation personnel not 
engaged in actual control of aircraft, which 
includes naval flight officers, technical observers, 
naval flight surgeons, aviation physiologists, avia- 
tion experimental psychologists, crewmembers, 
flight nurses, parachute jumpers, control tower 
operators, aircontrolmen, and other persons 
ordered to duty involving flying. 

(6) An individual who applies for training 
leading to the designation of one of the many 
categories of aviation personnel which have been 
listed above will be known as a candidate. When 
this term is used, it should be qualified to indi- 
cate the category for which the individual is a 
candidate; for example, "candidate for student 
flight nurses." By long usage, the term "candidate 
for flight training" indicates a person who is 
applying for training leading to one of the desig- 
nations in class 1. Because of the special require- 
ments for the "candidate for flight training," the 
special physical standards and comments on the 
reporting of physical examinations of this group 
are placed in a separate article below. Also pre- 
sented in a separate article is the special reporting 
for personnel who are actually taking part in 
flight training. These persons, though they fall 
in the category of class 1 personnel, must meet 
standards more rigid than those required for 
designated pilots of class 1. 

(7) Electrocardiograms. — 

■ (a) All students, designated naval aviators, 
and the designated naval flight officers on active 
duty shall have an electrocardiogram on file in 
their Navy Health Record. Those who do not 
have one shall be given one at the time of the 
next flight physical examination regardless of the 
purpose of the examination. The baseline electro- 
cardiogram shall be marked "not to be removed 
from Health Record" and shall be retained in the 
individual's Health Record until the record is 
permanently closed. A representative sample (or 
legible copy) of the electrocardiogram shall be 
forwarded to the Naval Aerospace Medical Insti- 
tute (Cardiology Department), Naval Aerospace 
Medical Center, Pensacola, Florida 32512. Each 
sample/copy electrocardiogram sent to Pensacola 
shall bear the individual's full name, grade or 
rate, file number, designator, duty status, duty 
station, age, height, weight, blood pressure, date, 
and presently recommended flight status (i.e., 
service group I, II, or III, for duty involving the 
actual control of aircraft (DIACA); duty involv- 
ing flying in administrative and/or operational 
flights, not in actual control of aircraft 
(NIACA); or for duty involving flying as a 
naval flight officer). 

(b) Electrocardiograms shall be obtained on 
all flight physical examinations conducted on 
naval aviators and naval flight officers on their 



15-84 

Change 69 



15-60 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-60 



27th, 30th, 33d, and 35th birthdays and yearly 
thereafter. The tracing shall be compared to the 
individual's baseline tracing in his Health 
Record. If significant changes are considered to 
be present, a cardiac consultation shall be 
arranged and a report thereof, together with an 
SF 88 in duplicate, shall be submitted to 
BUMED. Each new electrocardiogram shall be 
sent to the Institute at Pensacola bearing the data 
required in (7) (a) above. 

(8) Abnormal Hemoglobin, Including Sickle 
Cell Trait. — All class 1 and class 2 aviation per- 
sonnel of ethnic origin known to have a high 
incidence of abnormal hemoglobin, including 
sickle cell trait, shall have a sickle cell prepara- 
tion test or similar test for sickling phenomenon 
performed at the time of the initial flight physi- 
cal examination. The test results shall be 
recorded in item 50 of SF 88. Positive test for 
sickling is considered a disqualifying defect for 
performance of duty involving aerial flight. 

(9) Examination. — 

(a) The medical examination for duty 
involving flying shall be limited to members of 
the aeronautical organization and candidates 
authorized by the Chief of Naval Personnel, 
Commandant of the Marine Corps, or command- 
ing officers of ships, stations, and specified units 
of the aeronautical organization. In examining a 
person who is either a candidate for or who is 
already a member of the aeronautical organiza- 
tion, the examination shall be an appropriate 
complete aviation physical and once begun shall 
be completed. All candidates, and when specified 
other individuals, must, as the first step of their 
examination, fill out a Standard Form 93, Report 
of Medical History, in duplicate. The completed 
form shall be reviewed by the examining physi- 
cian and all items checked affirmatively shall be 
clarified or elaborated on. Direct questioning of 
the examinee concerning his past and present 
physical condition for serious illness, injury, or 
operation cannot be overemphasized. An exami- 
nee who has received medical care which could 
significantly affect his physical status shall be 
required, when indicated and practicable, to 
submit a statement fr^xii the attending physician. 
A history of familial disease shall be evaluated 
and investigated when indicated. 

(b) After evaluation of the Standard Form 
93, the flight surgeon shall proceed with the 
appropriate physical examination. The results of 
the physical examination shall be recorded in the 
rough on a Standard Form 88, Report of Medical 
Examination, which shall be placed on file by the 
examining room after the information has been 
utilized in completing the appropriate report for 



forwarding to higher authorities in accordance 
with existing regulations and instructions. 

(c) A satisfactory medical examination must 
be thorough in its performance and recording so 
as to dispel all reasonable questions about any 
defect and contain sufficient information to sub- 
stantiate the final recommendation made by the 
examining physician. Before signing and for- 
warding, the completed report of medical exami- 
nation shall be reviewed by the examining physi- 
cian for completeness and accuracy. Failure to do 
so reflects seriously on the credibility of the 
examination and on the thoroughness of the 
examiner. It must also be remembered the 
reviewing section of the Bureau of Medicine and 
Surgery does not have the advantage of a direct 
examination and must rely on the examiner's 
verbal picture and appropriate additional infor- 
mation in arriving at a decision. 

(10) An individual from another military 
service assigned to the U.S. Navy for training or 
duty shall be subject to the same requirements 
and standards set forth in this section V, only 
insofar as safety and personal well-being are 
concerned. In all other respects, it has been the 
policy of the U.S. Navy to accept the physical 
standards of the military service by which the 
individual has been found qualified for general 
military service and for the specified duty involv- 
ing flying. 

15-60. Restrictions Until Physically Qualified 

(1) Frequency of Physical Examination.— 

(a) Officer Personnel. —All aviation officer 
personnel, whether Class 1 or Class 2, will 
undergo an annual aviation physical examination 
(see art. 15-71(1)). 

(b) Enlisted Personnel.— All aviation en- 
listed personnel, except as listed below, will 
undergo an aviation physical examination within 
30 days of the anniversary of their date of birth 
at age 21, 24, 27, 30, 33 and 36, and annually 
thereafter. 

(1) Exceptions requiring annual physical 
examinations: 

(a) Aviation physiology technicians 
assigned to chamber duties. 

(b) Crewmembers assigned sea-air 
rescue Navy Enlisted Classifications (SAR NEC). 

(c) Personnel engaging in flights in air- 
craft equipped with ejection seats. 

(d) Aircontrollers and control tower 

operators. 

(e) Enlisted crewmembers responsible 
for or in control of actual flight instruments (e.g., 
flight engineers). 



26 Mar 75 



15_85 

Change 84 



15-61 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-61 



(f) Personnel performing as crewchief 
on vertical underway replenishment missions, 

(g) AW personnel serving as heli- 
copter crewmen. 

(c) Naval aviation personnel are considered 
to have passed an aviation physical examination 
when a flight surgeon or board of medical officers, 
one of whom is a flight surgeon, find that, in con- 
sideration of the qualifications prescribed in this 
Manual, the examinee is physically qualified and 
aeronautically adapted for flight duties appro- 
priate to his designation or candidate status. 
Except as authorized under subarticles (5) and (6) 
below, no person shall assume dury involving 
actual control of aircraft until notification has 
been received from the Bureau of Medicine and 
Surgery that such person is physically qualified 
for that duty. 

(2) Candidates for flight training who fail to 
attain the qualifying scores on psychological 
tests, as specified in technical memoranda and 
directives of BUMED, will not be recommended 
for assignment to flight training. 

(3) (a) All candidates for any category of 
aviation personnel, whether or not they are 
already in the naval service, must pass the appro- 
priate flight physical examination before assign- 
ment to duty involving instructional flight. The 
date on which this examination was conducted 
must not antedate such assignment by more than 
12 months. 

(b) The candidate shall be informed that he 
shall be subject to further examination as pre- 
scribed in paragraph (3)(c) below to ascertain 
if there has been any appreciable change in his 
physical qualifications subsequent to enlistment. 

(c) All candidates for one of the many cate- 
gories of aviation personnel, not limited to candi- 
dates for flight training, upon reporting to the 
Chief of Naval Air Training, but before being 
assigned to duty involving instructional flight, 
must be given a complete aviation physical exam- 
ination. This examination shall include an elec- 
troencephalogram and an electrocardiogram to 
detect latent defects and to ensure that there has 
not been an omission in compilation of the indi- 
vidual's Medical History (SF 93). Those who 
present an abnormality shall be subjected to addi- 
tional studies and may be brought before the 
Special Board of Flight Surgeons to determine 
their physical qualification for duty involving flying. 

(4) Pilots of the Ready Reserve in a non- 
drill-pay status who apply for permission to pilot 
naval aircraft shall be subjected to the examina- 
tion prescribed for class 1 herein unless they 
present satisfactory evidence that they have 
passed such an examination within 6 months 



prior to the date on which the flight is desired. 
For Selected Reserve and Ready Reserve pilots in 
a drill-pay status who serve under and are so 
authorized by the Chief of Naval Air Reserve 
Training or Commander, Marine Air Reserve 
Training, the interval shall be not greater than 
12 months. 

(5) Pending receipt of the approved copy of 
the record of physical examination, or certificate 
from the Chief of Naval Personnel or the 
Commandant of the Marine Corps that the record 
of physical examination has been approved, avia- 
tion personnel may be considered physically 
qualified if an authorized flight surgeon or avia- 
tion medical examiner certifies that the individ- 
ual has no physical or mental defect that would 
disqualify him for flying. 

(6) When the flight status of any member of 
the aeronautical organization has been restricted 
by letter from the Chief of Naval Personnel or 
Commandant of the Marine Corps, such restric- 
tion remains technically in effect until it is 
changed by subsequent letter from the same 
authority. However, to avoid delay in the return 
to flight status of persons who are clearly quali- 
fied to perform such duties, commanding officers 
are authorized, after consideration of the recom- 
mendation of a flight surgeon, to waive this tech- 
nical restriction pending the final action of the 
Chief of Naval Personnel or the Commandant of 
the Marine Corps. When the Chief of Naval Per- 
sonnel or the Commandant of the Marine Corps 
places or lifts flight restrictions because of the 
results of a physical examination, his action is 
always based on the opinion of the Chief of the 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. Submitting the 
original and two copies of Standard Form 88 
(physical examination) directly to BUMED is all 
that is necessary to accomplish reconsideration by 
the Chief of Naval Personnel or the Comman- 
dant of the Marine Corps of any restriction, 
based on physical condition or lack of aeronauti- 
cal adaptability, placed by him on persons in the 
aeronautical organization. (See art. 15-73 
(2)(b).) 

15-61. Policies on Service Groups for Naval 
Aviators 

(1) Assignment. — The following policies 
shall, in general, be followed in the assignment 
of aviators to flight duties: 

(a) Service Group I. — Aviators under 45 
years of age who meet the physical standards for 
service group 1. These aviators may be assigned 
to flight duties of an unlimited or unrestricted 
nature, 

(b) Service Group II. — Aviators under 45 
years of age who meet the physical standards for 



15-86 

Change 84 



26 Mar 75 



15-62 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-62 



service group II, and aviators of service group I 
who temporarily meet only the physical stand- 
ards for service group II. Aviators of service 
group II are restricted from carrier operations 
except in helicopter. 

(c) Service Group 111. — Aviators 45 years of 
age and over who meet the physical standards of 
service group I, II, or III and those aviators 
under 45 years of age who (1) are recovering 
from illness or injury or (2) meet the standards 
of service group III but are not physically quali- 
fied for the other service groups when the needs 
of the service and the individual's flying experi- 
ence specifically justify their employment in such 
a limited status. Those aviators assigned because 
of temporary physical defects shall be retained in 
service group III for a period up to 6 months, at 
the end of which time they shall be reexamined 
for classification. Should the temporary disability 
warrant a longer period in order to fully recuper- 
ate, they can be retained in this group for addi- 
tional 6-month periods before final classification 
is effected. Those aviators assigned for the need 
of the service shall be retained in service group 
III for only as long as the need exists. The Chief 
of Naval Personnel, or the Commandant of the 
Marine Corps in the case of Marine Corps per- 
sonnel, will effect appropriate redesignation as 
needs of the service require. 

(1) Service group III aviators shall nor- 
mally operate only aircraft equipped with dual 
controls and be accompanied on all flights by a 
pilot or co-pilot of service group I or II qualified 
in model aircraft operated. 

(2) With the approval of the Deputy 
Chief of Naval Operation (Air), or Comman- 
dant of the Marine Corps in the case of Marine 
Corps personnel, aviators in service group III 
who meet the physical standards for service 
group I or II may solo such aircraft as is 
commensurate with physical and service qualifi- 
cations of each aviator. Requests for solo/pilot in 
command waiver shall be submitted in accord- 
ance with OPNAVINST 3710.7 series or MCO 
3710.1 series. 

(3) Aviators in this group are authorized 
to maintain an instrument card provided all 
other requirements are met, 

(2) Physical Standards and Disposition. — 

(a) The physical standards for aviation per- 
sonnel in each of the foregoing service groups 
are set forth in articles 15-62, 15-63, and 15-64. 

(b) Should any aviator fail to meet the pre- 
scribed physical standards for flying of his service 



group, and the physical defect which caused such 
failure is expected to exist longer than 30 days, 
such failure shall be recorded by completing 
Standard Form 88, and the report shall be for- 
warded to BUMED with a specific recommenda- 
tion by the flight surgeon. BUMED will then 
submit its recommendation to the Chief of Naval 
Personnel or to the Commandant of the Marine 
Corps in the case of Marine Corps personnel. In 
general, one of the following dispositions will 
apply: 

(1) Permitted to continued unrestricted 
flight status of his service group subject to 
waiver of the standards by the Chief of Naval 
Personnel, or the Commandant of the Marine 
Corps in the case of Marine Corps personnel. 

(2) Restricted to flight duties of next 
service group; that is, from I to II, or II to III. 

(3) Restricted to flight duties of lessened 
tempo commensurate with present temporary 
physical condition (limited to aviators recuperat- 
ing from injuries or illness). 

(4) Restricted to flight duties of service 
group III, requiring the presence of a pilot or 
copilot qualified in service group I or II. 

(5) Restricted from all duties involving 
flying with statement concerning whether a dis- 
qualifying defect is considered temporary or per- 
manent. 

(c) In those cases where an aviator fails to 
meet the standards or qualifications for flying in 
an appropriate service group, for flying in any 
capacity or where a decision cannot be made by 
the examining flight surgeon, consideration shall 
be given to the appearance of the aviator before 
an appropriate board of flight surgeons. See 
article 15-72. 

(d) In cases where recommendation is made 
to terminate flight status, the Chief of Naval 
Personnel, or the Commandant of the Marine 
Corps in the case of Marine Corps personnel, will 
determine if the individual shall be retained 
within the aeronautical organization or assigned 
to duty outside the aeronautical organization. 



15-62. Examination and Standards for Class 1, 
Service Group I 

(1) GENERAL EXAMINATION.— Except as 
modified by addition of the provisions of this 
article, the basic physical examination and basic 
physical standards for first acceptance in service 



26 Mar 75 



15-87 

Change 84 



15-62 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-62 



group I shall be the same as those prescribed for 
commission. Continuation in service group I will 
be determined by the provisions set forth in this 
article and article 15-59(3) (a), 

(2) HISTORY.— History of any of the follow- 
ing shall be considered as disqualifying: seizures, 
isolated or repetitive (grand mal, petit mal, psy- 
chomotor or Jacksonian), narcolepsy or cata- 
plexy, head injury complicated by unconscious- 
ness in excess of 24 hours or post traumatic 
amnesia or impaired judgment exceeding 48 

hours, repeated attacks of acute allergy, hay fever 
allergic rhinitis, gastric or duodenal ulcer with or 
without hemorrhage, repeated use of hallucinatory 
drugs or narcotics, herniated nucleus pulposus with 
or without surgical treatment, ulcerative colitis or 
proctitis, psychosis, psychoneurosi s, personality 
disorders (arts. 15-21(2), (3), and (4) refer), recent 
attacks of malaria, paroxysmal tachycardia, any 
organic heart disease, heart surgery, recurrent 
attacks of any of the rheumatic group, recent 
renal calculus, encephalitis Iethargica or any ill- 
ness accompanied by diplopia and lethargy, or 
recurrent pneumothorax. For persons already in 
the Navy, a complete review of the examinee's 
Health Records is most important. Flight sur- 
geons are authorized to postpone the examina- 
tion of persons who fail to present their Health 
Record at the time of examination. In exercising 
this prerogative, due consideration must be made 
in cases where access to the individual's Health 
Record is administratively impracticable. In such 
cases the examinee shall be required to complete 
Standard Form 93. When Standard Form 93 is 
employed as part of a physical examination 
(mandatory for all candidates) some comment 
must be made by the flight surgeon when any 
significant item is checked by the examinee. 

(3) THERAPEUTICS AND GENERAL FIT- 
NESS. — A notation shall be recorded on the 
Standard Form 88 on individuals receiving medi- 
cation or other therapeutic procedures within 24 
hours of a flight physical examination. In gen- 
eral, individuals requiring therapeutics or who 
have observed lowering of general fitness (die- 
tary, rest, emotional, etc.) which might affect 
their flying proficiency shall not be found quali- 
fied for duty involving flying. See article 15-70 
and OPNAV Instruction 3740 series. 
(4) HEIGHT AND WEIGHT. — 
(a) Height. -The minimum height is 64 inches. The 
maximum height is 78 inches. Providing: 

(1) The sitting height is not less than 32 inches 
nor more than 41 inches. Record in parentheses in 
item 51 of the Standard Form 88. 

(2) The buttock-leg length is not less than 36 
inches nor more than 50 inches. Record in margin 
above item 51 of the Standard Form 88 as: BLL= 

(3) These measurements shall be obtained on all 
class I personnel and naval flight officers and re- 
corded to the nearest tenth of an inch in accordance 



with article 16-38(2)(u). Also see article 16-74, 
illustration 2A. 

(b) Weight. — Minimum and maximum 
weights shall be in accordance with the weight 
standards for aviation personnel, article 15-17 
(2), table 2. Even though an individual's weight 
is within the maximum standards, he shall be 
reported as not physically qualified when the 
examining physician considers that the weight in 
relation to the body structure and musculature 
constitutes obesity of such a degree as to interfere 
with the satisfactory performance of his duty 
involving flying. 

(5) CHEST. — Any condition that serves to 
impair respiratory function may be cause for 
rejection. The examinee, if an average-sized indi- 
vidual, should normally have not less than 3 
inches of chest expansion. A variation of Vi inch 
is allowable if the individual is otherwise accept- 
able. Pulmonary function tests are recommended 
in borderline cases. 

(6) CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM. — Card iac 
arrhythmia, or heart murmur, or other evidence 
of cardiac abnormality shall be the cause of 
careful study, to include appropriate consulta- 
tions and electrocardiographic studies. Evidence 
of organic heart disease shall be cause for rejec- 
tion Also see article 15-62(7). 

(7) BLOOD PRESSURE AND PULSE RATE. 
— The neurocirculatory efficiency test (Schneider 
Index) is no longer required. There is no objec- 
tion in determining or recording the index, how- 
ever it shall not be used in determining qualifica- 
tion for duty involving flying. 

(a) Blood Pressure. — Shall be determined 
first after the examinee has been supine at least 5 
minutes and secondly after standing motionless 
for 3 minutes, preferably employing a mercurial 
sphygmomanometer. Prolonged bed rest shall not 
precede the determination of the blood pressure; 
however, due regard must be given to the age of 
the examinee and to physiological causes such as 
excitement, recent exercise, illness, and digestion. 
No examinee shall be rejected as the result of a 
single determination. When the blood pressure 
determination at the first examination is regarded 
as abnormal, the above procedure shall be 
repeated twice daily (in the morning and in the 
afternoon) for a sufficient number of days to 
enable the examiner to arrive at a definite conclu- 
sion. The first determination shall be recorded in 
item 57(B & C) and the repeat determination in 
item 73 of the Standard Form 88. Blood pressure 
determinations shall be made in accordance with 
the recommendations of the American Heart 
Association. The systolic reading shall be taken 
at the first ausculatory sound. The diastolic read- 
ing shall be taken when the ausculatory sound 
disappears. 



15-88 

Change 76 



2 Aug 72 



15-62 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-62 



(b) Interpretation of Blood Pressure Deter- 
m 'nations. — In examinees under 35 years of age, 
a persistent systolic blood pressure of 140 mm. or 
more is disqualifying. In examinees over 35 years 
of age the persistent systolic blood pressure of 
150 mm. or more is disqualifying. A persistent 
diastolic blood pressure of 90 mm. or more is 
disqualifying. When changing from the recum- 
bent to the standing position and remaining in 
that position for 3 minutes, if the systolic or 
diastolic blood pressure is found to be persist- 
ently more than 10 mm. below that of the recum- 
bent position, it is disqualifying. Systolic blood 
pressure persistently less than 96 mm. is disquali- 
fying unless a complete evaluation shows no 
cardiovascular or other abnormalities. 

(c) Pulse Rate. — Shall be determined first 
after the examinee has been recumbent at least 5 
minutes and then after standing motionless for 3 
minutes {both determinations to coincide with 
the recording of the blood pressure). In the pres- 
ence of a relevant history, arrhythmia or a pulse 
of less than 50 or over 110, an electrocardiogram 
shall be obtained. 

(d) Interpretation of Pulse Rate. — Resting 
pulse shall not persistently exceed 100. Standing 
pulse shall not persistently exceed 110. Pulse rate 
of 50 or under in the presence of a negative 
cardiac history and the absence of abnormal 
physical or electrocardiographic finding shall not 
in itself be considered disqualifying. 

(8) TEETH. — Any dental defect which would 
react adversely to sudden changes in the barome- 
tric pressure or produce indistinct speech by 
direct voice or radio transmission is disqualify- 
ing. 

(9) PSYCHIATRIC EXAMINATION.— Fol- 
lowing the completion of the general examina- 
tion, the examiner shall make a careful study of 
the examinee's family history for evidence of 
insanity, familial traits of psychoneurotic mani- 
festations, degenerations, and inherited deficien- 
cies, A candidate's personal history shall be 
searched for significant factors which relate to 
the formative years that affect his personality 
trend. The infantile period shall be searched for 
evidence of retardation. Consideration shall be 
given to examination of the family life, play life, 
school life, sex life and a careful search for epi- 
leptic equivalents. Determine the family attitude 
toward flying and the examinee's reaction to the 
stresses of life and his general emotional response 
and control. The object of the examination shall 
be to determine the individual's basic stability, 
motivation, and capacity to react favorably to the 
special stresses encountered in flying. Although 
this phase of the examination shall be performed 
routinely only on candidates for flight training 
who are otherwise physically qualified, it may, at 



the discretion of the flight surgeon be made a 
part of the examination of any aviation person- 
nel. Any significant personality change in an 
experienced aviator should be reported when the 
examiner knows the pilot well enough to note 
such a change. 

(10) NEUROLOGICAL EXAMINATION.— 
A careful neurological examination shall be 
made, attention being given to the following 
examinations and report of findings. 

(a) Pupils. — Regular, irregular, equal, une- 
qual, do or do not react to light and accommoda- 
tion. 

(b) Deep Sense (Romberg). — Negative, 
slightly positive or pronouncedly positive. 

(c) Deep Reflexes: Patellar, Biceps, etc. — 
Absent (o), diminished ( — ), normal (+), 
hyperactive {+ + ) and exaggerated (+ ++)• 

(d) Superficial Reflex — Abdominal, Crecas- 
teric, etc. — Any abnormalities found. 

(e) Sensory Disturbances. — Any abnormali- 
ties found. 

(f) Motor Disturbances. — Evidence of 
muscle weakness, paresis, or any other abnormal- 

ity ' 

(g) Trophic Disturbances. — Evidence of 
atrophy, compensatory hypertrophies, or any 
other abnormality. 

(h) Tremors. — State whether fine or coarse, 
and name parts affected. 

(i) Tics. — Specify parts affected. State 
whether they are considered to be permanent or 
due to fatigue or nervous tension. 

(j) Cranial Nerves. — Examine carefully for 
evidence of impaired function or paresis. It 
should be remembered that some of the cranial 
nerves are subject to frequent involvement in a 
number of important diseases, such as syphilis, 
meningitis, encephalitis lethargica, and injuries 
to the cranium. 

(k) Psychomotor Tension. — Ability to relax 
voluntarily. This shall be tested by having the 
examinee rest his forearm upon palm of exam- 
iner and then testing the tendon reflexes of the 
forearm with a percussion hammer. The flight 
surgeon should also keep himself informed 
regarding all indications of staleness in order to 
recognize the earliest manifestations of that 
condition. 

(1) Peripheral Circulation. — Examine for 
flushing, mottling and cyanosis of face, trunk 
and extremities. Question as to the presence of 
localized sweating {armpits and palm) and cold 
extremities. Any abnormalities disclosed on the 
neurological examination should be carefully 
studied and an opinion expressed as to their 
cause and significance and whether they are 
sufficient cause for rejection. 



15-89 
Change 69 



15-62 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-62 



(11) VISUAL ACUITY. — 

(a) Methodology. — Because of the extreme 
importance of accuracy, uniformity, and objectiv- 
ity in performing this test, the examiner should 
be thoroughly familiar with article 15-86. Visual 
acuity may also be determined with the Armed 
Forces Vision Tester (AFVT). See article 
15-87 A for instructions. 

(b) Interpretation of Findings. — Visual 
acuity shall be not less than 20/50 for each eye 
and if less than 20/20 must be correctable to 
20/20 each eye with standard lenses. When the 
visual acuity of either eye is less than 20/30, each 
eye shall be corrected to 20/20 and that correc- 
tion shall be worn at all times while flying. 

(c) The corrected visual acuity obtained 
with the glasses worn while flying will be 
reported in item 59 and their prescription 
entered in item 60 of the SF 88. 

(d) Corrective lenses shall be mounted in 
aviation frames. When required, prescription 
sunglasses may be supplied. The wearing of 
contact lenses is prohibited. 

(12) DEPTH PERCEPTION. — 

(a) Methodology. The AFVT is to be used 
to determine depth perception in accordance 
with the instructions in article 15-87A. When 
this instrument is not available the test may be 
accomplished on the Verhoeff stereopter and 
shall be conducted as directed in article 15-87B. 

(b) Interpretation of Findings. — 

(1) The AFVT is the preferred testing 
device. In problem cases, the results obtained by 
this method shall be considered final. 

(2) AFVT: An error in group B, C, or D 
is disqualifying. 

(3) Verhoeff: Failure to correctly report 
eight out of eight in two of three trials is dis- 
qualifying. 

(c) Reporting. — 

(1) Record name of test used in left-hand 
portion of item 65 of SF 88. 

(2) AFVT: In appropriate space of right 
hand portion of item 65, record the. letter desig- 
nation of the highest group passed; example: 
Passed F. 

(3) Verhoeff: In appropriate space of 
right-hand portion of item 65, record perfect 
score as 16/16. 

(13) OCULOMOTOR BALANCE.— 

(a) Methodology. — The vertical and lateral 
phorias may be tested for with the photometer 
(see art. 15-87) or with the AFVT (see art. 
15-87A). 

(b) Interpretation of Findings. — 

(1) Esophoria greater than 10 prism diop- 
ters is disqualifying. 



(2) Exophoria greater than 10 prism 
diopters is disqualifying. 

(3) Hyperphoria greater than 1.5 prism 
diopters is disqualifying. 

(4) Prism divergence at 20 feet and 13 
inches is optional and required only on candi- 
dates and on entering preflight. These tests shall 
be accomplished, however, on designated naval 
aviators who have sustained significant head 
injury, central nervous system disease, or who 
have demonstrated a change in their phorias. 

(14) RED LENS TEST.— Conduct only if 
indicated. 

(a) Apparatus. — A spectacle trial frame, a 
red lens from the trial lens case, a small light 
such as an ophthalmoscope with head removed, 
and metric rule or tape shall be used. 

(b) Procedure. — The examinee is seated in 
the darkroom facing the dark wall or tangent 
curtain at 75 cm. distance. The spectacle trial 
frame is adjusted into position and the red lens 
from the trial lens case is placed in one cell of 
the trial frame. With the examinee's head in a 
fixed position, the small lamp is held directly 
before the center of the dark wall or tangent 
curtain at 75 cm. distance from the eyes. The 
presence or absence of diplopia in this position 
(primary) is noted. The light is then slowly 
moved from the central position toward the right 
for a distance of 50 cm. in the horizontal plane. 
In the same manner, the light is moved in the 
remaining five cardinal directions, up and to the 
right, up and to the left, to the left, down and to 
the left, and down and to the right. The presence 
or absence of diplopia in any of these positions 
should be noted. Normally diplopia should not 
occur in any meridian within 50 cm. of the pri- 
mary position. In the presence of diplopia, nota- 
tion should be made as to whether it is crossed, 
homonymous, or vertical and the distance in 
centimeters from the central position at which 
diplopia first occurs should be recorded. When 
diplopia is suspected and the examinee has been 
coached to deny its presence, a prism of 3 or 4 D. 
may be placed, either base up or base down, in 
one cell of the trial frame. If diplopia is still 
denied, the statement is obviously untrue. 

(c) Precautions. — The head of the examinee 
must remain fixed and the movement of the light 
followed only by the eyes. No tilting or rotation 
of the face shall be permitted. 

(d) Interpretation of Findings. — Diplopia 
first occurring within 50 cm. of the primary posi- 
tion, in any meridian, disqualifies. 

(15) INSPECTION OF THE EYES. — 

(a) Procedure. — Whenever possible, the 
eyes are inspected by bright daylight. Every path- 



15-90 

Change 69 



15-62 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-62 



ologic condition and congenital anomaly is 
recorded. The following conditions may be 
found by this procedure: 

(1) Lids. — Ptosis, blepharitis, trichiasis, 
entropion, ectropion, and chalazion. 

(2) Tear Sacs. — Imperfect drainage. 

(3) Lower Puncta. — Failure of contact 
with bulbar conjunctiva. 

(4) Conjunctivae, — Trachoma and old 

scars. 

(5) Corneas. — Scars, pannus and ptery- 
gium. The wearing of contact lenses should be 
disclosed at this stage of the examination, 

(6) Pupils. — Unequal size, irregular 
shape, and failure to react to light or accommo- 
dation. 

(b) Interpretation of Findings. — Any path- 
ologic condition which may become worse or 
interfere with the proper functioning of the eyes 
under the fatigue and exposure of flying disquali- 
fies, 

(16) TEST FOR ACCOMMODATION. — 

(a) Procedure. — Accommodation is meas- 
ured from the anterior focus of the eye, which is 
about 11.5 mm. in front of the cornea. Using the 
millimeter rule, make a pencil mark on each side 
of the examinee's nose 11.5 mm. in front of the 
right and left cornea, respectively. In measuring 
the accommodation of the right eye, lay the flat 
side cf the Prince rule against the right side of 
the examinee's nose, with the end of the rule at 
the pencil mark. The rule is held horizontally 
and extends directly to the front, edge up. The 
card of test letters is held not more than 5 cm. in 
front of the examinee's right eye. His left eye is 
screened from sight of the letters by the flat side 
of the rule. The card of test letters is now carried 
slowly away from the eye and the examinee 
instructed to begin reading aloud the letters of 
the innermost line as scon as they become legi- 
ble. The card is halted the instant he begins to 
read the letters correctly and the point on the 
rule opposite the card is read off in diopters. This 
is the measure of accommodation of the right 
eye. To test the left eye, change the rule to the 
left side of the nose and repeat the above proce- 
dure, using a different line of letters. 

(b) Precautions. — The examinee is placed 
with his back to good light, with the card well 
illuminated. The card is started from close to the 
eyes and carried away from them. The letters of 
the test card are read aloud. The same line of 
letters is not used for testing both eyes. When 
any correction is required to correct distant 
visual acuity, this correction must be worn while 
testing accommodation. In such cases, the nota- 
tion "With Dist, Rx" shall be entered in the 
upper half of item 63 of the SF 88. 



(c) Interpretation of Findings. — The fol- 
lowing table gives the mean values of accommo- 
dation in diopters from 17 through 45 years of 
age. Accommodation may be regarded as within 
normal limits provided it is not more than 3 D. 
below the mean for the examinee's age. The 
examinee is disqualified if his accommodation 
falls more than 3 D. below the mean for his age, 
but before an examinee is disqualified, his accom- 
modation should be taken on three successive 
days and an average of the three findings deter- 
mined. Accommodation may be affected by 
fatigue, staleness, or other debilitating condi- 
tions. No individual having less than 2.5 D. of 
uncorrected accommodation will be considered 
qualified for service group I. 

Accommodation Power — Normal Mean Value for Age 
Age Diopters Age Diopters Age Diopters 



17 11.8 

18 11.6 

19 11.4 

20 11.1 

21 10.9 

22 10.7 

23 10.5 

24 10.2 

25 9.9 

26 9.7 



27 9.5 

28 9.2 

29 9-0 

30 8.7 

31 8.4 

32 8.1 

33 7.9 

34 7.6 

35 7.3 

36 7.0 



37 6.7 

38 6.4 

39 6-1 

40 5.8 

41 5.4 

42 5.0 

43 4.5 

44 4.0 

45 3.6 



(17) CONVERGENCE. — 

(a) Near Point of Convergence (PC). — The 
Prince rule and a pin with a white head 2 mm. 
in diameter shall be used. The end of the Prince 
rule is placed edge up, at the mark on the right 
side of the nose, 11.5 mm. in front of the cornea. 
The white-headed pin is held 33 cm. away in the 
medial line above the edge of the rule and the 
examinee is instructed to look at it intently. If 
both eyes are seen to converge upon the pin, it is 
then carried in the medial line, along the edge of 
the rule, toward the root of the nose. The exami- 
nee's eyes are carefully watched and the instant 
one is observed to swing outward, the limit of 
convergence has been reached. The point on the 
rule opposite the pin is then read in millimeters. 
This test is repeated until a fairly constant read- 
ing is obtained. Both eyes must converge upon 
the pin at the start of the test. The examinee's 
observation of the onset of diplopia is not relied 
upon to determine the near point, although he is 
asked to state when he sees double. 

(b) Interpretation of Findings. — A point of 
convergence (PC) greater than 70 mm. is dis- 
qualifying. 

(18) Deleted. 

(19) COLOR VISION.— Normal color per- 
ception is required. Color perception shall be 
determined and findings interpreted in accord- 



15-91 

Change 69 



15-62 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-62 



ance with the standards and procedures in article 
15-1 3 A. 

(20) FIELD OF VISION. — 

(a) Procedure, — The examiner faces the 
examinee at a distance of 2 feet. He instructs the 
examinee to close his left eye and to fix his right 
eye on the examiner's left eye, the examiner's 
right eye being closed. The examiner then brings 
his moving fingers in from the periphery, 
midway between himself and the examinee. The 
examinee is instructed to say when he sees the 
fingers, and how many. He should see them as 
soon as the examiner, if normal. The fingers are 
brought in from al! cardinal directions. The test 
is then repeated for the left eye. Any evidence of 
abnormality should be given detailed study on 
the perimeter. Normal fields are as follows: tem- 
porally 90 3 ; supero-temporally 62°; superiorly 
52°; superonasally 60°; infero-nasally 55°; inferi- 
orly 70°; infero-temporally 85°. 

(b) Interpretation of Findings. — The field 
of vision for each eye shall be normal as deter- 
mined by the finger fixation test. When there is 
evidence of abnormal contraction of the field of 
vision in either eye, the examinee shall be subject 
to perimetric study for form. Any contraction of 
the form field of 15° or more in any meridian 
shall disqualify. 

(21) REFRACTION. — 

(a) When Required. — Refraction of the eyes 
shall be required only on the original examina- 
tion, but must also be performed in cases when 
visual acuity falls to or below 20/30. Subsequent 
refractions shall be required only in the event of 
further decrement in visual acuity. 

(b) Procedure. — Before instilling a cyclo- 
plegic, it must be determined that the ocular 
tension is normal and that there is no evidence of 
glaucoma by ophthalmoscopic examination. 
Under the effects of a suitable cycloplegic, a reti- 
noscopic examination is conducted and the 
results of the refraction verified by having the 
examinee read the Snellen Charts. The minimum 
correction required to enable the subject to read 
20/20 is recorded for each eye. Correction beyond 
this level of visual acuity is neither indicated nor 
desired. For persons over 40 or for whom a cyclo- 
plegic is contraindicated, a manifest refraction is 
acceptable, but must be so designated. 

(c) Interpretation of Findings. — The exami- 
nee is disqualified if he cannot be corrected to 
20/20 for each eye or if he requires more than 
(minus)-1.25 diopters correction in any meridian 
(sphere and cylinder combined). 

(d) After the use of a cycloplegic the exami- 
nee must wear dark glasses until the effects have 
disappeared. The instillation into each eye of a 1 
percent solution of pilocarpine hydrochloride in 



distilled water will contract the pupil and thus 
relieve the photophobia. 

(22) OPHTHALMOSCOPIC EXAMINA- 
TION. — Any abnormality disclosed on ophthal- 
moscopic examination that materially interferes 
with normal ocular function disqualifies. Other 
abnormal disclosures indicative of disease, other 
than those directly affecting the eyes, shall be 
considered with regard to the importance of 
those conditions. 

(23) INTRAOCULAR TENSION. — 

(a) Requirements. — Intraocular tension 
determination shall be performed at the time of 
all aviation physicals and recorded. When prac- 
ticable all naval aviators will have tonometric 
measurement of the intraocular tension at the age 
of 35 and yearly thereafter. This examination 
shall be performed by a physician, optometrist, 
or a technician who has received instruction in 
the proper performance and interpretation of 
this test. Digital palpation should be done at 
other times and when a tonometer is not availa- 
ble. 

(b) Procedure. — Determination of the intra- 
ocular tension should be conducted after all other 
eye examinations have been completed. Because 
of corneal denuding by tonometric measurement, 
a refraction (cycloplegic or manifest) should not 
be performed for at least 24 hours following this 
procedure. (See art. 15-92 for special instruc- 
tion.) 

(c) Recording. — 

(1) Digital, — Normal, if such is the case. 

(2) Tonometric. — As mm Hg 

Schiotz with weight used, e.g., TOD 22,4 mm Hg 
Schiotz (5.5), in item 69 or 73 on SF 88. 

(d) Interpretation. — 

(1) Questionable findings on palpation 
and ophthalmoscopic examination should be 
referred to an ophthalmologist for tonometric 
measurement and further evaluation. 

(2) Tonometer readings consistently 
above 25. mm Hg Sch ; otz in either eye, or a 
difference of 5 mm Hg Schiotz between the two 
eyes, should be referred to the nearest military 
hospital glaucoma clinic for further evaluation. 

(24) EAR, GENERAL.— The external audi- 
tory canals and membranae tympani are exam- 
ined by means of a speculum and good light. A 
perforation or evidence of present inflammation 
d squalifies. The presence of a small scar caused 
by trouble several years previously, which has 
not recurred and with which there is no 
deficiency of hearing and no evidence of other 
inflammation, does not disqualify. Actual perfor- 
ation, or marked retraction of a drum membrane 
following chromic ear disease, disqualifies. 



15-92 

Change 69 



15-63 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-64 



(25) HEARING TESTS.— To determine audi- 
tory acuity, the following test shall be used: 

(a) Audtometric Examination. — An audi- 
ogram shall be obtained and recorded on all 
flight physical examinations if practicable. The 
frequencies of 250, 3000, 4000, 6000, and 8000 
will be for record and research purposes only. 
They shall not be used in evaluating the flight 
status. 

(b) Whispered Voice Test. — When an audi- 
ometer is not available the whispered voice test 
will be performed. A quiet room is essential. The 
examinee should stand 15 feet from the examiner 
with the ear being tested turned toward him, the 
ether ear being covered or closed. The examiner, 
after full expiration, will whisper a number or 
word and require the examinee to repeat it after 
him. Each ear shall be tested in turn. If the exam- 
inee is unable to hear at 15 feet, the examiner 
shall approach until he is able to distinguish the 
words or numbers, the distance being recorded in 
feet with 15 as the denominator. 

(c) Interpretation of Findings. — When an 
audiometric examination is not available, 15/15 
whispered voice in each ear is qualifying. If the 
auditory acuity is less than 15/15 whispered voice 
in either ear, the spoken voice shall be recorded 
for record and an audiogram must be obtained. 
Audiometric loss in excess of the limits set forth 
in the following table is disqualifying: 



Frequency 



500 1000 2000 3000 4000 6000 8000 
510 1024 2048 2896 4096 6144 8192 



Maximum 



decibel* 



ASA Standards : 
Better ear 
Worse ear 



20 
SO 



20 
40 



20 
40 



ISO Standard*: 
Better oar 
Worn ear 



35 
35 



SO 10 * » • • 

so so • * • • 



* No requirement — record for baseline information only, 

(26) NASO-PHARYNX.-A.ny abnormality 
disclosed on examination indicating an estimated 
50 percent or more of nasal obstruction, acute or 
chronic sinusitis, acute or chronic tonsilitis, nasal 
blockage, mechanical obstruction to drainage of 
accessory sinuses, occlusion of one or both Eus- 
tachian tubes (see art. 15-93, Valsalva's maneu- 
ver modified), or other abnormalities which may 
seriously interfere with normal function shall be 
cause for rejection. 

(27) EQUILIBRIUM.— 

(a) Self-Balancing Test. — The candidate 
stands erect, without shoes, with heels and large 
toes touching. He then flexes one knee to a right 
angle, being careful not to support it against the 
other leg, closes his eyes, and endeavors to main- 
tain this position for 15 seconds. Tne test is then 
repeated on the other foot. The findings are 
recorded as "Steady," "Fairly Steady," 



"Unsteady," or "Failed." The candidate should be 
instructed that this is an equilibrium test; there 
is no objection to his assisting his balance by 
moving and bending back and forth. 

(b) Interpretation of Findings. — Inability to 
pass this test for equilibrium satisfactorily shall 
be cause for rejection. 

15-63. Standards for Service Group II 

(I) Physical requirements for service group II 
shall be the same as those prescribed for service 
group 1, with the following variations: 

(a) Visual acuity shall be not less than 20/ 
100 for each eye. When the visual acuity of 
either eye is less than 20/30, each eye shall be 
corrected to 20/20 and that correction shall be 
worn at all times while flying. 

(b) When accommodation is tested, any 
correction that is required by (a) above must be 
worn and the notation "With Dist. Rx" entered 
in the upper half of item 63 of the SF 88. The 
test may be done binocularly. When accommoda- 
tion under these conditions is less than 2.5 diop- 
ters, it must be corrected by sufficient addition to 
accomplish 2.5 diopters of accommodation. This 
correction must be available at all times while 
flying. 

(c) When any correction is required for 
depth perception, the correction must be availa- 
ble at all times while flying. 

(d) No refractive limits are required. 

15-64. Standards for Service Group III 

(1) Physical requirements for service group 
III shall be the same as for service group II, with 
the following variations: 

(a) Visual acuity shall be not less than 20/ 
200 each eye. When the visual acuity is less than 
20/30 in either eye, each eye must be corrected to 
20/20 and the correction must be worn while 
flying. 

(b) There shall be no muscle imbalance 
(phoria of sufficient degree to result in diplopia 
within 50 cm. of the central position of the tan- 
gent curtain). 

(c) Except for personnel aboard ship, an 
audiogram shall be obtained. In general, defects 
in hearing shall not exceed the limits set forth in 
the following table. 



Frequency 



2S0 500 1000 2000 3000 40J0 6000 8000 
256 510 1024 2048 2896 4096 6144 S192 



Maximum 
loss in 



detibels 



ASA Standards: 
Better car 
Worse ear ' 



30 30 



30 
* 



ISO Standards: 
Better ear 
WorHe ear 



* 45 40 



* No requirement — record for baseline information only. 

Individuals who fail to meet these standards, but 
whose hearing in the opinion of the examining 

15-93 
Change 69 



15-65 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-67 



flight surgeon is commensurate with safety in 
flight, shall be further evaluated by the Naval 
Aviator's Speech Discrimination Test, The mini- 
mum passing score on this test is 70. 

(d) Accommodation. — When accommoda- 
tion is tested, any correction that is required by 
(a) above must be worn and the notation "With 
Dist. Rx" entered in the upper half of item 63 of 
the SF 88. The test may be done binocularly. 
When accommodation under these conditions is 
less than 2.5 diopters, it must be corrected by 
sufficient addition to accomplish 2.5 diopters of 
accommodation and the correction must be avail- 
able at all times while flying. 

(e) When a correction is required for depth 
perception, the correction must be available at all 
times while flying. 

(f) The diastolic blood pressure shall not 
regularly exceed 94 mm. The systolic blood pres- 
sure shall not regularly exceed 154 mm. 

15-65. Reporting Examination of Class 1 
Personnel 

(1) After the examination has been completed, 
the examiner shall make an assessment of the 
individual's qualifications for flying, based upon 
either a review of previous entries in the Health 
Record or the report of SF 93, the physical find- 
ings, and the result of the neuropsychiatric exam- 
ination. While no individual will possess all 
good traits, or all bad ones, the examiner shall 
summarize his impressions of the individual's 
aeronautical adaptability, which shall be 
recorded as favorable or unfavorable. When an 
individual is found to be physically qualified but 
his aeronautical adaptability is regarded as unfa- 
vorable, the entry of findings on SF 88, as finally 
recorded, shall be "Physically qualified but not 
aeronautically adapted." When an individual is 
found not aeronautically adapted, sufficient 
comment and information shall be furnished 
under "remarks" or "notes" to justify such a 
conclusion. When the report of examination of 
class 1 personnel is made to BUMED, the flight 
surgeon shall specify an appropriate service 
group. The flight surgeon may make any further 
recommendation or comment which he considers 
proper. 

(2) Flight surgeons are directed to use freely 
the space on the SF 88 entitled "remarks" or 
"notes." In this space, the flight surgeon may feel 
free to express his opinion on both specific 
defects and the overall capabilities of the exami- 
nee. Proper use of this space often converts a 
report from a mere recording of a mechanical 
examination to a valuable vital estimation of the 
qualifications of the examinee. A space 4 inches 
on the right side of item 73 and item 74 shall be 
reserved for the required BUMED endorsement 



(see art, 16—74 illustration 2A). Comments by 
the examinee or of his immediate superiors are 
occasionally most valuable especially when 
removal from flight status is recommended. 
Flight surgeons should enclose such comments in 
writing as addenda to the formal report when- 
ever such information is considered relevant to 
making a final recommendation. 

15-66. Special Reporting on Personnel in 
Flight Training 

(1) The standards for personnel in flight 
training are the same as class 1, service group I, 
except that whenever the uncorrected visual 
acuity of a person in flight training falls perma- 
nently below 20/20 in either eye, or whenever 
any other defect which is permanently disqualify- 
ing for appointment to ensign develops; a 
complete flight physical examination, including 
refraction under cycloplegic for cases of defective 
vision, will be done and the report shall be for- 
warded to BUMED. It is the policy of BUMED 
to advise the commanding officer concerned, by 
message, when a person already in flight training 
is considered, by BUMED, to be disqualified. 

15-67. Standards for Candidates for Flight 
Training 

(1) Candidates for flight training shall meet 
all the requirements of class 1, service group I, 
with the following additions or limitations: 

(a) Visual acuity must be not less than 20/ 
20 in each eye. 

(b) While under the effects of a 4 percent 
homatropine or 1 percent cyclogyl cycloplegic 
the candidate must read 20/20 with each eye 
with: 

(1) Total myopia no greater than 
(minus) —0.25 diopters in any meridian. 

(2) Total hyperopia no greater than 
(plus) +2.50 diopters in any meridian. 

(3) Astigmatism no greater than (plus) 
-f0.75 diopters. The astigmatic correction shall 
be reported in terms of the positive cylinder 
required. 

(c) Oculomotor Balance. — 

(1) The vertical and lateral phorias at 20 
feet shall be tested for with the phorometer (see 
art. 15-87) or with the AFVT (see art. 15-87A). 
It is extremely important that testing for hetero- 
phoria be completed before measuring prism 
divergence at near and far. 

(2) Prism divergence at 13 inches and 20 
feet shall be determined on all candidates. The 
tests shall be accomplished with the Risley rotary 
prism of the phorometer as described in article 
15-87. Because of its value in evaluating muscle 
balance, a permanent record of prism divergence 



15-94 
Change 69 



15-68 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-68 



shall be retained in the Health Record of all 
student and designated naval aviators. 

(3) Interpretation of Findings. — 

(a) Vertical and Lateral Pborias for a 
20 Foot Stimulus, — 

(1) Esophoria greater than 10 prism 
diopters is disqualifying. 

(2) Exopboria greater than 10 prism 
diopters is disqualifying. 

(3) Hyperphoria greater than 1 
prism diopter is disqualifying. 

(b) Prism Divergence at 20 Feet. — 

(1) Each diopter of esophoria within 
the 10 diopter maximum, must be compensated 
by an equal or greater amount of prism diver- 
gence at 20 feet. 

(2) Except as noted above, there are 
no disqualifying limits. 

(c) Prism Divergence at 13 Inches. — 
Less than 12 diopters is disqualifying. 

(d) Color Vision. — Normal color perception 
is required. Qualification shall be determined in 
the manner set forth in article 15-1 3 A. 

(e) Hearing. — An audiogram is required for 
all candidates. Audiometric loss in excess of the 
limits set forth in the following table is disquali- 
fying: 



. Frequency 



250 500 1000 2000 3000 4000 6000 8000 
256 510 1024 2043 28S6 4096 6144 8192 



Maximum 
loss in 
decibels 



ASA Standards: 
Better ear * 10 i B i S 35 
Worse car * 10 15 15 35 



50 
50 



ISO Standards: 
Better ear • 25 26 25 45 60 • • 
Worse tar * 25 25 25 45 60 * * 

*No requirement — .record for baseline information only. 

(f) Blood Pressure. — When the blood pres- 
sure estimation at the first examination is 
regarded as abnormal, or in the case of doubt, the 
procedure shall be repeated twice daily (in the 
morning and in the afternoon) for a sufficient 
number of days to enable the examiner to arrive 
at a definite conclusion. In the case of civilian 
candidates repeated blood pressure readings on 
one day will be acceptable when return on subse- 
quent days is impractical. 

(g) The Teeth. — Commissioned or warrant 
officers need meet only the standards in article 
15-62(8). All other candidates are required to 
meet the standards in article 1 5-9. 

(h) Must pass certain psychological tests 
promulgated by BUMED and administered in 
accordance with current BUMED instructions. 

(i) Must demonstrate, in an interview with 
the flight surgeon, a personality makeup of such 
traits and reactions as will indicate that the 
candidate will successfully survive the rigors of 
the flight training program and give satisfactory 



performance under the stress of duty involving 
flying. 

15-68. Reporting on Candidates for Flight 
Training 

(1) The importance of the physical examina- 
tion of a candidate should be recognized not only 
by the examining surgeon but also by the 
medical department personnel assisting in the 
procedure and preparing the report. Candidates 
often come from a great distance or from isolated 
ships. If the examination cannot be completed in 
1 working day, the assistance of the commanding 
officer in making it possible for the candidate to 
remain available for a second working day shall 
be elicited. Careful planning should keep such 
cases to a minimum. If a report, upon reaching 
BUMED, is found to be incomplete and must be 
returned, the candidate will suffer unjust delay in 
receiving orders and in some cases will be 
completely lost to the Navy or Marine Corps as a 
candidate. The preparation of the SF 88 in the 
case of a candidate warrants the execution of 
extreme care by all concerned. 

(2) The Dental Corps officer who performs 
the dental portion of the examination shall make 
an entry over his signature, in the space set aside 
on SF 88 for remarks of the dental officer, to the 
effect that the examinee "does" or "does not" 
meet the dental standards. The dental officer shall 
record disqualifying dental defects clearly and in 
such a manner as will preclude any doubt of the 
character or degree of the defect. 

(3) In a report of the examination of a candi- 
date, rigid adherence to set standards is expected. 
(See art. 15-11 for a frequently omitted portion 
of the general service requirement.) The examin- 
ing officers are authorized to use freely that por- 
tion of the report which provides for the 
"remarks" or "notes" of the board or any one 
member of the board. Comments made under 
"remarks" are for the opinion of the examiner or 
examiners. No restriction is made about the 
source of information which might be molded 
into an expression of professional opinion. A 
final recommendation of the examiner or board 
of examiners must be made. When such recom- 
mendation is not consistent with standards set by 
BUMED, the examiner shall note that fact on the 
form under "remarks" or "notes" and a reasona- 
ble explanation shall be made. When space set 
aside on Standard Form 88 for any special pur- 
pose is inadequate, extra sheets shall be used for 
recording addenda. 

(4) Failure to detect disqualifying defects at 
the place of the first examination of a candidate 
for flight training results in great monetary loss 
to the Government because of unnecessary travel, 



2 Aug 72 



15-95 

Change 76 



15-69 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-69 



disappointment for the candidate, and embarrass- 
ment to the original examiner. 

15-69. Standards for Class 2 Personnel 

(1) General. — Candidates for an aviation program 
that leads to appointment to commissioned grade 
shall meet the physical standards for commission- 
ing. The following standards apply for duty involv- 
ing flying. 

(2) Technical Observer. — Candidates for orders as, 
and those ordered to duty involving flying as, tech- 
nical observers shall meet the qualifications of the 
designation for which they are in training. When 
ultimate designation as naval aviation observer is not 
appropriate and the need for officers to perform in- 
flight duties is justified by reason of special qualifica- 
tions, they shall meet the neurocirculatory efficiency 
and the neuropsychiatric standards of service group 
I. In all other respects they shall be required to meet 
the standards of general service. 

(3) Standards far Naval Flight Officer (NFO). — 

(a) Candidates. — Physical standards are the 
same as prescribed for class 1, service group I, with 
the following additions or limitations: 

(1) Vision. — Visual acuity shall be correcta- 
ble to 20/20 each eye, and if visual acuity is less than 
20/40, correction shall be worn as required in the 
performance of their duties. Non-commissioned ap- 
plicants must meet the appointment standards set 
forth in 15-13<4)(a)(2)(table 3). Marine Corps flight 
officer candidates shall have an unaided visual acuity 
not to exceed 20/200, correctable to 20/20 each eye, 
and correction worn if visual acuity is less than 
20/40. 

(2) Refraction. — Manifest refraction is re- 
quired when uncorrected distant visual acuity is less 
than 20/40 each eye. 

(3) Ocular Motility. — No obvious hetero- 
topia or symptomatic heterophoria. (To be so stated 
on SF 88.) 

(4) Depth Perception. — Not required. 

(b) Designated Naval Flight Officers. — 
Physical standards are the same as for class 1, service 
group III, with the exceptions noted above in 
15-69(3) (a) (2), (3), and (4). In addition: 

(1) Vision. — Visual acuity shall be consistent 
with the ability to perform duties required and when 
less than 20/40 shall be corrected to 20/20 each eye 
and the correction worn, as required, in the 
performance of their duties. An extra pair of correc- 
tive spectacles shall be available on the person at all 
times while flying when the uncorrected visual 
acuity is less than 20/100. 

(4) Naval Flight Surgeons, Aviation Medical Ex- 
aminers, Aviation Physiologists, and Aviation Ex- 
perimental Psychologists. — When ordered to duty in- 
volving flying (not in control of aircraft), naval flight 
surgeons, aviation medical examiners, aviation phys- 
iologists, and aviation experimental psychologists 
shall meet the physical requirements of the appro- 



priate service group according to their age as pre- 
scribed for class 1, except for visual acuity, which 
requirement shall be the same as for staff officers of 
the general service. 

(5) Student Naval Flight Surgeons, Student Avia- 
tion Physiologists, and Student Aviation Experimen- 
tal Psychologists. — Physical standards for student 
naval flight surgeons, student aviation physiologists, 
and student aviation experimental psychologists are 
those prescribed for naval flight officer candidates. 
Naval flight surgeons, naval aerospace physiologists, 
and naval aerospace experimental psychologists, 
regardless of their visual acuity, must meet the 
refractive error limits set forth by article 15- 
1 3(4)(a)(2)(table 3), must correct to 20/20 each eye, 
and must wear their correction if unaided visual 
acuity is less than 20/40. Only those officers who 
meet the physical standards of class 1, service group 
I, shall be found physically qualified to solo elemen- 
tary aircraft upon completion of flight indoctrinal 
training. Failure to meet visual standards for solo 
flight shall serve to disqualify only for solo flying 
but shall not disqualify for other indoctrinal training 
involving flying as a special crewmember leading to 
the designation of flight surgeon, aviation 
physiologist, and aviation experimental psy- 
chologist. 

(6) Aviation Physiology Technician (APT). 

(a) Candidates. — Physical standards are the 
same as prescribed for crewmembers and noncrew- 
members, with the following exceptions: 

(1) Age. — Not more than 31 years. 

(2) Electrocardiogram. — Within normal 

limits. 

(3) Weight. — Must meet standards for avia- 
tion personnel listed in article 15-17(2), table 2 
(listed for emphasis, a recommendation for waiver 
will not be entertained). 

(b) Designated Aviation Physiology Tech- 
nician. — Physical standards are the same as pre- 
scribed for candidates except for age. 

(7) Crewmembers and Noncrewmembers. — 

(a) Crewmember-in-Training and Initial 
Designation as Crewmember. — Crewmember is an 
individual normally required aboard an aircraft for 
flight duties incident to the mission of the aircraft 
who meets current requirements. See BUPERS 
MANUAL article 1410240 or MCO P1000.6, article 
2015. Unless otherwise directed by the Chief of 
Naval Personnel or the Commandant of the Marine 
Corps, personnel shall not be permitted to undergo 
training leading to the designation of crewmember 
unless they have been found physically qualified for 
such training by a flight surgeon or an aviation medi- 
cal examiner. Such candidates shall in general meet 
the standards of class 1, service group III, with the 
following exceptions: 

(1) Age. — Not applicable. 

(2) Height. — Minimum 60 inches; maximum 
78 inches. 



15-96 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



15-69 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-69 



(3) Vision. — Unaided visual acuity not to ex- 
ceed 20/400, correctable to 20/20 each eye. No re- 
fractive limits are required. 

(4) Ocular Motility. — No obvious hetero- 
trophia or symptomatic heterophoria. {To be so 
stated on SF 88). 

(5) Depth Perception and Accommoda- 
tion. — Not required. 

(6) Color Vision. — Required for all crew- 
members except those with the following ratings: 
CTT, CTO, CTR, and CT1. 

(7) Hearing. — Audiogram required. Flight \ 
engineers, airborne sonar operators, and flight ] 
communications operators must meet aviation can- ! 
didate standards, article 15-67; others must meet 
service group I standards, article 15-62. 

(8) Waivers. — Should it be desirable, for ex- 
ceptional reasons to assign an individual to duty as 
crewmember who does not meet the above stand- 
ards, a recommendation for waiver of the standards 
is to be submitted. The Standard Form 88 must 
contain sufficient information to support the rec- 
ommendation, and a letter from the commanding 
officer to the Chief of Naval Personnel or the Com- 
mandant of the Marine Corps, via the Chief, Bureau 
of Medicine and Surgery, requesting a waiver shall 
be submitted with the Standard Form 88. Final ac- 
tion taken on recommendation for waiver will be 
transmitted to the commanding officer by the Chief 
of Naval Personnel or the Commandant of the 
Marine Corps. 

(b) Kedesignation Aviation Physical Examina- 
tion of Aircrewmen. — Physical requirements for des- 
ignated aircrewmen, on the occasion of redesigna- 
tion examinations, shall be the same as prescribed 
above for aircrewmen and aircrewmen-in-traming 
with the following additions or limitations: 

(1) Hearing. — Audiogram is required. 
Flight engineers, airborne sonar operators, and 
flight communications operators must meet the 
standards of service group I, article 15-62; others 
must meet the standards of service group III, article 
15-64. 

(c) Noncrewmember (To include Marine 
Aerial Observer). — An individual who is ordered to 
participate in regular and frequent aerial flights and 
who is not included in the crewmember comple- 
ment as determined by the Chief of Naval Operations 
or the Commandant of the Marine Corps shall meet 
the physical standards in article 15-69 (10). 

(d) Reports and Disposition. — 

(1) The cognizant senior flight surgeon or 
aviation medical examiner shall review the report of 
the required aviation physical examination to de- 
termine the individual's qualification for the rec- 
ommended duty involving flying. Except when a 
waiver of the standards is to be recommended, or 
when a BUMED decision is desired, the reviewing 
examiner shall sign the appropriate endorsement in 
the item 73 space that is usually reserved for the 



BUMED endorsement and the SF 88 shall be filed in 
the member's Health Record. 

(2) An SF 88 and 93 shall be submitted to 
BUMED only in cases requiring a waiver or when a 
BUMED decision is desired. (The typewritten origi- 
nal shall be submitted.) Compliance with article 
15-69 (7)(a)(7) is mandatory. 

(3) The reviewing flight surgeon or aviation 
medical examiner shall issue a NAVMED 6410/2 
(formerly NAVMED 1381), Clearance Notice, to the 
cognizant commanding officer at the time of suc- 
cessful completion of each annual flight physical, 
except in those cases requiring BUMED decision or a 
waiver of the standards, 

(8) Parachute Jumper (Candidate and Desig- 
nated). — Physical standards are the same as for 
crewmember with additions or limitations as fol- 
lows: 

(a) Visual Acuity. — Not less than 20/100 
each eye, correctable to 20/20 each eye. Acuity less 
than 20/40 shall be corrected to 20/20 and the correc- 
tion worn as required in the performance of duty. 
Two pairs of industrial-thickness, case-hardened, 
prescription spectacles equipped with comfort- 
cable temples shall be issued to all parachute 
jumpers who wear spectacles. 

(b) Color Vision. — No requirement. 

(c) Accommodation. — No requirement. 

(d) Height. — Shall meet standards for ap- 
pointment or enlistment, as appropriate, in accord- 
ance with standards of Navy or Marine Corps. 

(e) Joint Movement. — No limitation of nor- 
i mal joint movement except that limitation of joint 

motion, which would be disqualifying for the stu- 
dent, may be considered as not disqualifying if, in 
the opinion of the flight surgeon, the experience of 
the jumper adequately compensates for the degree of 
immobility. 

(f) Non-Navy Training. — The physical re- 
quirements of the training service shall be accepta- 
ble if a waiver of the applicable Navy standards is 
granted in advance by the Chief of Naval Personnel 
or the Commandant of the Marine Corps. 

(g) Waivers. — If desirable for exceptional 
reasons to assign an individual to duty as a parachute 
jumper who does not meet the standards, a recom - 
mendation for a waiver is to be submitted. The 
procedure in 15-69(7)(a)(7) shall apply in such cases. 

(h) EOD/UDT/SEAL. — Parachute jumpers 
who are members of EOD/UDT/SEAL Teams are 
considered to be diving personnel. Their physical 
examinations shall be conducted in accordance with 
article 15-30. 

(9) U.S. Navy and Marine Corps Aircontrolmen 
and Air Traffic Controllers shall meet the physical 
standards of class 1, service group II, with the fol- 
lowing additions and limitations: 

(a) Articulation. — Must speak clearly and dis- 
tinctly without accent or impediment of speech 
which would interfere with radio conversation. 



10 Feb 75 



15-97 

Change 83 



15-70 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-70 



Voice must be well modulated and pitched in 
medium range. Stammering, poor diction, or other 
evidences of speech impediments which become 
manifest or aggravated under excitement shall be 
cause for rejection. 

(b) Vision. — Candidates and designated per- 
sonnel shall have an unaided visual acuity not to 
exceed 20/200, correctable to 20/20 each eye, and 
must wear their correction while on duty. Air con- 
trolmen whose vision falls below 20/200 in either eye 
may not engage in the control of air traffic in a 
control tower but may be otherwise employed in the 
duties of their ratings. 

(c) Color Vision. — Must pass the Farnsworth 
Lantern Test. 

(d) Heterophoria. — 

(1) Esophoria or exophoria greater than 6 
prism diopters is disqualifying. 

(2) Hyperphoria greater than 1 prism diopter 
is disqualifying. 

(e) Height. — Same as general service. 
(0 Age. — Not applicable. 

(10) Helicopter Rescue Crewmen. — 

(a) Candidates for helicopter rescue crewmen 
shall meet the same requirements for crewmembers 
with the following additions or limitations: 

( 1 ) Age. — Applicants should be under age 30 
although waiver for age may be considered on an 
individual basis. 

(2) Height and Weight. — Applicants must 
conform to the aviation height/weight standards in 
15-17(2){table 2). The individual should be of mus- 
cular physique without tendency toward exogenous 
obesity. 

(3) Vision. — Applicant must have a min- 
imum visual acuity of 20/30 each eye correctable to 
20/20. He must also have: 

(a) Normal unaided depth perception. 

(b) Unaided accommodation normal for 

age. 

(c) Normal color vision. 

(4) Ears. — Applicant must be free of any 
acute or chronic infection or obstruction, and the 
Eustachian tubes must be freely patent to withstand 
sudden pressure changes. Audiogram should be 
within standards set forth in 15-10(3). 

(5) Medical History. — The applicant should 
be free of any chronic or recurrent disease or condi- 
tion which would interfere with the successful com- 
pletion of the training and rescue mission. 

(6) Temperament. — Each applicant should 
be evaluated for his emotional and intellectual fit- 
ness, reaction to stress, maturity, motivation, and 
aeronautical adaptability. 



. (b) Designated Helicopter Rescue Crewmen. — 
Physical standards are the same as prescribed for 
candidates except for age and minimum visual acuity 
which may not exceed 20/50 each eye, correctable to 
20/20. 

(11) Other Personnel. — When ordered to duty in- 
volving flying for which special requirements have 
not been prescribed, personnel shall, prior to engag- 
ing in such duties, be examined to determine their 
physical fitness for aerial flights. The examination 
shall relate primarily to the circulatory system, 
equilibrium, neuropsychiatric stability, and patency 
of the Eustachian tubes (see art. 15-93), with such 
additional consideration as the individual's specific 
flying duties may indicate. The visual acuity shall be 
at least 20/50 with or without correction in the best 
eye and if uncorrected visual acuity is less than 
20/ 1 00, an extra pair of corrective spectacles shall be 
available on the person at all times while flying. The 
examination and its evaluation shall be entered on 
the NAVMED 6150/2 (Special Duty Medical Ab- 
stract) of the individual's Health Record and the 
commanding officer officially notified. Submission 
to BUMED of physical examination reports on per- 
sonnel in this category shall be the same as article 
15-69(7)(d). 

15-70. Examination for and Reporting of Fitness for 
Flying Duties 

(1) An examination or reexamination of any class 
1 or class 2 aviation personnel shall be performed 
whenever it is necessary to determine his physical 
fitness to continue flying duty or flight training or 
when considered necessary by BUMED, the Chief of 
Naval Operations, the Chief of Naval Personnel, the 
Commandant of the Marine Corps, or the command- 
ing officer. All aviation personnel admitted to the 
sicklist or hospitalized shall be suspended from all 
duty involving flying. Upon the recommendation of 
a medical officer (not restricted to a flight surgeon), 
the commanding officer may relieve from flying duty 
or suspend the flight training of an individual 
deemed physically unfit for such duty. In all such 
instances, a Grounding Notice (Aero-Medical), 
NAVMED 1380, shall be issued. When aviation per- 
sonnel are subsequently found physically qualified 
for duty, certified fit for duty following hospitaliza- 
tion, to include action by a medical board or other 
appropriate boards, or discharge from the sick- 
list, they shall be examined by a flight surgeon 
and a Clearance Notice (Aero-Medical), NAVMED 
6410/2 (formerly NAVMED 1381), submitted 



15-98 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



15-71 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-72 



prior to returning to duty involving flying. On the 
recommendation from the flight surgeon, the com- 
manding officer may authorize resumption of such 
duty or training involving flying. 

(2) Class 1 or 2 aviation personnel, upon report- 
ing to a new duty station or upon reporting for duty 
from a protracted leave of absence or when otherwise 
indicated, shall be interviewed by a flight surgeon in 
order to determine their current health, verify that 
a current flight physical examination has been con- 
ducted, and to administratively review their Health 
Record. A physical examination may be conducted, 
if required, to determine their physical fitness to con- 
tinue or resume their flying duties. The appropriate 
(Aero-Medical) Grounding or Clearance Notice shall 
be completed in all such cases and the necessary nota- 
tion shall be made in the individual's Health Record, 
NAVMED 6150/2, Special Duty Medical Abstract.' 

(3) Flight surgeons shall use Clearance Notice 
(Aero-Medical), NAVMED 1381, in all cases con- 
tinued in, or returned to, flight status in order to in- 
sure conformity of action on all personnel involved 
in flight duty. On the 15th of each month, a copy of 
each NAVMED 1381 issued during the preceding 30 
days must be forwarded to the Data Processing Divi- 
sion, Naval Aerospace and Regional Medical Center, 
Pensacola, Florida 32512. 

15-71. Triennial/Annual and Promotion Physical 
Examinations 

(1) Triennial/ ' Annual. - 

(a) Since all persons who actually control naval 
aircraft and those who perform frequent aerial flights 
must pass an aviation physical examination every 12 
or 36 months, as appropriate, in accordance with sub- 
article 15-60(1), the triennial/annual physical exami- 
nation of aviation personnel must be an aviation 
physical examination. Such physical examination is 
to be conducted within 30 days of the individual's 
birthday anniversary. Although an aviation physical 
examination conducted during the preceding 12 
months would fulfill the requirements of an annual or 
triennial physical examination, it does not change the 
requirements of subarticle 15-60(1) that all aviation 
personnel must pass an aviation physical examination 
within a specified period of time prior to the time the 
duty involving flying is performed. Therefore, unless 
an aviation physical examination, for whatever reason, 
coincides within 30 days of the individual's birthday 
anniversary, it will not be considered as fulfilling the 
requirements of subarticle 16-60(1) for the examina- 
tion of aviation personnel. When a BUMED endorse- 
ment is required (i.e., every 3 years), article 15-73(2) 
applies. In the intervening 2 years, any required avia- 
tion physical examinations shall include appropriate 



physical, laboratory, X-ray, or special examinations 
pertaining to qualifications for the appropriate avia- 
tion duty assignment (e.g., service group, naval flight 
officer, aircontrol, etc.) and shall be legibly recorded 
on the SF 88. The SF 88 shall be reviewed by a flight 
surgeon/ AME for completeness and accuracy prior to 
signing and shall be signed by the reviewing authority in 
item 82 prior to filing in the member's Health Record. 

(b) On the annual physical examination of 
aviation personnel who are flag or general officers, the 
completed SF 88, typewritten original and one copy 
shall be forwarded to BUMED (3322) for subsequent 
referral to BUMED (5 1 1) for endorsement and return 
of copy to the Health Record. On the annual physical 
examination of aviation personnel with the grade of 
captain (USN) or colonel, the completed SF 88, type- 
written original only, shall be forwarded to BUMED 
(511) for endorsement and return. 

(c) On the annual physical examination of a 
service group III aviator who has been granted a solo/ 
pilot in command waiver by the Chief of Naval Opera- 
tions, the completed typewritten original SF 88 shall 
be forwarded to BUMED (511) for endorsement 
and return. 

(d) Annually, 30 days prior to the birthdate of 
service group III aviators in the Marine Corps who 
have been granted a solo/pilot in command waiver, the 
Standard Form 88 shall be completed in duplicate and 
forwarded to the Commandant of the Marine Corps 
in accordance with Marine Corps Order 3710.1 series. 

(2) Promotion. -Physical examination for promo- 
tion of officers on active duty shall be in accordance 
with current requirements. See BUPERS Manual 
article 2220150 and MCO P1400.29, paragraph 
2405.1b. Whenever a physical examination specifically 
for promotion is performed on a person who actually 
controls naval aircraft or who performs duty involv- 
ing flying, the examination shall be a complete avia- 
tion physical examination. 

1 5-72. Boards of Flight Surgeons 

( 1 ) Local Board of Fligh t Surgeons. - 

(a) Purpose of the Board. To provide an ex- 
peditious and impartial recommendation as to the 
aeronautical adaptability and physical qualification of 
any member of the naval aviation community to con- 
tinue in a flight status. 

(b) Convening of the Board. - A local board of 
flight surgeons shall be convened by the local com- 
mand on the recommendation of the individual's 
flight surgeon. The board may also be convened by 
the Chief of Naval Personnel, the Commandant of the 
Marine Corps, or the Chief, Bureau of Medicine 
and Surgery. 



26 Mar 75 



15-99 
Change 84 



15-72 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-72 



(c) Membership of the Board. - 

(1) A local board of flight surgeons shall 
consist of three or more medical officers, at least one 
of whom must be a flight surgeon or an aviation medi- 
cal examiner. When an appropriate medical specialist 
is available, it is desirable but not mandatory that he 
also serve on the board. 

(2) When the action of a local board of 
flight surgeons is specified by BUMED for any pur- 
pose and the formation of such a board is not admin- 
istratively possible, a statement to that effect by the 
senior officer present shall accompany the report re- 
quiring the action of a local board of flight surgeons. 
Under such circumstances, a single flight surgeon or 
single aviation medical examiner may be considered 
the minimum sufficient to constitute a local board of 
flight surgeons. 

(d) Recommendations. -The board shall make 
an appropriate recommendation as to the individual's 
physical fitness and aeronautical adaptability for duty 
involving actual control of aircraft or for duty 
involving flying. If found unsuitable, the defect shall 
be clearly defined. 

(e) Reporting. A record of the proceedings of 
the board on 8" x 1(W4" papers shall be affixed as an 
addendum to a report of a current flight physical on 
SF 88 (original and two copies) with details of all per- 
tinent findings including any relevant consultations. 
The full report shall be forwarded to the Chief, Bureau 
of Medicine and Surgery, via the commanding officer. 

(2) Special Board of Fligh t Surgeons. - 

(a) Purpose.-The Special Board of Flight Sur- 
geons shall examine naval aviation personnel, includ- 
ing flight trainees, referred to it for specialized studies 
for recommendation whether or not an individual is 
physically qualified and aeronautically adapted for 
duty involving the actual control of aircraft or for 
duty involving flying. To assist the Bureau of Medi- 
cine and Surgery, the Bureau of Naval Personnel, and 
the Commandant of the Marine Corps in obtaining 
complete evaluations, the Board is located at the 
Naval Aerospace and Regional Medical Center, Pensa- 
cola, Florida, which is specifically equipped and 
staffed to render the evaluation services. 

(b) Convening Authority and Composition.— 
The Board shall be convened by the Commanding 
Officer of the Naval Aerospace and Regional Medical 
Center. A minimum of four flight surgeons and a 
dental officer shall act in each case. 

(c) Referral Methods and Procedures. - 

(1) Flight Personnel (Less Flight Trainees 



and Pensacola-Area Personnel). -The Bureau of Medi- 
cine and Surgery may, in special instances, request 
examination of flight personnel by the Board. A com- 
manding officer, preferably on the advice of a local 
board of flight surgeons, may request examination of 
flight personnel by the Board in accordance with the 
following procedures: 

(a) The referring command shall prepare 
a complete Standard Form 88 (original and two 
copies) and Standard Form 93 with appropriate clini- 
cal addenda describing the basic defect and furnishing 
all pertinent history, physical findings, and reports of 
all special examinations. Comments by the examiner 
and commanding officer are desired when appropriate. 

(b) This complete report, outlining the 
need for a more extensive examination, shall be for- 
warded to the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery via the 
commanding officer's immediate superior. If, because 
of deployment or for some other reason, the physical 
location of the immediate superior would cause undue 
delay in forwarding the recommendation, it may be 
forwarded via the nearest available flag or general offi- 
cer or more senior naval or marine aviation command. 

(c) If approved by the Bureau of Medi- 
cine and Surgery, a recommendation will be made to 
the Bureau of Naval Personnel or the Commandant of 
the Marine Corps that the examinee be ordered to re- 
port to the Commanding Officer, Naval Aerospace and 
Regional Medical Center, to be referred to the Board. 
As a general policy, personnel on the sicklist or those 
ordered to appear before a physical evaluation board 
will not be referred to the Board. 

(d) Upon issuance of orders by the Bu- 
reau of Naval Personnel or the Commandant of the 
Marine Corps, the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 
will forward appropriate records to the Naval Aero- 
space and Regional Medical Center. 

(e) The Health Record, Flight Log Book, 
and Aviation Qualification Jacket shall accompany 
each examinee. 

(/) Personnel ordered to appear before the 
Board shall be directed to report prior to 0800 on 
a Monday. 

(2) Flight Trainees. -A flight trainee re- 
ported as not physically qualified or not aeronauti- 
cally adapted for duty involving the actual control of 
aircraft, may if appropriate, be ordered by the func- 
tional commander, on the recommendation of the 
trainee's commanding officer, to report to the Com- 
manding Officer of the Center for referral to the Board. 

(3) Other aviation personnel attached to 
Pensacola-area commands where travel funds are 



15-100 
Change 84 



26 Mar 75 



1S-7J 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-73 



the Commandant of the Marine Corps will issue 
temporary additional duty orders for personnel 
covered by subarticle (c)(1). 

(2) Flight trainees required to utilize 
travel funds shall be issued temporary additional 
duty orders by their functional commanders. 

(3) Travel orders are not required for 
trainees in the Pensacola area. 

(4) In accordance with the U.S. Navy- 
Travel Instructions (NAVSO P-1459), costs 
incident to this travel shall be chargeable to the 
appropriation which provided travel funds to the 
examinee's command. 

(ej Reports. — 

(1) Flight Personnel, Including Flight 
Trainees. — The Senior Member of the Board 
shall submit its findings to the Commanding 
Officer of the Center for consideration and for- 
warding to the Chief, Bureau of Medicine and 
Surgery (via the Chief of Naval Air Training 
when appropriate). The report shall consist of 
the Standard Form 88 (original and two copies) 
with details of all pertinent findings and recom- 
mendations on the individual's physical fitness 
and aeronautical adaptability for duty involving 
flying or the actual control of aircraft. 

(2) Flight Trainees With Defects Consid- 
ered Disqualifying. — If it is the Board's opinion 
that a flight trainee has physical defects consid- 
ered disqualifying for duty involving flying or 
the actual control of aircraft, and this opinion is 
approved by the Commanding Officer of the 
Center, he shall by the most expeditious means 
feasible inform the Chief of Naval Personnel or 
the Commandant of the Marine Corps of the 
defects. (This report is in addition to that 
required in (1) above.) 

(3) Board of Flight Surgeons at the Bureau of 
Medicine and Surgery. — For those cases where 
appeal of a recommendation or decision is 
requested, the Chief of Naval Personnel, or the 
Commandant of the Marine Corps in the case of 
Marine Corps personnel, will convene a formal 
board of senior flight surgeons at the Bureau of 
Medicine and Surgery. The Board will consist of 
a minimum of five members, three of whom shall 
be flight surgeons. The decision of the Board 
will be final. Individuals appealing may request 
appearance before this Board. Upon such request 
for appearance, the individual may be issued tem- 
porary additional duty orders authorizing Gov- 
ernment air travel at no additional expenses to the 
Government, in accordance with current direc- 
tives. 

15-73. Recording and Forwarding of Physical 
Examinations 

(1) When a physical examination of aviation 



personnel (class 1 or 2) is performed, it shall be 
recorded on Standard Form 88 in accordance 
with current BUMED instructions. This form, 
completed in rough, shall be retained in the files 
of the medical department at which the examina- 
tion is performed. The results of such examina- 
tion on aviation personnel shall be recorded on 
NAVMED 6150/2 of the examinee's permanent 
Health Record. In the case of all candidates for 
flight training, the Standard Form 88 must be 
typewritten and forwarded to BUMED. For those 
candidates who fail, the examining flight surgeon 
shall forward to BUMED an original and two 
copies of the Standard Form 88, and in item 77 a 
statement regarding qualification for class 2 avia- 
tion personnel and appointment to commissioned 
grade. 

(a) In the case of crewmembers and non- 
crewmembers, reports of physical examination 
shall be forwarded in accordance with article 
15-69(8) (d). 

(2) In the following situations, when a physi- 
cal examination is completed and recorded in 
rough, the results of the examination shall be 
typewritten and the original and two copies of 
this completed report (Standard Form 88) shall 
be forwarded to BUMED when: 

(a) any individual has received the first 
complete physical examination by which he has 
been found qualified or disqualified. 

(b) as a result of a complete physical exami- 
nation of class 1 personnel, the flight surgeon 
recommends a temporary (in excess of 30 days) 
or permanent change in service group or flying 
status. 

(c) report to BUMED is specifically directed 
by proper authority. 

(d) naval aviation personnel, class 2, are 
found disqualified and the status of disqualifica- 
tion is expected to be in effect longer than 30 
days. 

(e) naval aviation personnel who were dis- 
qualified and so reported to BUMED are subse- 
quently found to be qualified. 

(f) an aviator of the U.S. Naval or Marine 
Corps Reserve reports for active duty, if such 
duty is expected to continue in excess of 15 days. 

(g) a physical examination is completed for 
purposes of promotion of any officer or fulfill- 
ment of the requirements of a semiannual, 
annual, or quadrennial physical examination of 
Inactive Reserve officers. 

(h) after the examination of aviation per- 
sonnel of any classification, the flight surgeon or 
board of flight surgeons considers a review of the 
findings by BUMED advisable. 

(i) class 1 personnel have appeared before a 
medical board and have been found fit for full or 
limited duty. 



15-101 

Change 69 



15-76 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-76 



15-76. Annual and Quadrennial Physical 

Examinations and Annual Certificate of 
Physical Condition 

(1) Annual Physical Examination. — When not 
on active duty, including active duty for training 
in excess of 30 days, all naval reservists of the 
Selected Reserve and all others in a drilling 
status (Ready Reservists or Standby Reserve 
Active (SI)) shall undergo a complete physical 
examination annually during their birthday 
month and all Class II Marine Corps Reservists 
shall undergo a complete physical examination 
annually during their anniversary month. For 
aviation personnel, articles 15-59 and 15-60 shall 
be observed. For submarine personnel, article 
15-29 shall be observed. A complete physical 
examination conducted within the preceding 12 
months will obviate the need for the annual 
physical examination during that period. Juris- 
diction for annual physical examinations is 
assigned to the cognizant reserve command 
authority in the field. The examination may be 
conducted by any medical officer of the Depart- 
ment of Defense, on active duty or inactive duty, 
or by a civilian contract physician. The scope of 
the system examination shall be in accordance 
with the guidelines set forth in article 15—45. 
Hospitalization of anf inactive reservist for the 
purpose of annual physical examination or any 
part thereof is not authorized. In those cases 
where any examination or test is not conducted, 
this fact should be noted in the member's Health 
Record with the recommendation that such be 
accomplished incident to the member's next 
period of active duty or active duty for training. 
As part of the examination, an SF 93 shall be 
completed and signed by the member. The 
medical examiner shall comment under item 25 
of the SF 93 on all affirmative answers checked 
by the examinee. For identification, enter "USNR 
ANNUAL" or "USMCR ANNUAL" as appropri- 
ate, in block 5 on the SF 88 and 93. 

(a) Submission of Annual Physical Exami- 
nation Reports. — Upon completion of the exami- 
nation, the SF 93 and the SF 88 shall be filed in 
the member's Health Record. In the case of per- 
sonnel found not physically qualified, or when 
doubt exists as to the member's physical qualifica- 
tions, SF 88's and 93's, to include consultation re- 
ports, abstracts of treatment, etc., shall be sub- 
mitted to BUMED (3322) via the cognizant field 
authority. In the case of flag and general officers, 
the original SF-88 and 93 shall be filed in the 
officer's Health Record and a signed copy of the 
SF-88 and 93 shall be forwarded to BUMED 
(332) annually. In the case of those physically 
qualified officer and enlisted personnel serving 
in an aviation category only, the typewritten 
original SF-88 and 93 shall be sumbitted every 



3 years to BUMED (511) for review, endorsement, 
and subsequent return to the member's command. 
No other reports of annual physical examinations 
are required to be submitted to BUMED. 

(2) Quadrennial Physical Examination. — 
When not on active duty, all reservists, other 
than those in the Standby Reserve, Organized 
Marine Corps Reserve or Retired Reserve, or 
those reservists listed above who require annual 
physical examination, shall be physically exam- 
ined once every 4 years or more often if deemed 
necessary. Such 4-year period shall be considered 
to commence on the day following the date of 
completion of the last physical examination, the 
findings of which were reported on the SF 88. 
Jurisdiction for quadrennial physical examina- 
tion is assigned to the cognizant Reserve 
command authority in the field. The examination 
may be conducted by any medical officer of the 
Department of Defense on active duty or inac- 
tive duty or by a civilian contract physician. The 
scope of the system examination shall be in 
accordance with the guidelines set forth in article 
15-45. In those cases where any part of the exam- 
ination or tests are not completed this fact shall 
be noted on the SF 88 prepared incident to the 
member's examination. As part of the examina- 
tion, an SF 93 shall be completed and signed by 
the member. The medical examiner shall 
comment under item 25 of the SF 93 on all 
affirmative answers checked by the examinee. In 
view of the lapse of time between examinations, 
it is incumbent upon the medical examiner to 
describe in detail any defects or disabilities 
noted. For identification, enter "QUAD- 
RENNIAL" in block 5 on the SF 88 and 93. All 
quadrennial physical examinations shall be 
reported in accordance with article 15-82. 

(3) Opinion or Recommendation. — The pur- 
pose of the annual and quadrennial physical 
examinations is to establish the physical fitness of 
reservists for active duty. In determining physical 
fitness for active duty, due consideration is to be 
given to the physical standards in article 
15-74(2) and to the character of the duty to 
which the member may be assigned if ordered to 
active duty. Those who are considered unfit for 
active duty and retention, or who may reasonably 
be expected to be unfit in the near future, or 
whose condition is such as to constitute an 
unwarranted high health risk if accepted for 
active duty, should be reported to be physically 
unfit for retention in the naval service. In all 
cases where a member is not considered physi- 
cally qualified, the decision as to physical classifi- 
cation and disposition shall be deferred to the 
Navy Department via the cognizant jurisdic- 
tional command authority in the field, in order 
that the needs of the service may be considered in 
determining appropriate disposition. Medical 



15-106 

Change 73 



15-77 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-77 



examiners are to bear in mind the need to main- 
tain a healthy and fit Reserve personnel force, 
and, therefore, those who are not considered 
physically qualified for retention in the Reserve 
should be recommended for separation. The 
medical examiner shall specify the type of duty 
to which the member is considered qualified to 
perform; i.e., shore duty, sea duty, field duty, or 
duty involving flying. 

(4) Annual Certificate of Physical Condition. — 
All reservists not on active duty, except Retired 
Reserves and members of the Fleet Reserve and 
Fleet Marine Corps Reserve, are required to 
submit an annual certificate of physical condition. 
This shall be accomplished by members for- 
warding a completed and signed annual certifi- 
cate of physical condition to the appropriate 
jurisdictional command authority in the field. 
It shall be the responsibility of the cognizant 
jurisdictional command authority in the field 
to institute procedures for the fulfillment of this 
requirement. The completion of an SF 93 inci- 
dent to a complete physical examination shall be 
considered as fulfilling the requirement for 
submission of an annual certificate of physical 
condition for that year. 

(a) If the report of annual certificate of 
physical condition indicates the possibility that a 
member may be unfit, the cognizant jurisdic- 
tional command authority in the field shall 
obtain such information as may be considered 
necessary to determine the member's physical 
fitness for active duty and retention. Where pos- 
sible, any additional tests or examination shall be 
obtained at an Armed Forces medical facility, on 
an outpatient basis; and, if obtained elsewhere 
they must be at no expense to the Government. 
The annual certificate of physical condition shall 
not be forwarded to BUMED. 

15-77. Physical Examinations for Active Duty 
and Active Duty for Training 

(1) Active Duty or Active Duty for Training 
in Excess of 30 days. — 

(a) Members ordered to active duty or 
active duty for training in excess of 30 days are 
not required to undergo a complete physical 
examination prior to reporting for such duty, 
provided a complete physical examination was 
conducted within the preceding 12 months and 
SF 88 and SF 93 are filed in the member's Health 
Record. The cognizant medical officer (or in the 
absence of a medical officer, a medical depart- 
ment representative qualified in accordance with 
article 9-8(2)) shall ascertain that there has 
been no significant change in the member's phys- 
ical condition and that the member continues to 
be physically qualified to perform active duty 
(see art. 15-50 for scope of evaluation). Certifi- 



cation of his continued physical fitness shall be 
accomplished by an entry on the SF 600 and 
endorsement of appropriate orders. If a current 
SF 88 and 93 are not in the member's Health 
Record, a complete examination shall be 
conducted prior to reporting for active duty or 
active duty for training in excess of 30 days. If 
physically qualified, the report of examination 
(SF 88/93) shall be filed in the member's Health 
Record, Should conditions be discovered which 
are considered sufficient to preclude the member's 
reasonable performance of duty to which he is 
being assigned, the medical officer shall report 
the findings to the member's commanding officer 
for appropriate action. In addition, the findings 
(SF 88/93) and appropriate consultation reports 
shall be forwarded to BUMED (3322) via the 
cognizant field authority for review and appro- 
priate action. 

(b) Members ordered to involuntary active 
duty shall be processed in the same manner as 
any member ordered to active duty (see art. 
15-77(1) (a)). Those members ordered to invol- 
untary active duty for unsatisfactory participa- 
tion, who have not been physically examined 
during the preceding 12 months, may be ordered 
to undergo a physical examination prior to or 
upon reporting for such duty. If physically quali- 
fied the member shall carry out the remainder of 
his orders and the SF 88 and 93 shall be filed in 
the member's Health Record. If found not physi- 
cally qualified, the report of the examination (SF 
88/93), with appropriate consultations attached 
shall be forwarded to BUMED (3322) via the 
cognizant field authority for appropriate action. 
The provisions of article 15-50 shall be adhered 
to incident to the transfer of the member to 
involuntary active duty for physical examination 
and subsequent active duty. In other words, 
should the member present an obviously disquali- 
fying defect his commanding officer should be so 
advised and his orders held in abeyance pending 
further evaluation by the cognizant field author- 
ity. 

(c) All members of the Naval and Marine 
Corps Reserve shall undergo a complete physical 
examination prior to release from active duty or 
active duty for training in excess of 30 days in 
the same manner as a member of the Regular 
service being separated from the active list in 
accordance with article 15—48. 

(2) Active Duty for Training of 30 Days or 
Less and Involuntary Training Duty for 45 Days 
or Less. — 

(a) Members ordered to active duty for 
training of 30 days or less and members ordered 
to involuntary training duty for 45 days or less 
are not required to undergo a physical examina- 



15-107 

Change 69 



15-78 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-78 



tion prior to or upon reporting for such duty, 
provided a complete physical examination was 
conducted within the preceding 12 months and a 
complete report of such examination, on SF 88 
and 93, is filed in the member's Health Record. 
The medical officer (or in the absence of a 
medical officer, a medical department representa- 
tive qualified in accordance with article 9-8(2)) 
shall ascertain that there has been no significant 
change in the member's physical condition and 
that the member has not incurred a defect or 
disability which would preclude his reasonable 
performance of training duty. Certification of his 
continued fitness shall be accomplished by an 
entry on the SF 600 and endorsement of appro- 
priate orders. If a complete and current SF 88 
and 93 are not in the member's Health Record, a 
complete physical examination shall be 
conducted prior to or upon reporting for train- 
ing duty, and recorded on SF 88 and 93 which 
shall be filed in the member's Health Record. 
The reservist must be considered physically qual- 
ified to reasonably perform the duties to which 
he is to be assigned, must be free of infectious or 
contagious disease, and must receive, or have 
received, the required vaccination and inocula- 
tions. However, should it be determined that the 
member is not physically qualified for training 
duty, a complete physical examination shall be 
conducted and reported on SF 88 to BUMED 
(3322) via the cognizant jurisdictional field 
authority. 

(b) Upon release from active duty for train- 
ing of 30 days or less and involuntary training 
duty for 45 days or less, an extensive physical 
examination is required only if a member has 
suffered a disease or injury while so employed or 
alleges such is the case. Where there is no ques- 
tion of injury or disease incurred during such 
training, the physical examination to be given 
shall be sufficient for the medical examiner to 
reasonably determine whether or not the health 
of the member has been adversely affected by the 
training duty. For this purpose, it should usually 
be sufficient for the examiner to question the 
member and examine any impairment that would 
be likely to have resulted from disease or injury 
to which the member was exposed during his 
training duty. An entry to this effect shall be 
made on the SF 600. Members who have suffered 
disease or injury in the line of duty which 
requires treatment or hospitalization shall be 
given such treatment in accordance with current 
BUMEDLNST 6320.14 and 6320.31 series. 

(c) Reservists performing inactive duty 
training such as regular drill, etc., are to be 
considered physically qualified to participate, 
provided they are considered physically qualified 
for retention as a result of a complete physical 



examination conducted within the preceding 12 
months. However, if at any time the member's 
commanding officer, medical officer, or medical 
department representative has reason to believe 
that physical unfitness exists, the reservist would 
be examined to determine his physical fitness. If 
unfitness exists, a SF 88 and 93 (with abstracts of 
treatment, consultation reports, etc., if indicated, 
attached) shall be conpleted and forwarded to BUMED 
(3322) via the cognizant jurisdictional field authority. 
It is required that all reservists performing inactive 
duty training receive the required vaccination and 
inoculations annually. An annual tuberculin skin test 
shall be performed on all with no test or with 
negative skin tests recorded previously. Annual 
chest X-rays are required only for those person- 
nel with positive tuberculin test as defined in 
article 15-91(3)(c) and for all personnel during 
a physical examination as required by article 
15-45. 

15-78. Physical Examinations for Assignment to 
Organized or Selected Reserve Units or 
Transfer From Standby to Ready Reserve 

(1) General. — For any member who has satis- 
factorily undergone a complete physical examina- 
tion within 1 year preceding application, an 
examination incident to assignment to an Organ- 
ized or Selected Reserve unit or transfer to the 
Ready Reserve category is not required, except 
for assignment concerned with duty involving 
flying. The member shall execute a SF 93 to be 
reviewed by cognizant field medical authorities. 
If a physical examination is required, the 
member shall be completely examined and must 
meet the physical standards prescribed in article 
15-74(2) and (3) before such transfer or assign- 
ment becomes effective. Applications for assign- 
ment to Organized or Selected Reserve units or 
for transfer to the Ready Reserve category shall 
be submitted in accordance with currently pre- 
scribed administrative procedures, but such appli- 
cations shall not be processed until the cognizant 
field authority has determined that the member is 
physically qualified. 

(2) Conditions Requiring SF 88 and 93.— A 
current SF 88 and 93 shall be prepared and sub- 
mitted to BUMED (3322) for determination of 
physical fitness for assignment or retention in all 
cases where an applicant for membership in an 
Organized or Selected Reserve unit is considered 
to be unfit; or a period in excess of 1 year has 
elapsed since his last complete examination; or 
there is a reasonable indication that there has 
been an adverse change in the physical condition 
of the applicant even though he may meet the 
physical standards; or where the member has a 
disability compensation claim pending, or is in 



15-108 
Change 73 



15-79 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-80 



receipt of such compensation; or an officer is 
known to be classified as a B, C, or "4" physical 
risk. 

15-79. Physical Examination for Actual Control 
of Aircraft 

(1) All reservists who are members of organi- 
zations under the jurisdiction of CNRESTRA or 
MARTC shall undergo such examinations as may 
be required in accordance with section V of this 
chapter. 

15-80. Physical Defects, Reporting, and 
Disposition 

(1) Appointment or Enlistment. — Physical 
examination of applicants for appointment to 
commissioned grade or enlistment shall be 
completed regardless cf whether the member is 
or is not physically qualified. Reports of exami- 
nation shall be submitted in accordance with the 



guidelines set forth elsewhere in this chapter or 
other applicable regulations. Appropriate recom- 
mendations regarding the applicant's physical 
fitness for appointment or enlistment and to per- 
form all the duties of his grade or rate on the 
active list shall be made in item 77 of the SF 88. 
(2) Active Duty and 'Retention. — 

(a) Disposition of reservists on active duty, 
including active duty for training in excess of 30 
days, who are considered physically unfit for 
active duty and retention on the active list, shall 
be processed in accordance with existing regula- 
tions for disposition of similarly disqualified 
Regular members. 

(b) Disposition of reservists on active duty 
for training of 30 days or less and involuntary 
training duty of 45 days or less who are disabled 
by injury or disease, shall be processed in accord- 
ance with 10 USC 6l48, as implemented by 
current Departmental regulations. 



15-109 

Change 69 



( 



( 



( 



15-81 



General 

Disposition of SF 88 and SF 93 

Validity Periods for Reports of Medical Examinations . 

15-81. General 

(1) Standard forms for use by all medical mil- 
itary establishments have been adopted for the 
purpose of preserving and utilizing information 
obtained from physical examinations. Each physi- 
cal examination shall be recorded on Standard 
Form 88 (Report of Medical Examination), and 
the examinees prior or intervening medical his- 
tory shall be recorded on Standard Form 93 
(Report of Medical History), These forms, when 
completed, shall be disposed of in accordance 
with the guidelines in article 15-82. 

15-82. Disposition of SF 88 and SF 93 

(1) Specific requirements for preparation and 
disposition of the SF 88 and 93 in most of the 
major categories are tabulated on the following 
pages. Guidance on the number of copies (SF 
88/93) and reporting of physical examinations 
for various special categories are outlined in 
other portions of this chapter (i.e., aviation, sub- 
marine, divers, antarctic, etc.). 

15-83. Validity Periods for Reports of Medical 
Examinations 

(1) Medical examination will be valid for the 
purpose and within the periods set forth below 
provided there has been no significant change in 
the member's physical or medical condition. 



15-83 



Article 

15-81 

15-82 
15-83 

(a) One year from date of medical examina- 
tion to qualify for induction, enlistment, 

appointment as a Reserve or Regular officer, 
and enrollment in officer candidate programs. 

(b) Six months from date of examination 
for separation from active duty including retire- 
ment. Members being processed for physical disa- 
bility retirement are exempt from this require- 
ment. 

(c) Ninety days from date of medical exam- 
ination for separation from active duty for 
former members desiring to reenlist in naval 
service. The copy of the former member's separa- 
tion physical examination (SF 88) given to him 
at time of his release must be presented to the 
recruiting office for review of block 77, to deter- 
mine if the former member was, in fact, fit for 
separation and/or reenlistment. 

(2) A medical examination conducted for one 
purpose is valid for any other purpose within the 
prescribed validity periods provided the examina- 
tion is of the proper scope specified elsewhere in 
this chapter or other regulations. If the examina- 
tion is deficient in scope, only those tests and 
procedures needed to meet the additional require- 
ments need be accomplished and the results 
recorded. 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 
Section VII. REPORTING RESULTS OF PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



10 Feb 75 



15-111 

Change 83 



95 

ft 
% 5 



2 



Preparation and Disposition of Report of Medical Examination (SF 88) and Report of Medical History (SF 93} 

Note-Health Record abbreviated HR 



Standard Form 88, number needed and disposition 



Standard Form 93, number needed and disposition 



I 

T 
E 
M 



Purpose of examination 



Physically 
qualified 



Disposition 



Physically 
qualified 



Disposition 



If YES, 
copies* 



If NO, 

copies* 



Original 



Copy 



If YES, If NO, 
copies* copies* 



Original 



Copy 



NAVY AND MARINE CORPS OFFICER CANDIDATE PROGRAMS (See Note 1) 



1. 

2, 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

10. 

u. 

12. 

13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 



NRC (311) 
NRC(311) 



AOC, NFOC, NAOC-AI; enrollment 3 NRC (311) ■. , . . 2 

ACC.NFOC, NAOC-AI; retention &precom- 3 NRC (311) '., 2 

missioning. 

Direct appointment; USN, USNR 2 NRC (3123) 1 NRC (3123). 

OCS, male and female applicants 2 NRC (3123) 1 NRC (3123). 

Ensign 1 9xx, all programs 2 NRC (3141) 1 NRC (3141). 

LDO; application for appointment See BUPERSMAN ait. 1020290 See BUPERSMAN art. 1020290 . 

WO; application for appointment See BUPERSMAN art. 1020310 See BUPERSMAN art. 1020310 . 

LDO & WO; precommissioning See BUPERSMAN art. 1020180 See BUPERSMAN art. 1020180 . 

2 NRC (3141) 1 NRC (3141). 



Merchant Marine Academy graduates; pre 
commissioning 

Merchant Marine Academy, midshipmen 
appointment. 

U.S. Naval Academy applicants See BUMEDIN ST 6120.3 series See BUMEDINST 6120.3 



See BUMEDINST 6120.3 series See BUMEDINST 6120.3 series . 



series . 



NRC (313) 2 

NRC (314) 



U.S. Naval Academy graduates; precom- 2 

missioning. 

Project Boost 1 

NENEP See BUPERSINST 1120.37 series 

NEDEP See BUPERSINST 1120.38 series 

NESEP; applicants See BUPERSMAN art. 1020350 

NESEP; precommissioning 3 PERS (483) 

NESEP; NROTC, retention 77 . . See art. 1546 See art. 1546 



NRC (313) HR 



1 NRC (314) . 

See BUPERSINST 1120.37 series 
See BUPERSINST 1120.38 series 
See BUPERSMAN art. 1020350 . 

2 PERS (483) . 



19- OCS graduates; precommissioning ... 2 HR 1 HR . . . . . . - • - 

3 NRC (3122) HR 2 NRC (3122) HR 

20. Regular Navy Augmentation Program 3 PERS (3142) HR 2 PERS (3142) HR 

21. AVROCTWO enrollment 1395 or 4 NRC (3112) 2 NRC (3112) 

1355. 

22. ROC TWO; enrollment 3 NRC (3Hb) 2 NRC (3Mb) 

23. AVROC (1395 or 1355)/ROC; ' 4 NRC (3112) 2 NRC (3112) 

precommissioning. 

24. Marine AOC; enrollment 4 CMC (DPF) 2 CMC (DPF) 

25. Marine AOC; precommissioning ... 4 CMC (DPE) 2 CMC (DPE) 

26. Marine LDO or WO; application for 3 CMC (DPB) HR 2 CMC (DPB) HR 

appointment. • • 

27. Marine LDO and WO; precommission- 2 HR 1 HR • > 

ing. 3 CMC (DPB) HR 2 CMC (DPB) HR ^ 

28. Marine OCC, WOCC, PLC, ECP, & 3 CMC (DPF) 2 CMC (DPF) 

OMCR; enrollment. ~ 

29. OCC, WOCC graduates; precommis- 2 HR 1 HR . ... ... 

sioning. 3 CMC (DPF) HR 2 CMC (DPF) HR v 

30. PLC; precommissioning 3 CMC (DPD-4) 2 CMC (DPD-4) < 

31. Regular Marine Corps Augmentation 3 CMC (DPB) HR 2 CMC (DPB) HR O 



Program. 



active duty. 



34, USN, USMC, immediate reeniistment 1 HR 0 

or extension of enlistment; USNR, 1 HR 0 

USMCR, immediate reeniistment or ex- (Refer NPQ cases to medical board.) 

tension of enlistment while on active 
duty. 

35. USN, USMC reeniistment with broken 3 Note 2 2 Note 2 

2 Note 3 1 Note 3 



service. 



PS 

s- 

I m «ttn S tan U or^lis^Twwifi"nm on " T '. '. '. '. ! '. '. '. '. HR ........ .BUMED (3322) 2 HR BUMED (3322) 

org u, 



36. USNR, USMCR reeniistment or, 2 HR BUMED (3342) 2 HR J^MED 

extension o 
active duty. 



* 5S See notes at end of table. 



n 
EC 



r 1 

M 

ENLISTMENT AND REENLISTMENT > 

s 



32. USN, USMC, original enlistment; 3 Note 2 2 Note 2 > 

USNR, USMCR, original enlistment for 2 Note 3 1 Note 3 H 

immtdiate active duty. O 

*y 

33. USNR & USMCR original enlistment 3 , Note 2 2 Note 2 d> 

all classifications not for immediate 2 Note 3 ] Note 3 



£5 K 
jf T 
a m 



0\ 



i 

T 

E 
M 



Purpose of examination 



Standard Form 88, copies needed and disposition Standard Form 93, copies needed and disposition 



Physically 
qualified 



If YES, If NO, 
copies copies 



Disposition 



Original 



Copy 



Physically 
qualified 



If YES, If NO, 
copies copies 



Disposition 



Original 



Copy 



MISCELLANEOUS 



37. Preretirement, active duty officers: 
NAVY 



MARINE CORPS 



38. Transfer to Fleet Naval Reserve or 
Fleet Marine Corps Reserve. 



39- Promotion, active duty, USN, USNR, 
USMC, USMCR. 

40. Promotion, inactive duty, USNR, 
USMCR. 



2 HR PERS (B85) 0 

0 Not required 0 

(See art. 
I5^f8) 

2 HR CMC(DM) 0 

0 Not required 0 

(See art. 
15-48) 

1 HR 0 .... 



0 Not required 

(See art. 
15_48(4)) 

See art. 15^f7 See art. 15^47 



41. Discharge or retired 



42. Triennial/annual, officer, active duty 
(USN, USNR, USMC, USMCR). 

43- Annual, inactive duty, USNR, USMCR 
(officer and enlisted). 



See art. 15-75(3) '■ - ■ - See art. 15-75(3) 

2 HR Member 0 

0 Not required 0 

(See art. 
15-48(2)) 

See art. 15^*5 See art. 15^f5 . . 



1 HR (See note 4) 1 

2 HR BUMED (3322) 2 

via cognizant 
field authority. 



HR 

HR BUMED (3322) 

via cognizant 
field authority. 



K 

t-i 

o 

m 
X 

a 
g 

tn 

o 

n 
> 

V 
u 

5 

S 

tn 
Z 
.H 
G 

% 



44. Quadrennial, USNR, USMCR, USNFR, 
USMCFR (officer and enlisted). 



45. Active duty or active duty for training 
for more than 30 days, USNR, USMCR, 
officer and enlisted. 



1 Cognizant 1 

field 

authority 

2 HR BUMED (3322) 2 

via cognizant 
field authority. 

See art. 15-77(1) See art. 15-77(1) 



Cognizant 

field 

authority 

HR BUMED (3322) 

via cognizant 
field authority. 



See notes at end of table. 



46. Release from active duty or active duty 2 
for training of more than 30 days, 
USNR, USMCR, officer and enlisted. 

47. Active duty for training of 30 days or 0 
less and involuntary training duty of 
45 days; USNR, USMCR, officer and 
enlisted. 



48. Release from active duty for training 
of 30 days or less and involuntary 
training duty of 45 days; USNR, 
USMCR, officer and enlisted. 



49. Inactive duty training; USNR, USMCR, 0 
officer and enlisted. 



HR See Note 5 



Not required 
except as set 
forth in art. 
15-77<2)<a). 
HR 



.BUMED (3322) 
via cognizant 
field authority. 



0 Not required 

except as set 
forth in art. 

15-77(2){a). 
2 HR 



Not required 
except as set 
forth in art. 
15-77 (2) (b). 
HR 



BUMED (3322) 
via cognizant 
field authority. 



Not required 
except as set 
forth in art. 
15-77(2)<c). 
HR 



. BUMED (3322) 
via cognizant 
field authority. 



0 Not required 

except as set 
forth in art 

15-77(2)b). 
2 HR 



.BUMED (3322) 
via cognizant 
field authority. 



BUMED (3322) 
via cognizant 
field authority. 



0 Not required 

except as set 
forth in art 

15-77(2)(c). 
2 HR 



BUMED (3322) 
via cognizant 
field authority. 



50. Request for assignment to Organized See art. 15-78 
or Selected Reserve Units or transfer 
from Standby to Ready Reserve; USNR, 
USMCR, officer and enlisted. 



See art. 15-78 



EXPLANATION OF NOTES 

Number Explanation 

1. Except where otherwise indicated, the original and all copies of the SF 88 and SF 93, Physically Qualified or Not Physically Qualified, are 
to be forwarded to the designated NRC, BUPERS, or MARCORPS Code. 

NRG— Naval Recruiting Command, Department of the Navy, Washington, D.C. 20370. 
PERS— Chief of Naval Personnel, Department of the Navy, Washington, D C. 20370. 

CMC — Commandant of the Marine Corps, Headquarters Marine Corps, Washington, D.C. 20380. „ 113 „™ De 

2. Original SF 88 and SF 93 attached to enlistment contract and forwarded with other enlistment documents to BUPERS or MAKCOKfo, as 
appropriate. Copy to be used to open new Health Record. DITnED . 

3 Not required by BUMED, BUPERS or MARCORPS except when waiver of physical standards is recommended, then forward to BUPERS or 
MARCORPS, via BUMED (3321). Otherwise retain in local files for 1 year, then destroy. 

4. See article 15-76(lXa) for exceptions. 

5. A copy of the release SF 88 and a copy of the most recent SF 93 (or SF 89 if applicable) shall be delivered to the commanding officer for trans- 

mittal with the service record. 



15-85 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-86 



Section VIII. METHODS OF EXAMINATION 



General 

Testing Visual Acuity 

Testing Heterophoria and Prism Divergence at Near and Far 



Article 

15-85 
15-86 
15-87 
15 -87 A 



Armed Forces Vision Tester (AFVT) 15-87B 



Dapth Perception 



15-88 



Examination of Heart and Blood Vessels 15-89 

Examination of Range of Motion 15-89 

Orthopedic Examination of Major Joints 15-90 

Roentgenograph^ Examination of Chest ; 

Tuberculin Testing of Navy and Marine Corps Personnel First Reporting for Duty in 

Excess of 30 Days 

Testing Intraocular Tension 

Eustachian Tub; Patmcy Test (Valsalva's Maneuver Modified) 

Special Examination Requirements 



15-91 

15-92 



15-85. General 

(1) This section presents more detailed meth- 
ods of examination which could not conveniently 
be included in the section on physical standards. 
The Army-Navy-National Research Council 
Vision Committee has prepared two manuals for 
use by all military services. One is entitled 
"Manual of Instructions for Testing Visual 
Acuity," the other "Manual for Testing Hetero- 
phoria and Prism Divergence at Near." The 
contents of these manuals are incorporated in 
articles 15-86 and 15-87 (1) and (2). 

15-86. Testing Visual Acuity 

(1) General.— Visual defects are one of the 
major causes for physical disqualifications from 
the Armed Services of the United States. Methods 
of testing vision have varied greatly among the 
Services and from place to place in each Service. 
In consequence, visual test results are not compa- 
rable. A candidate presenting himself for exami- 
nation at one center might be qualified for visual 
acuity while at another center he would be dis- 
qualified. The purpose of this article is to 
describe the conditions and facilities necessary 
and the procedure to be followed in order to 
correct this situation. The procedures outlined in 
this article are to be followed by every person 
who administers visual tests. It shall be the duty 
of the medical officer in charge to supervise and 
inspect the proper administration of procedures 
outlined in this article. 
(2) The Examination. — 
(a) Necessary Conditions. — 

(1) Physical Equipment.— Tests shall be 
given in a room where arrangements, charts, and 
illumination are in good order and conform as 
closely as possible to subarticle 15-86(3). It 
should be noted that, if projector charts and 
screens are used, the color of the walls and the 



arrangement of room lighting need not conform, 
provided the room can be darkened. 

(2) Condition of Candidates.— Every 
effort should be made to examine men who are in 
normal physical condition. 

(b) Testing Acuity for Distant Vision. — 

(1) Procedure. — 

(a) If the candidate wears glasses, they 
must be removed before he enters the examining 
room. Each man shall be tested without unneces- 
sary delay after he has entered the room. To 
prevent personnel from memorizing the charts, 
only one candidate shall be permitted to view the 
targets at a time. Candidates awaiting test must 
be kept out of hearing. 

(b) The candidate is directed to the 
indicated 20-foot mark. The examiner holds the 
occluder (see drawing) and covers the candi- 
date's left eye, while instructing the candidate to 
keep both eyes open without squinting. The 
occluder must not be permitted to touch any part 
of the eye to be shielded, but should be held in 
contact with the side of the nose. 

(c) The candidate is directed to begin 
with the first (visible) line and to read as many 
lines as possible. (The larger and less used lines 
should be kept covered in accordance with the 
suggestions in subarticle 15-86(3)(c).) 

(d) The smallest line read on the chart 
from the 20-foot distance shall be recorded as the 
vision for the right eye (O.D.) in accordance 
with regulations in effect. 

(e) The acuity for the left eye (O.S.) is 
then tested, using a different chart and recorded 
in the same manner. 

(f) Finally, the visual acuity for both 
eyes (O.U.) may be taken, if regulations require 
it, with a third chart and recorded. 

(g) A candidate who normally wears 
glasses all the time is tested again with them in 



15-117 
Change 69 



15-86 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-86 



place. The same procedure is followed as without 
glasses, for right eye, left eye and both eyes, 
changing charts for each test. 

(h) When there is suspicion that the 
candidate has memorized the charts, he is to be 
directed to read the letters of targets in reverse 
order or will be shown a different chart. When 
suspicion still remains, the candidate should be 
referred to the medical officer in charge. 

(i) The candidate is expected to read 
the letters promptly. No precise time limit 
should be applied but 1 or 2 seconds per letter is 
ample time. 

(j) When a candidate fails a letter or 
target he should not be asked to read it again. If 
the candidate is a rapid reader and his mistakes 
are obviously careless ones, he should be 
cautioned to "slow down" and the test should be 
repeated on another chart. 

(k) Some men give up easily. They 
may need encouragement to do their best. How- 
ever, no coaching shall be given by the examiner. 
(2) Score Recording. — 

(a) Vision is recorded in the form of a 
fraction (see subarticle 1 5-86(4) (b)). 

(b) When glasses are worn the record 
should read as follows: 



Without glasses 

O.D. 20/ 

O.S. 20/ 

O.U. 20/ 



With glasses 
O.D. 20/. . . . 

O.S. 20/ 

O.U. 20/. . . . 



(3) Suggested Useful Phrases for Use by 
Examiner. — 

(a) "Please stand here (indicating the 
place). Hold your head still and straight. Keep 
both eyes open when I cover your left eye." 

(b) "When I cover your eye, don't close 
it, for that interferes with the test." 

(c) "Start at the top and read as many 
lines as you can." 

(d) "Don't squint. Don't screw up your 
eyelids or frown." 

(e) "Look straight ahead." 

(f) "Don't rub your eyes." 

(g) "Read promptly — too much effort 
will tire your eyes and make it harder." 

(h) "Don't hurry — get each one right 
that you can because you won't have another 
chance." 

(i) "The next line may be hard but try 
it anyway." 

(j) "If you're not quite sure, make a 
guess — play your hunches." 

(4) Precautions To Be Observed on 
Conducting Tests for Visual Acuity. — 

(a) It may be extremely difficult to 
obtain an accurate measure of visual acuity. The 
examiner must bear in mind that men who are 

15-118 

Change 69 



anxious to pass tests of visual acuity will resort to 
deception in certain cases. Similarly, other men 
may take any means in order to fail a visual test 
when undesirable duties are in prospect. Hence, 
the examiner must be prepared to cope with 
either possibility so that he can uncover and 
recognize visual defects without the obvious 
cooperation of the person being tested. If the 
examiner is not a medical officer, such examinees 
should be referred to one. Various tests for mal- 
ingering are described in the Flight Surgeon's 
Handbook or the Aviation Medicine Technician's 
Manual. 

(b) The examiner must watch the 
candidate, not the chart which he is reading. The 
occluder must be held in such a manner that the 
candidate cannot peep around it. The most fre- 
quently used method of increasing visual acuity 
is to squint with the eyelids (screw up the eye- 
lids). This is not to be permitted. Some people 
with astigmatism will be able to read the letters 
better by tilting the head to one side; do not 
allow them to do this. 

(c) Another well known method used 
to pass a test for visual acuity is to obtain eye- 
drops beforehand which contract the pupil. If the 
pupils are unusually small, the attention of the 
medical officer must be called to the fact. 

(d) The occluder must not be pressed 
against the eyeball or lids, but rather it should be 
held against the side of the nose. The eye 
shielded by the occluder should be open in order 
to avoid pressure and to discourage squinting. 

(e) Some men may appear to be malin- 
gering when they are not, and, on the other 
hand, the most innocent-appearing person may 
be the worst malingerer. If malingering is sus- 
pected, the candidate should be referred to the 
medical officer at once. 

(5) The Examiner. — 

(a) The examiner must be neat in uni- 
form and professional in manner. 

(b) Test results determine the duties to 
which personnel will be assigned; therefore, too 
much care cannot be taken in tests for visual 
acuity if every man is to be utilized to the best 
purpose. 

(c) The examiner must be unhurried 
and persevering if accurate results are to be 
secured. A patient, tolerant, and painstaking atti- 
tude on the part of the examiner will reassure 
the candidate and increase the accuracy of the 
visual acuity test. Haste and irritation are to be 
avoided. 

(d) The examiner should undertake to 
memorize the test targets. If necessary, he may 
hold in his hand a small card on which the tar- 
gets are reproduced, in order to verify the res- 



15-86 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-86 




15-119 

Change 69 



15-86 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-86 




v 



15-120 

Change 69 



15-86 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-86 



ponses. In any event some accurate check of the 
responses should be made. 

(e) The routine of examination must 
be followed carefully in the order described. The 
vision for each eye should be recorded as soon as 
it is determined so that errors and omissions will 
be avoided. 

(c) Retests. — 

(1) The effects of fatigue and alcohol may 
make a certain amount of retesting necessary. In 
questionable cases one retest shall be given not 
less than the day after the initial test. 

(2) Occasionally an excuse is given for 
failure to pass the test due to temporary injury to 
the eyes. Examples are: that the candidate has 
gotten something in one or both eyes, that he has 
been exposed to welding flash, to bright sun, etc. 
Such cases are to be referred to the medical 
officer. 

(3) Testing Room and Equipment. — (See also 
art. 15-86(2)(a)(l).) 

(a) The Room. — 

(1) Size, — The room used for testing 
visual acuity must provide a distance of 20 feet 
between the eyes of the person being examined 
and the targets. (See drawing.) 

(2) Equipment. — A desk, stand, or high 
shelf shall be placed so that the examiner can 
observe the candidate while recording the res- 
ponses. The 20-foot mark must be carefully meas- 
ured and clearly marked. (See room plan.) 

(3) Ventilation. — Provision must be made 
for adequate ventilation of the testing room. This 
is of paramount importance. 

(4) Color. — Walls shall be painted with 
flat Navy Number 9 Pearl Gray (reflectivity 
46%) paint. Walls must not be black. Ceilings 
shall be painted white in order to approximate 
75 percent of reflection. It is important that the 
trim, frame, or panel on which the charts may be 
mounted should be painted a gray which is not 
darker than the walls. The general room trim, 
casings, etc., shall be painted with semi-gloss 
Navy Number 19 Light Navy Gray (reflectivity 
28%) paint. The standard Navy Number paints 
referred to in this paragraph are those listed in 
the Navy Department manual, "The Application 
of Color to Shore Establishment." Windows and 
glass doors shall be completely covered or 
curtained with material which is not in contrast 
with the color of the walls. 

(5) Security. — When the room is unused, 
there must be no access to the targets by persons 
who might profit by memorizing them. 

(b) Illumination. — 

(1) Room Brightness. — The brightness of 
the walls of the testing room at head height shall 
be not less than 3-foot lamberts nor greater than 



the brightness of the test charts. Light from fixt- 
ures or openings must be shielded so that it does 
not shine in the candidate's eyes. There must be 
no glare sources or areas of high contrast in the 
field of view around the test charts. The quality 
of light is immaterial; Mazda incandescent, or 
fluorescent is suitable. 

(2) Target Brightness. — The brightness 
of the charts shall average 12 foot-lamberts and 
shall be not less than 10 or more than 15 foot- 
lamberts. Under no circumstances shall there be 
shadows or reflections visible on the charts. 

(3) Lighting the Room. — 

(a) If means are not available for meas- 
uring foot-lamberts of brightness, the room 
should be painted as directed in subarticle 
15-86(3) (a) (4), and lighted as described in 
the following subarticle. The brightness of the 
chart and walls will then approximate the 
requirements of 12 and 4 foot-lamberts respec- 
tively. 

(b) A room is assumed about 24 feet 
long, 8 feet wide, and 10 feet high as shown in 
the illustrated room plan. Such a room should be 
lighted by three 200-watt incandescent lamps 
placed at a height of about 9 feet from the floor. 
One lamp may be over or just behind the exami- 
nee's head. One lamp should be approximately in 
the middle of the room. One lamp should be 
exactly 5 feet diagonally from the 20/20 line of 
the chart and incident upon this part of the chart 
at an angle of 45° (i.e., 3Vi feet above the 20/20 
line and 3V5 f eet m front of it). All lamps must 
be shielded from the direct vision of the exami- 
nee by opal shades (not clear glass) or metal 
reflectors; or a 4-inch strip of tin can be nailed to 
the ceiling in front of each lamp so as to accom- 
plish the same purpose. 

(c) Test Charts.— 

(1) At least three charts must be availa- 
ble. As rapidly as they are made available, only 
targets approved by the Army-Navy-National 
Research Council Vision Committee shall be 
used. 

(2) In order to conserve the examiners' 
time and prevent immediate recognition of the 
charts which may have been memorized, the 
large letters above 20/30 normally may be 
covered by a white cardboard which can be 
swung aside or pulled up with a cord when it is 
necessary to use the larger test targets. 

(d) Occluder. — A rigid occluder, 
constructed of a material such as wood, translu- 
cent plastic, or metal, shall be provided to shield 
the eye not being tested. An excellent design to 
discourage cheating is illustrated. 

(4) Score Reading. — 

(a) Test charts or* targets approved by the 



15-121 

Change 69 



15-87 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAV\ 



15-87 



Army-Navy-National Research Council Vision 
Committee will replace vision testing charts pres- 
ently in use as rapidly as they become available. 

(b) Permanent Reporting of Test Scores. — 
Vision test scores shall be expressed as a fraction 
in which the upper number is the distance in feet 
from the targets, and the lower number is the 
value of the smallest test-chart line read 
correctly. Thus a person reading at a distance of 
20 feet the 30 foot test-chart line is given a score 
of 20/30. 20/20 indicates that a person reads at a 
distance of 20 feet the test-chart line marked 20. 
Similarly, 20/200 means a person can read at a 
distance of 20 feet only the test-chart line marked 
200. 

15-87. Testing Heterophoria and Prism 
Divergence at Near and Far 

(1) TESTING HETEROPHORIA. — 

(a) General. — Heterophoria is a condition 
in which the eyes have a constant tendency to 
deviate but are prevented from so doing by 
fusion. When a person looks at an object, an 
image of that object is formed separately in both 
the right and the left eye. These separate images 
are sent to the brain where they are associated 
and interpreted as a single image; this process is 
known as fusion. Fusion is responsible for the 
two eyes working together in harmony and when 
anything prevents this, fusion is disrupted and 
one eye deviates. Since heterophoria is only a 
tendency of the eyes to deviate, no actual devia- 
tion is apparent when the eyes are being used 
together under ordinary conditions. The devia- 
tion becomes visible only when fusion control is 
weakened or abolished. When deviation occurs, 
its exact amount can be estimated with some 
accuracy by neutralizing the deviation with 
prisms of varying strength. If the deviating eye 
turns in (toward its fellow), the deviation is 
known as esopboria; if it turns out (away from 
its fellow), the deviation is known as exopboria; 
if the deviating eye turns up or down, the devia- 
tion is called hyperphoria or hypophoria, respec- 
tively. 

(1) Breaking up Fusion. — For the pur- 
pose of heterophoria measurement, fusion can be 
disrupted by placing a Maddox rod in front of 
one eye. The image of a spot of light, when 
viewed through a Maddox rod, is converted into 
a line of light. When the two eyes see" unlike 
images of the same object (one eye sees a spot of 
light while the other eye, the one behind the 
Maddox rod, sees a line of light), this disrupts 
fusion and tends to prevent the two eyes from 
working together. Thus, when heterophoria is 
present, one eye (the eye behind the Maddox 
rod) will deviate when its fellow eye continues 
to look at or fixate the spot of light. 



(2) Standardization of the Test. — The 
measurement of heterophoria is one of the most 
difficult problems that the inexperienced exam- 
iner can meet. The reason is simple. There are 
many factors which influence the test and only a 
few of these are actually known. For example, it 
is just as important to have the examinee seated 
comfortably during the test so that his neck 
muscles are not strained as it is to have the test- 
ing equipment in good condition. Strained posi- 
tions of the head and neck have a definite effect 
upon the measurement of heterophoria. Unless 
the test is performed in exactly the same way at 
every testing station, an examinee may pass the 
test at one station on one day and fail it on the 
next day at another station. A uniformly stand- 
ardized testing technique must be used at every 
station. This article has for its purpose the 
description of the testing technique to be fol- 
lowed at all testing stations, 

(b) Necessary Equipment. — 

(1) A testing room long enough to pro- 
vide a distance of 20 feet between the muscle 
light and the eyes of the seated examinee. 

(2) A comfortable testing chair located at 
one end of the room. 

(3) A muscle light (spot of light), 1 
centimeter in diameter, placed at a distance of 20 
feet from the eyes of the seated examinee and 
facing him. 

(4) An ophthalmoscope with a remova- 
ble, May-type head. 

(5) Either (a) a binocular phorometer 
with Risley rotary prisms, white Maddox rods, 
and Stevens phorometer (graduated in tenths of 
a prism diopter from 0 to 2.0 attached); or (b) a 
monocular, portable phorometer with a Risley 
rotary prism and white Maddox rod attached; or 
(c) a trial frame with a white Maddox rod and 
graduated and accurately calibrated prisms, 
either loose or arranged vertically in a prism bar. 

(6) Some method of measuring exactly 13 
inches from the front of the phorometer. A cord 
tied to the phorometer and either looped or knot- 
ted at the proper length is satisfactory. Some 
phorometers have a metal rod attached to which 
a small light may be fixed in order to accurately 
measure heterophoria at 13 inches. 

(c) Testing With the Binocular Phorome- 
ter. — 

(1) Seating the Examinee. — The examinee 
should first be comfortably seated in a chair. A 
straight backed chair with arms is preferable to a 
stool. If there is a head rest on the chair, it 
should be accurately and comfortably adjusted. 

(2) Adjusting the Phorometer. — The pho- 
rometer should be carefully adjusted to the exam- 
inee, not the examinee to the phorometer. He 
should never be told to "come forward a little" 



15-122 

Change 69 



15-87 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-87 



to "stretch your neck a bit," or "move your head 
sideways (to right or left) a little bit," The 
examiner must make these adjustments himself 
with the various controls on the phorometer; 
that is why they are there. (See drawing.) Don't 
make the examinee adjust himself to the phoro- 
meter. Adjusting the phorometer means several 
things. It means: 

(a) Having the entire length of the 
browpiece touching the examinee's forehead and 
exerting gentle but firm pressure. 

(b) Having the bubble in the spirit 
level accurately centered between the two mark- 
ers. 

(c) Having the interpupillary distance 
reading set on the scale and the phorometer high 
enough so that each of the examinee's pupils is 
exactly centered behind its respective frame. 

(d) Having the examinee so seated and 
the phorometer so placed that both are exactly 
and directly facing the muscle light across the 
room. 

(e) The examinee's glasses. If the exam- 
inee wears glasses all the time, any test of hetero- 
phoria should be made with the equivalent of his 
lenses inserted in the phorometer. If prisms are 
incorporated in the examinee's regular glasses, 
these must be omitted from the lenses inserted in 
the phorometer. If the examinee wears glasses all 
the time, any measurement of his heterophoria 
without his glasses is utterly worthless and 
entirely undependable. 

(3) The Maddox Rod. — The examinee's 
attention is directed to the muscle light which is 
a spot of light 1 cm. in diameter located at a 
distance of 20 feet across the room. To insure his 
seeing it, the examiner should flash it on and off 
a time or two by means of a remote control 
switch located conveniently near at hand, if this 
is available. There must be no other sources of 
light except the muscle light visible to the exam- 
inee. There may be other lights in the room as 
long as the examinee cannot see them. All 
reflecting surfaces should also be removed from 
the examinee's range of vision. If this is not 
done, the overhead light which the examinee 
cannot see directly may nevertheless be reflected 
into his eyes from any shiny metal or glass 
objects in the room. If this reflection occurs, 
more than a single line is liable to be seen 
through the Maddox rod and will prove to be a 
disturbing factor if not a source of actual error in 
the test. Once the examinee has definitely located 
the muscle light, a white multiple Maddox rod 
attached to the phorometer should be rotated 
into position. This means rotating it on its hinge 
as far as it will go. It should be placed before the 
right eye. The axes of the small rods which make 



up the multiple Maddox rod should be in the 
horizontal meridian. With the rod in this posi- 
tion, when the examinee looks at the muscle 
light, he sees a vertical white line with his right 
eye (which has the Maddox rod in front of it) 
and a spot of light with his left eye. He is thus 
seeing unlike images of the same object, i.e., the 
spot of light. The examinee should now be spe- 
cifically questioned as to whether he sees both 
the vertical white line of light and a white spot 
of light. If he does, the testing may proceed. If 
he does not see both the line and light at the 
same time, one of several things may have hap- 
pened: 

(a) The phorometer frames may not be 
exactly centered before each eye. 

(b) Although properly centered, the 
phorometer may not be aimed exactly at the 
light. 

(c) The examinee may have closed one 
eye. Both eyes must be kept open at all times 
during the test. 

(d) The examinee may be uncons- 
ciously suppressing vision in one eye (see subar- 
ticle 15-87 (l)(c)(4). 

(e) Visual acuity may be poor in one 

eye. 

(f ) One eye may be turned far in or far 
out; if one eye is deviating a great deal ("cross- 
eyed" or "wall-eyed"), this fact should have been 
noted on external examination. The presence of a 
manifest deviation is known as heterotropia, and 
no heterophoria measurement is accurate or is 
usually even possible in such cases. 

<4) Suppression. — Double vision is 
usually avoided by the natural impulse to line up 
the two eyes so that they work together. In the 
presence of heterophoria, the examinee fuses the 
two images into one but to do this requires effort 
(whether he is aware of it or not). If the 
required effort is too great, one of the two 
images may be ignored by the brain and when 
this happens, it is known as suppression. In the 
case of the Maddox rod test, it is somewhat 
annoying to look at a spot of light, yet see a line 
of light with one eye and a spot of light with the 
other. The image of the line is often suppressed 
(ignored) by the brain, which means that it 
seems to fade in brightness and may disappear 
entirely. If the examinee sees only the line, or 
only the light, or the line and then the light 
alternately, it may be assumed that he is sup- 
pressing, provided: 

(a) The phorometer is properly 

adjusted. 

(b) Visual acuity is normal or any- 
where near equal in the two eyes. 

(c) There is no gross deviation of the 
eyes on external examination (inspection). 



15-123 
Change 69 



15-87 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-87 



If the examinee sees only the spot of light {using 
his left eye), the left eyepiece of the phorometer 
should be covered with an occluder until the 
light is seen by the right eye. If the cover is then 
removed, the line and light will usually be seen 
simultaneously. Likewise, if only the line is seen 
(using the right eye, which has the Maddox rod 
in front of it), the occluder should be placed 
over the right eyepiece of the phorometer until 
the spot of light is seen by the left eye. It may 
then be removed. 

(5) The Risley Rotary Prism. — Once the 
examinee sees the line and light simultaneously, 
the next step is the removal of the Maddox rod 
from its position before the eye and the rotation 
of the Risley rotary prism attached to the phoro- 
meter into position before the right eye. It will 
be noted that its location is behind the Maddox 
rod, between the Maddox rod and the examinee's 
eye. The handle of the rotary prism should be 
rotated into the vertical position (at 90°). By 
means of this same handle, the line indicating 
the position of the prism base should be rotated 
on or near zero. Some of the older phorometers 
have the handle so placed that it is to one side 
when horizontal muscle balance is being tested. 
Others have it at an angle. The proper position 
should be determined by the examiner before- 
hand. 

(a) Marking the Prism. — 

(1) It is a difficult problem for the 
inexperienced examiner to remember whether 
prism base indicates exophoria, prism base down 
hyperphoria, etc. For this reason, a very simple 
and practical solution may be found in the use of 
a little adhesive tape. One piece should be stuck 
on the fixed frame of the rotary prism over the 
90° mark, and another over the 180° mark on the 
right eyepiece and over the 0° mark on the left 
eyepiece. With pen and ink, a line representing 
the three marks which have been covered should 
be drawn. (See drawing.) On the tape over the 
90° on the prism before the right eye, the letter 
"X" should be printed on the tape on the side of 
the line toward the nose; similarly, a letter "S" 
may be printed on the opposite side of the line 
(toward the temple). When heterophoria is 
being measured, if the prism base marker is set 
on the "X" side of the 90° mark, exophoria is 
present (prism base in); if the marker has been 
set on the "S" side, esophoria is present (prism 
base out). 

(2) In the same manner, the tape at 
180° and at 0° can be lined. Above the line on 
the right prism, print the letter "L" and below 
the line the letter "R." When vertical hetero- 
phoria is being tested and the rotary prism 
handle is set at 180° (right eye), if the prism 
marker has been set above the line (in the "L" 



area), then left hyperphoria is present. If the 
marker has been set below the line (in the "R" 
area), then right hyperphoria is present. This is 
true for the right eye. For the left eye, as is 
shown in the diagram, all markings are reversed, 
(b) Instructions to the Examinee. — 

(1) Having assured himself that the 
examinee sees both the line of light (seen 
through the Maddox rod) and the spot of light, 
the examiner is ready to begin the test. Since the 
examiner adjusts the Risley prism, the examinee 
need only be instructed to tell the examiner 
when the line of light runs through or bisects the 
spot of light. The instructions would therefore 
be something like this: "I am going to move the 
line. I want to adjust it so that it runs right 
through the center of the spot of light." The 
examiner then slowly turns the knob controlling 
the Risley prism in one direction or the other, 
meanwhile asking, "Is the line moving toward 
the light or away from it?" If the examinee 
replies that the line is moving away from the 
light, the examiner immediately begins turning 
the Risley prism control knob in the opposite 
direction, meanwhile asking, "Now is the line 
going toward the light?" When the examinee 
indicates that the line is moving .toward the 
light, the examiner continues to turn slowly, 
saying, "Now when the line runs through the 
exact center of the light, tell me to stop." When 
the examinee states that the line" is running 
through the center of the light, the Maddox rod 
is rotated out of position in order that the cali- 
brated scale on the Risley prism may be easily 
read. The scale reading is recorded. 

(2) The examinee may often state in 
one breath that the line is running through the 
light and in the next breath state that this is no 
longer the case. The examiner should reassure 
him by telling him that it often happens and 
continue adjusting the prism until the line stops 
moving and an accurate reading can be made. 

(6) The Maddox Rod Test at 20 Feet.— 
(a) Lateral Heterophoria. — 

(1) The examiner should always 
begin the test with the Risley prism set "off" of 
zero in one direction or the other, preferably on 
the "X" side (exophoria) so that some adjust- 
ment will have to be made in every case. 

(2) When the reading is completed, 
if lateral heterophoria was being measured, then 
if the prism marker is on the side of the line 
toward the examinee's nose (in the "X" area), 
exophoria is present; if on the side toward the 
examinee's temple (in the "S" area), esophoria is 
present. 

(3) Doubtful Cases. — If any doubt 
exists in the mind of the examiner about the 



15-124 

Change 69 



15-87 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-87 



results of the test, the examinee should be 
referred to the medical officer in charge. The 
Maddox rod and rotary prism before the exami- 
nee's right eye should be rotated out of position 
and the rod and prism on the other side of the 
phorometer rotated into position before the left 
eye. The procedure described previously should 
then be repeated. If there is a great difference 
between the readings with the Maddox rod 
before the right eye and before the left eye, both 
should be repeated again. If there is only a small 
difference, i.e., 2 or 3 prism diopters, the larger 
of the two should be recorded as the lateral het- 
erophoria (esophoria or exophoria as the case 
may be) for the examinee, A consistently large 
difference between the readings for the right and 
left eye indicates a partial paralysis of one of the 
extraocular muscles and calls for a repeated 
examination of the extraocular movements and a 
red lens test with charting of diplopia fields, 
(b) Vertical Heteropboria. — 

(1) When the lateral heterophoria 
has been tested, the next step is the measurement 
of vertical heterophoria. With the Maddox rod 
before the right eye, the rod should be adjusted 
so that the axes of its component glass rods are in 
the vertical. The eye behind the rod now will see 
the spot of light as a horizontal line. The Risley 
prism is turned down and out of position and the 
Steven's phorometer is turned up into its vertical 
position. Set the index of the Steven's phorome- 
ter at 2.00 LH (Left Hyperphoria). The exami- 
nee is told that he should see a horizontal line 
below the spot of light. The examiner grasps the 
controlling lever of the Steven's phorometer and 
moves the lever up slowly until the examinee 
states that the line bisects the spot of light. If the 
examinee reports that he also sees another spot of 
light he is told to ignore the faint spot and to 
watch the line until it bisects the bright spot. 
When this is done the examiner reads the scale in 
tenths of prism diopters of hyperphoria. As indi- 
cated on the Steven's phorometer, if the index is 
set below the zero position, the measurement is 
of left hyperphoria (LH), and if it is set above 
the zero position the measurement is of right 
hyperphoria (RH). When testing the left eye, 
the relative positions of the line and spot of light 
are reversed. That is, with the index set at 2.0 LH 
{Left Hyperphoria) the line will appear to the 
examinee to be above the spot of light. 

(2) Only Hyperphoria Is Recorded. 
— It has been previously stated that the eyes may 
deviate upward (hyperphoria) or downward 
(hypophoria). In most cases, when one eye turns 
up, its fellow eye tends to turn down. For simpli- 
fication, only hyperphoria is recorded. Thus, if 
the right eye tends to turn upward, it is right 
hyperphoria. If the right eye tends to turn down- 



ward, the left eye would tend to turn upward in 
the majority of cases and so left hyperphoria 
would be recorded. The proper finding, whether 
the Maddox rod is before the right or left eye is 
always indicated on the Steven's phorometer by 
the letters RH or LH for right or left hyper- 
phoria respectively. 

(3) Doubtful Cases. — If there is any 
doubt about the measurement in the mind of the 
examiner, the left eye should be tested in a simi- 
lar fashion. This is done by placing the Maddox 
rod before the left eye instead of the right eye 
and by using the Steven's phorometer as 
described above. The only apparent change is the 
reversal of the relative positions of the line and 
the spot of light at the beginning of the test. A 
difference of more than 0.5 prism diopters 
between the right and left eye measurements 
should be the cause for a recheck of the hyper- 
phoria measurements for each eye. In this case it 
would be well to begin the test with the index 
set at 2.0 RH (Right Hyperphoria), the exam- 
iner moving the line in the opposite direction as 
described above until the line bisects the spot of 
light. The averages for the settings "from below" 
and "from above" when the Maddox rod is 
before the right and the left eyes should be 
compared. If the difference is greater than 1.0 
prism diopter there is, in all probability, a slight 
paralysis of one or more of the extraocular 
muscles and a red lens test with the charting of 
the diplopia fields is indicated. 

(4) Cases With More Than 2.0 Prism 
Diopters of Hyperphoria. — Occasionally an 
examinee may have more than this amount of 
hyperphoria. This will be indicated at the begin- 
ning of the test by the examinee reporting that 
the line appears above the spot of light instead of 
below when the index of the Steven's phorometer 
is set at 2.0 LH. Remove the Steven's phorometer 
and place the Risley prism in position with its 
handle in the horizontal and toward the exami- 
nee's temple. The line is then adjusted so that it 
runs through or bisects the spot of light. When 
this is done, set the index of the Risley to the 
nearest whole division toward zero and bring the 
Steven's phorometer into position. Now adjust 
the lever of this phorometer until the line bisects 
the spot of light. The sum of the readings on the 
Risley and the Steven's phorometer gives the 
total hyperphoria, and the position of the index 
of the Steven's phorometer indicates whether it is 
right or left hyperphoria that has been measured. 

(7) The Maddox Rod Test at 13 Inches — 
(a) When the test has been completed 
at the 20-foot testing distance, the muscle light is 
turned off. The test should then be performed at 
13 inches, using an ophthalmoscope with its head 
removed at the muscle fight. The light should be 



15-125 
Change 69 



15-87 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-87 



held exactly in the midline and 6 inches below 
the level of the examinee's eyes; thus the eyes are 
in the reading position. It may be necessary to 
lower the phorometer slightly in order to keep 
the eyes accurately centered. The light should be 
held at distance of exactly 13 inches from the 
phorometer. A string tied to the center bar of the 
phorometer and looped at 13 inches will serve 
nicely. If the ophthalmoscope neck is slipped 
into the loop and the cord drawn taut, the light 
will be exactly 13 inches from the phorometer 
each time the test is performed. 

(b) The technique of testing lateral and 
vertical heterophoria at 13 inches is exactly the 
same as that used at 20 feet. Occasionally the 
examinee may complain that he sees more than 
one line at the 13-inch distance. If the source of 
this annoying reflex cannot be found, he should 
be instructed to pay attention only to the bright- 
est line while it is adjusted so that it runs 
through or bisects the spot of light. 

(d) Testing With the Monocular, Portable 
Phorometer. — The principle of measuring heter- 
ophoria with a Maddox rod and prisms may be 
applied in several different ways. Because the 
equipment available for the test varies from one 
station to the next, two additional testing meth- 
ods will be described. At some installations there 
may not be a binocular phorometer available; 
instead, there may be only the monocular, porta- 
ble type. This consists of a stick which has an 
eyepiece mounted at one end in a fixed position. 
Rotating on an axle attached to the eyepiece are 
a Risley rotary prism and a white Maddox rod. 
The instrument is held in position before the 
right eye by the examinee and the test is carried 
out exactly as has been previously described. It is 
the responsibility of the examiner to make 
certain that the instrument is held in the proper 
position at all times during the test. If the right 
eye is being tested, the examinee should hold the 
instrument, with its handle vertical before the 
right eye with his left hand. The examiner 
adjusts the prism as before. 

(e) Testing With a Trial Frame and Loose , 
Prisms. — If no phorometer is available, a trial 
frame should be carefully adjusted on the exami- 
nee's eyes. A white Maddox rod from the trial 
case is placed in the cell before the right eye; its 
component rods should be placed with their axes 
horizontal if lateral heterophoria is to be tested 
first. Once the examinee has located both the line 
and the light, the examiner should select a weak 
prism and hold it before the Maddox rod with its 
base either in or out. Care must be taken to keep 
the base of the prism exactly vertical if lateral 
heterophoria is being tested or exactly horizontal 
if vertical heterophoria is being tested. Several 
prisms will probably need to be tried (both base 



in and base out) before one is found which 
causes the line to run through or bisect the spot 
of light. The rest of the procedure should be 
carried out exactly as has been described pre- 
viously. 

(f) Checking the Maddox Rod. — Two 
defects may occasionally be found in a Maddox 
rod: 

(1) The line of light may be indistinct 
rather than sharp. 

(2) There may be a prism effect which 
acts to deflect the line of light from its true 
position. A Maddox rod which is found to have 
either of these defects should be discarded. If the 
line of light formed by the rod is sharp and 
clear, any prism can be readily detected by hold- 
ing the rod before one eye so that a horizontal 
line of light is seen while the other eye sees a 
spot of light. The position of the line in relation 
to the light is observed. The rod is then rotated 
through a full 180° and the line and light rela- 
tionship observed again. If no prism is present, 
the relationship should be identical in the two 
observation positions described. 

(g) Checking Prisms. — 

(1) If a phorometer with a Risley rotary 
prism attached is not available for heterophoria 
testing, it will be necessary to use loose prisms. 
These may be available either in a trial case or in 
a special box (prism set). The strength of each 
prism should be etched upon the prism itself in 
units of prism diopters, this prismatic unit being 
one used throughout the armed forces. Unfortun- 
ately, not all prisms are marked in these units, 
some are not marked at all, and still others are 
marked incorrectly. It therefore becomes neces- 
sary to check the strength of each prism before it 
is used in the measurement of heterophoria. This 
can be very easily and very simply done. 

(2) A diagram (see drawing) is made on 
a white sheet of paper Wi X H inches in size. A 
heavy black line is drawn about 1 inch from and 
parallel to one edge. A second, lighter line is 
drawn perpendicular to the heavy line in such a 
way that it roughly bisects it. Using a meter 
stick, units of 1 cm. are laid off on the second 
line. These units should be numbered consecu- 
tively, the mark closest to the heavy line being 
numbered "1". This chart or diagram should 
then be tacked in place on the wall in such a 
manner that the heavy black line is vertical while 
the line with the centimeter markings runs to the 
left of the heavy line. A series of arrowheads 
added to the heavy line below the point of the 
intersection will facilitate the checking. 

(3) The prism to be checked is held at a 
distance of exactly 1 meter from the diagram on 



15-126 

Change 69 



15-87 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-87 




The appearance of the test 
chart when viewed through 
a prism whose strength is 
2 diopters, at a distance 
of exactly I meter. 



the wall and in a plane parallel to the plane of 
the wall. The base of the prism should be held in 
the vertical, toward the right, and parallel to the 
heavy black line on the chart. The examiner 
should then place his eye at a distance of about 4 
inches from the prism in such a position that he 



can view the heavy black line through it. As 
shown in the drawing, the top edge of the prism 
should be held so that it is just below but almost 
coincides with the lighter marked line on the 
diagram. The position of the heavy black line 
above the intersection of the two lines should be 



15-127 

Change 69 



15-87 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-87 



such that it strikes the prism's upper edge at 
about its center. If the left eye is now closed and 
one looks through the prism, held in the position 
described, the heavy black line will appear to 
break at the prism edge and continue its down- 
ward course in a position to the left of its origi- 
nal one. The centimeter marking to which the 
arrowheads on the displaced portion of the heavy 
line point is a measurement of the strength of 
the prism in diopters. If the arrowheads point to 
a spot between two markings, the appropriate 
fraction can be easily estimated. If the test is 
carried out as described and the displaced portion 
of the heavy line intersects the marked line at 3, 
for example, then the prism being tested has a 
strength of 3 diopters. If the displaced portion 
intersects the marked line at 5, it is a 5 diopter 
prism, etc. 

(4) Two things must always be known 
about a prism: 

(a) Its strength in prism diopters. 

(b) The position of its base. 

In testing heterophoria, the prism base is placed 
in the following positions: 

For exophoria, prism base in (toward 
the nose). 

For esophoria, prism base out (toward 
the temple). 

For hyperphoria, prism base down 
(toward the cheek). 

For hypophoria, prism base up (toward 
the eyebrow). 

(2) TESTING PRISM DIVERGENCE AT 
NEAR {13 INCHES).— A test of prism diver- 
gence is essentially a test of fusion. Tests for 
heterophoria depend upon breaking up fusion as 
much as possible. If prism divergence is tested 
before heterophoria is measured, the hetero- 
phoria measurements will be affected. It is there- 
fore important always to test heterophoria before 
testing prism divergence. 

(a) Equipment. — The equipment for testing 
prism divergence is the same as that described for 
testing heterophoria in a previous section of this 
article. 

(b) Procedure for Testing Prism Diver- 
gence at Near. — The procedure of seating the 
examinee and adjusting the phorometer is also 
identical with that for testing heterophoria, pre- 
viously described. The only difference is that the 
Maddox rod is not used. The Risley rotary prism 
is rotated into position before the right eye. The 
handle of the rotary prism should be rotated to 
the vertical (90°). By means of this same handle, 
the line indicating the position of the prism base 
should be set at 0 on the scale. 

(1) The Muscle Light.— This is a May- 
type ophthalmoscope with the head removed. It 



should be held in the midline between the exami- 
nee's eyes in a depressed position (below the 
horizontal) at a distance of 13 inches from the 
eyes. An easy and practical method for securing 
the proper distance is to use a string tied to the 
center of the phorometer which is 13 inches long. 
The free end of the string should have a loop 
tied in it. The stem of the ophthalmoscope 
(which contains the bulb) can then be slipped 
through the loop and the string drawn taut. This 
insures a 13-inch testing distance. The light 
should be held in the midline at such an angle 
below the horizontal that the corneal reflection 
of the light is just able to form by rays passing 
over the bottom of the phorometer trial frame. If 
the examiner holds the light in the midline on a 
level with the examinee's eyes, a corneal reflec- 
tion of the light will be seen located roughly 
over the center of each pupil. If the light is now 
slowly lowered, still being kept in the midline, a 
point will be reached where the phorometer trial 
frame will prevent rays of light from reaching 
the cornea and the corneal reflex will suddenly 
disappear from both eyes. The desired position of 
the light is one of depression below the horizon- 
tal, in the midline, to a point just short of one 
producing disappearance of the corneal reflec- 
tion, 

(2) Testing Procedure. — 

(a) With the Risley rotary prism in 
position before the right eye as described, and 
with the muscle light held in the proper posi- 
tion, the examinee's attention is directed to the 
light. He is told to watch the light carefully and 
to inform the examiner at the instant that the 
light appears to double. He is warned that the 
light may blur before it doubles. It is not the 
point of blurring but the point of doubling that 
is wanted. 

(b) The examiner then grasps the 
handle of the rotary prism and turns it in such a 
manner that the 2ero mark on the prism moves 
inward toward the examinee's nose. The rate of 
movement should be smooth rather than jerky 
and fairly slow. The examinee is cautioned to 
avoid undue blinking, if this is present. 

(c) The rotation is stopped at the point 
where the light appears double to the examinee. 
A reading is then taken from the calibrated scale 
on the rotary prism and is recorded as prism 
divergence at 13 inches. The average normal 
figure in this test is around 19 prism diopters. 
The examinee must have a reading of 12 prism 
diopters or better to qualify. 

(3) TESTING PRISM DIVERGENCE AT 
FAR (20 FEET).— The same precautions noted 
under testing for prism divergence at 13 inches 
earlier in this section shall be observed. 



15-128 
Change 69 



15-87A 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-87A 



(a) Equipment. — The Risley rotary prisms 
of the phorometer already described in this 
article and a stimulus light 1.0 cm in diameter 
shall be employed. 

(b) Procedure. — The examinee is seated 
facing the spot of light 20 feet away. With the 
Risley prism set at zero on the scale, the exami- 
nee should see but one spot of light. As the prism 
is slowly rotated, base in, diplopia will ulti- 
mately be produced. The number of prism diop- 
ters which produces diplopia is read from the 
scale and recorded as the prism divergence for a 
20 foot stimulus. In most subjects the prism 
divergence at far is approximately one third the 
value of the prism divergence at near. 

(c) Precaution. — The test can not be made 
if the examinee sees two spots of light with the 
prism set at zero on the scale. If this condition 
exists, the examinee has diplopia in the primary 
position of gaze. Such finding should be 
confirmed by a red lens test. 

15-87A. Armed Forces Vision Tester (AFVT) 

(1) General. — The Armed Forces Vision 
Tester (AFVT) has been approved as an alter- 
nate method for the testing of vision of naval 
aviation personnel. The standards for the various 
categories of personnel and various training pro- 
grams are the same as the standards for the same 
item tested by any other method. For a more 
detailed description of this instrument refer to 
the "Manual of Instructions: Armed Forces 
Vision Tester" (FSN 7610-721-9390). The 
Manual may be obtained by MILSTRIP requisi- 
tion to: Defense Personnel Support Center 
(DPSC-ASI), 2800 South 20th Street, Philadel- 
phia, Pa. 19101. Replacement parts are available 
only from Bausch & Lomb, Inc., 635 St. Paul 
Street, Rochester, N.Y. 14602, or their local rep- 
resentative. The light source bulb is carried 
under the catalog number 71-71-93 and the 
scoring card key as number 71-2164-139. 

(2) Illustration. — The illustration shows the 
instrument from the left front. The components 
of the instrument are as follows: (1) forehead 
rest, (2) eye pieces, (3) occluder, (4) lever for 
changing from far to near vision testing, (5) 
door for checking bulb, (6) handle to rear drum, 
(7) handle to the forward drum, (8) setscrew 
for locking the instrument at a given height, (9) 
plastic bar for demonstrating the stereopsis test. 

(3) Description.— The AFVT consists of two 
rotating drums holding illuminated slides for the 
testing of various facets of vision. The examinee 
observes the distance slides looking slightly 
downward with the instrument set as shown in 
the illustration and he observes the near slides 
looking downward at a greater angle. The han- 



dles on the side of the instrument rotate the 
drums to change the slides. Beneath the eye 
pieces there is a lever which operates an occluder 
so that each eye can be tested separately; or, as in 
the case of the slides for muscle balance and 
stereopsis, the two eyes can be tested together. A 
scoring key is provided with the instrument. The 
following slides are available: 

(a) Rear Drum (Distance Testing). — 

(1) Slide 1— Vertical Phorias.— The right 
eye sees a set of numbered steps, the left sees a 
dotted line. With both eyes open the examinee is 
asked which step the dotted line intersects. Inter- 
pretation: Step 1, 2 prism diopters of left hyper- 
phoria; step 2, 1.5 left hyperphoria; step 3, 1.0 
left hyperphoria; step 4, 0.5 left hyperphoria; 
step 5, orthophoria; step 6, 0.5 prism diopters of 
right hyperphoria; step 7, 1.0 right hyperphoria; 
step 8, 1.5 right hyperphoria; step 9, 2.0 right 
hyperphoria. DETECTION OF MALINGER- 
ERS: It would be possible for the examinee to 
feign a normal phoria if he knew that a score of 
5, for example, is normal. To avoid this, a pair of 
VARIABLE PRISMS is provided, by means of 
which the examiner can raise either the right or 
the left eye image. The prisms are mounted 
within the viewing box. The extent of prismatic 
deviation is governed by the position of each of 
two control handles. These handles are not visi- 
ble in the illustration, but are clearly visible to 
the examiner when he looks down on the top of 
the instrument. The correct score — and the only 
score recorded — is that obtained when both 
control handles of the VARIABLE PRISMS are 
pushed inward as far as they will go. This is 
known as the SCORING POSITION. Moving 
the left handle outward from this position moves 
the left eye image downward and outward. Simi- 
larly, moving the right handle outward moves 
the right-eye image downward and outward. The 
maximum amount of downward shift provided 
by each control corresponds to four steps. 
Moving the right handle outward to its extreme 
position therefore will change the apparent loca- 
tion of the dotted line from step 1 to step 5, for 
example, from 6 to above 9, etc. Moving the left 
control handle outward to its extreme position 
similarly will change the apparent location of 
the dotted line from step 5 to step 1, or from step 
8 to step 4, etc. The examiner varies the location 
of the right or left control handle, each time 
asking the examinee to report the location of the 
dotted line. One of these answers only, i.e., the 
one obtained when both handles are in the 
SCORING POSITION, gives the examinee s 
score on the test. 

(2) Slide 2 — Horizontal Phorias. — The 
right eye sees a row of numbered dots, the left 
eye sees an arrow. With both eyes open, the 



15-129 

Change 69 



15-87A 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-87A 




examinee is asked what is the number of the dot 
to which the arrow is pointing. Interpretation:^ 
The reported value minus 11 equals prism diop-" 
ters of exophoria; 11 minus the reported value 
equals the prism diopters of esophoria. DETEC- 
TION OF MALINGERERS: By means of the 
VARIABLE PRISMS previously mentioned, the 
right and left eye images can both be shifted 
outward a maximum of seven dots. To produce 
this outward shift without a downward shift, in 
this test both control handles are moved outward 
simultaneously by about the same amount. When 
both handles are shifted as far out as they go, the 
apparent position of the arrow is moved seven 
dots to the left, giving a score seven below the 
true score. As in previous test, the correct score 
and the only score recorded is that obtained 
when the control handles are in the SCORING 
POSITION; i.e., when both are pushed inward as 
far as they will go. 

(3) Slides 3 and 3 A — Visual Acuity,— 
With both eyes uncovered the examinee sees a 



jumble of letters. With either eye blinded, the 
uncovered eye cannot see the letters intended for 
the opposite eye. An examinee cannot read the 
left eye letters with his right eye and then repeat 
them from memory when his left eye is being 
tested. A scoring key sealed in plastic comes with 
the instrument and is also to be found in the 
AFVT Manual of Instructions. 



(4) Slides 4 and 4 A— Visual Acuity, 
Large Letters. — Separate charts for the left and 
right eye. See scoring key. 

(5) Slides 5 and 5A—Stereopsis.— Six 
groups of three horizontal lines, five circles to a 
line. The groups are numbered A to F. In each 
horizontal row of circles, one circle stands out 
closer to the examinee. The degree of difficulty 
increases from A to F. The examinee calls the 
circle which stands out. Passing score: There 
must be no misses in groups A through D. 
Caution: The examiner must insure that neither 
eye is inadvertently left occluded when this test 



15-130 
Change 69 



15-87B 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-88 



is being given. Both eyes must be able to see the 
circles in order for any stereopsis to occur, 
(b) front Drum (Near Testing). — 

(1) Slide 6 — Vertical Phorias. — Same as 
slide 1, only this is a near test. 

(2) Slide 7— Horizontal Phorias. — Same 
as slide 2, only here the interpretation is: The 
reported value minus 13 equals prism diopters of 
exophoria; 13 minus the reported value equals 
prism diopters of esophoria. 

(3) Slide 8 — Near Visual Acuity. — This is 
given in Snellen notations. 

(4) Slide 9 — Near Visual Acuity, Large 
Letters. — 

1S-87B. Depth Perception 

(1) When the Armed Forces Vision Tester 
(AFVT) is unavailable, the Verhoeff stereopter 
may be used to test depth perception. This is a 
binocular test. As a preliminary, target #2 (the 
second target down when the instrument is 
upright) is presented at about 40 centimeters and 
brought nearer if necessary. This will acquaint 
the examinee with what he is to observe and at 
the same time determine whether there is at least 
a distance, however short, at which he can judge 
correctly. One or two positions are shown at 
close range to the examinee to clearly demon- 
strate that one rod is always at difference from 
the other two. It is pointed out that the size of 
the rods is not a clue to the relative distance. The 
examinee is now ready for the test. The appara- 
tus is held 1 meter from the examinee. Eight 
different rod relations are possible and all eight 
are shown. The device should be kept centered as 
a frontal plane normal to the subject's binocular 
visual midline. To avoid helpful extraneous cues 
it is highly important to hold the device steady, 
and particularly not to rotate it on its vertical 
axis. It is also important not to permit the 
subject to move his head. The target window 
should not be exposed while the device is being 
placed in position or the sets are changed. A 
convenient method of manipulation is to grasp 
the device ever the target window with the left 
hand, place the desired set into position with the 
right hand, then grasp the device below with the 
right hand and expose the target window by 
moving the left hand up or down. Thus while 
the target window is exposed, the device is sup- 
ported by both hands of the examiner. The 
instructions to the subjects are: "Report the near- 
est strip and the farthest strip, unless they all 
appear to be at the same distance, referring to 
the strips as 'left,' 'middle,' and 'right'." Only the 
report concerning the one strip out of plane (far- 
ther or nearer than the other two which are in 
the same plane) is to be considered. 



15-88. Examination of Heart and Blood 
Vessels 

(1) (a) General. — The applicant should stand 
before the examiner with direct light falling 
upon his chest. He should stand at ease, with the 
arms relaxed and hanging by his sides. The 
examiner should not permit the applicant to 
move his body from side to side or twist it in an 
endeavor to assist in the examination, as these 
maneuvers may distort landmarks and increase 
muscular resistance of the chest wall. The heart 
should be examined by the following method: 
inspection, palpation, percussion, auscultation, 
and when considered necessary, by mensuration. 
Blood-pressure readings and palpation of the 
pulse are required for candidates for commission 
and for applicants for enlistment. Electrocar- 
diograms and X-rays for cardiac mensuration 
should be made in doubtful cases. 

(b) Inspection. — Begin from above and go 
downward, with special reference to the follow- 
ing: condition and color of skin and mucous 
membranes; eyes for arcus senilis; visible pulsa- 
tions of the vessels of the neck; enlargement of 
the thyroid gland; the shape of the chest, for any 
malformation which might change the normal 
relations of the heart; pulsations in the supraster- 
nal notch, and in the second interspaces to right 
and left of the sternum; character of the pre- 
cordial impulse, and the location and character of 
the maximum impulse, epigastric pulsations or 
pulsations in the hepatic region, and any pulsa- 
tions or retractions in the back. 

(c) Palpation. — Palpate first for the detec- 
tion of thrills over the carotids, thyroid gland, 
suprasternal notch, apex of heart, and at the base. 
Use palms of hands in palpating and use light 
pressure, as hard pressure may obliterate a thrill. 
To locate the maximum cardiac impulse, have 
the applicant stoop and throw his shoulders 
slightly forward, thus bringing the heart into the 
closest possible relation with the chest wall. Pal- 
pate both radial arteries at the same time for 
equality in rate and volume. Run the finger 
along the artery to note any changes in its walls. 
Place the palm of one hand over the heart and 
fingers of the other over the radial artery to see if 
all ventricular contractions are transmitted. Pal- 
pate to determine the degree of tension or 
compressibility of the pulse. In an estimate of 
pulse rate, the excitement of undergoing a physi- 
cal examination must be considered and a rate of 
90 may be considered normal, provided the heart 
responds normally to the exercise test. A rate of 
50 or below should excite suspicion of heart 
block and be made the subject of further investi- 
gation. Rates of 100 or over should be investi- 
gated with a view to the exclusion of heart 
lesions and hyperthyroidism. 



15-131 

Change 69 



15-88 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-88 



(d) Percussion. — Light mediate percussion 
should be used. The right and left cardiac bor- 
ders, as well as the diameter of the transverse 
arch, may be determined by percussion. In doubt- 
ful cases in which it is important to determine 
the actual cardiac boundaries, teleroentgen- 
ography should be employed. 

(e) Mensuration. — Draw a line down the 
midsternum, from the suprasternal notch to the 
tip of the ensiform cartilage. Measurements are 
made at right angles to this line, at the second 
interspace (aortic dullness), at the fourth inter- 
space to the right for any increase in the right 
border, and at the fifth interspace to the left for 
any increase in the left border. The following 
measurements may be considered normal for the 
average young adult: 

(1) From midsternal line to right border 
at fourth interspace, 3 cm. 

(2) From midsternal line to left border 
along fifth interspace, Wi cm. 

(3) The normal aortic dullness at the 
second interspace to the right and left of the 
midsternal line is 5Vi cm. 

(f) Auscultation. — In auscultating the heart, 
the examiner should bear in mind the four points 
where the normal sounds of the heart are heard 
with maximum intensity: 

(1) Aortic area, second interspace to right 
of sternum. Here the second sound is distinct. 

(2) Tricuspid area, at the junction of the 
fifth right rib with the sternum. Here the first 
sound is distinct. 

(3) Pulmonic area, second interspace to 
left of sternum. Here the second sound is most 
distinct. 

(4) Mitral area, fifth interspace to left of 
sternum. Here the first sound is most clearly 
heard. 

No auscultatory examination is to be considered 
complete unless the subject is examined in the 
upright, recumbent, and left lateral recumbent 
positions and after exercise, and in the different 
phases of respiration. The examiner should ascer- 
tain whether the applicant has had any of the 
following diseases: scarlet fever, diphtheria, 
chorea, rheumatic fever, tonsillitis, hemolytic 
streptococcal infection, syphilis, or tuberculosis. 

(2) (a) Examination After Exercise.— Exam- 
iners shall use judgment and discretion in apply- 
ing the exercise test to those who present evi- 
dence of incompetency of the heart. An exercise 
test is required in order to determine the 
efficiency of the heart muscle. The applicant 
should be required to hop 20 times on one foot 
not faster than one hop per second, clearing the 
floor about 1 inch at each hop. Record sitting 
pulse rate and blood pressure before exercise. 



Immediately after exercise, record pulse rate, and 
2 minutes after exercise record pulse rate and 
blood pressure. Immediately after the exercise 
auscultation should be repeated with particular 
reference to the detection of murmurs previously 
inaudible. Note should be made of the degree of 
dyspnea and other symptoms of circulatory fail- 
ure. 

(b) Consideration of Blood Pressure.— In 
considering the blood pressure, the examiner 
should give due regard to the age of the appli- 
cant and to physiological causes, such as excite- 
ment, recent exercises, loss of sleep, and diges- 
tion. The condition of the arteries, the tenseness 
of the pulse, and the degree of accentuation of 
the aortic second sound must be taken into 
consideration, as well as the relation between the 
systolic and diastolic pressure. No applicant shall 
be rejected as a result of a single reading. When 
the blood pressure estimation at the first exami- 
nation is regarded as abnormal, or in case of 
doubt, the procedure shall be repeated twice 
daily (in the morning and in the afternoon) for 
a sufficient number of days to enable the exam- 
iner to arrive at a definite conclusion. For those 
individuals with elevated blood pressure an aver- 
age of the readings taken, with the individual as 
free from stress as possible, should be reported 
rather than the results of a single high or low 
reading. However, a representative sample of the 
highest and lowest readings shall also be 
recorded. 

(c) Resting Blood Pressure. — The resting 
blood pressure is to be taken with the examinee 
comfortably relaxed in a sitting position with 
legs uncrossed and the arm placed on a rest at the 
horizontal level of the heart. The systolic blood 
pressure reading is to be taken as the level at 
which the first clear tapping sound appears 
during slow decompression of the blood pressure 
cuff. As the blood pressure cuff is further decom- 
pressed the auscultatory sound becomes murmur- 
like, then it becomes clearer and louder, and 
finally it becomes muffled in character. The dias- 
tolic blood pressure reading is to be taken as the 
level at which this fourth phase (the muffled 
sound) abruptly drops in intensity or disappears. 

(d) Interpretation of Abnormal Signs and 
Symptoms. — The following principles are laid 
down for the guidance of examiners in their 
interpretation of abnormal signs and symptoms. 
It should be constantly borne in mind that the 
excitement of the examination may produce vio- 
lent and rapid heart action, often associated with 
a transient systolic murmur. Such conditions may 
erroneously be attributed to the effects of exer- 
tion; they usually disappear promptly in the 
recumbent posture, but the examiner must 
endeavor to recognize the excitable individuals to 



15-132 

Change 69 



15-89 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-89 



take measures to eliminate psychic influences 
from the test so far as possible. 

(e) Hypertrophy and Dilatation. — An apex 
beat located at or beyond the left nipple line, or 
below the sixth rib, suggests an enlargement suf- 
ficient to disqualify for military service. Its cause, 
either valvular disease or hypertension in the 
majority of cases, should be sought. Clear cut 
radiologic evidence of heart enlargement is cause 
for rejection. A horizontal position of the heart 
must be distinguished from left ventricular 
enlargement. Fluoroscopy and teleroentgen- 
ography are important adjuncts in the diagnosis 
of enlargement of the cardiac chambers, particu- 
larly the left auricle. The left oblique position 
may reveal early enlargement of the latter 
chamber. Enlargement, however, should not be 
made a primary diagnosis unless careful examina- 
tion fails to reveal a cause. 

(f) Physiological Murmurs. — Cardiac mur- 
murs are the most certain physical signs by 
which valvular disease may be recognized and its 
location determined. The discovery of any mur- 
murs demands diligent search for other evidence 
of heart disease. Murmurs may occur, however, 
in the absence of valvular lesions or other cardiac 
disease. Such physiological murmurs are not 
causes for rejection. The following characteristics 
of physiological murmurs will enable the 
medical examiner to differentiate them from 
organic murmurs: 

(1) They are always systolic in time. 

(2) They are usually heard over a small 
area, the most common places being over the 
pulmonic valve and the mitral valve. 

(3) They change with position of the 
body, disappearing in certain positions. They are 
loudest usually in the recumbent position and are 
sometimes heard only in that position. 

(4) They are transient in character, fre- 
quently disappearing after exercise. 

(5) They are usually short, rarely occupy- 
ing all of a systole, and are soft and of a blowing 
quality. 

(6) There is no evidence of heart disease 
or cardiac enlargement. 

The most frequent types of physiological mur- 
murs are: 

(1) Those heard over the second and 
third left interspaces during expiration, disap- 
pearing during forced inspiration. These are par- 
ticularly common in men with flexible chests, 
who can produce extreme forced expiration. 
Under such circumstances, murmurs may be asso- 
ciated with a vibratory thrust. 

(2) Cardiorespiratory murmurs 
occasioned by movements of the heart against air 



in a part of the lung overlapping the heart. They 
usually vary in different phases of respiration, 
and at times disappear completely when the 
breath is held. 

(3) Prolongations of the apical first 
sound, which are often mistaken for murmurs. 

15-89. Examination of Range of Motion 

(1) The applicant shall be put through a 
series of movements similar to those described 
below, which will bring into action the various 
joints and muscles of the body. The purpose is 
best accomplished by requiring the applicant to 
follow the movements as made by the examiner 
or an assistant, 

(a) Bring the elbows firmly to the sides of 
the body with the forearms extended to the 
front, palms of the hands uppermost; extend and 
flex each finger separately; bring the tips of the 
thumbs to the base of the little ringers; close the 
hands, with the thumbs covering the fingers; 
extend and flex the hands on the wrists; rotate 
the hands so that the fingernails will first be up 
and then down; move the hand from side to side. 
Extend the arms and forearms fully to the front 
and rotate them at the shoulders with the fists. 
Extend the arms at right angles with the body; 
place the thumbs on the points of the shoulders; 
raise and lower the arms, bringing them sharply 
to the sides at each motion. Let the arms hang 
loosely by the sides; swing the right arm in a 
circle rapidly from the shoulder, first to the front 
and then to the rear; swing the left arm in the 
same manner. Extend the arms fully to the front, 
keeping the palms of the hands together and the 
thumbs up; carry the arms quickly back as far as 
possible, keeping the thumbs up, and at the same 
time raise the body on the toes. (Question the 
candidate regarding any previous dislocations of 
the shoulder.) Extend the arms above the head, 
locking the thumbs, and bend over to touch the 
ground with the hands, keeping the knees 
straight. Perform two push-ups from the floor. 
(Question the candidate as to wrist injury for 
possible scaphoid fracture.) 

(b) Extend one leg, lifting the heel from 
the floor, and move all the toes freely; move the 
foot up and down and from side to side, bending 
the ankle joint, the knee being kept rigid; bend 
the knee freely; kick forcibly backward and for- 
ward; throw the leg out to the side as far as 
possible, keeping the body squarely to the front; 
repeat all these movements with the other foot 
and leg; strike the breast first with one knee and 
then with the other; stand upon the toes of both 
feet; squat sharply several times; kneel upon 
both knees at the same time. (If the man comes 
down on one knee after the other there is reason 



15-133 
Change 69 



15-89A 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-89A 



to suspect infirmity, such as injury to menisci. 
Question the candidate as to previous injury.) 

(c) Take the position "to fire kneeling"; 
stand erect, present the back to the examiner, and 
then hold up to view the sole of each foot; leap 
directly up, striking the buttocks with both heels 
at the same time, hop the length of the room on 
the ball of first one foot and then the other; 
make a standing jump as far as possible and 
repeat it several times; run the length of the 
room several times. 

(2) While the exercises prescribed may cause 
some breathlessness and accelerated throbbing of 
the blood vessels, they should not cause manifest 
exhaustion or great distress in a healthy man. 
Lack of ability to perform any of these exercises 
indicates some defect or deformity that should be 
investigated further. 

15-89A. Orthopedic Examination of Major 
Joints 

(1) The Shoulder.— With the patient stripped 
to the waist, inspect both anteriorly and poster- 
iorly for asymmetry or abnormal configuration or 
muscle atrophy. From the back, with the appli- 
cant standing, observe the scapulo-humeral 
rhythm as patient elevates the arms from the 
sides directly overhead, carrying the arms up lat- 
erally. Any arrhythmia may indicate shoulder 
joint abnormality and is cause for particularly 
careful examination. Palpate the shoulders for 
tenderness and test range of motion in flexion, 
extension, abduction, and rotation. Compare each 
shoulder in this respect. Test muscle power of 
abductors, adductors, flexors and extensors of the 
shoulder, as well as power in internal and exter- 
nal rotation. Have the patient attempt to lift a 
heavy weight with arm at the side to establish 
integrity of the acromioclavicular joint. 

(2) The Back.— 

(a) With the candidate standing stripped, 
note the general configuration of the back, the 
symmetry of the shoulders and hips and any 
abnormal curvature including scoliosis, abnormal 
dorsal kyphosis or excessive lumbar lordosis. Pal- 
pate the spinous processes and the erector spinae 
muscle masses for tenderness. Determine absence 
of pelvic tilt by palpating iliac crests. Have 
patient flex, extend spine and bend to each side, 
noting ease with which this is done and the pres- 
ence or absence of pain on motion. Test rotary 
motion by gripping the pelvis on both sides and 
having the patient twist to each side as far as is 
possible. Measure chest expansion. With the 
patient sitting on the examining table, test patel- 
lar and ankle reflexes and fully extend the knee, 
noting complaints of pain. (This corresponds to 
a 90-degree straight leg raising test in supine 
position.) With the patient supine, test dorsi- 



flexor muscle power of the foot and toes, with 
particular attention to power of the extensor hal- 
lucis longus. Weakness may indicate nerve root 
pressure on SI. Flex hip fully on abdomen with 
knee flexed and determine presence or absence of 
pain on extremes of rotation of each hip with 
hip flexed to 90 degrees. Frequently, in lumbosa- 
cral sprains of chronic nature, pain is experi- 
enced on these motions. Place the heel on the 
knee of the opposite extremity and let the flexed 
knee fall toward the table. Pain or limitation 
indicates either hip joint and/or lumbosacral 
abnormality. With the patient prone, have him 
extend back (arch the back) and test strength in 
extension by noting degree to which this is possi- 
ble. 

(b) If pain is experienced on back motions 
in association with these maneuvers or if there is 
asymmetry or abnormal configuration, back X- 
rays, including the pelvis, should be obtained. 
These should include an anteroposterior, lateral, 
and oblique views. 
(3) The Knee. — 

(a) With trousers, shoes, and socks removed, 
observe general muscular development of legs, 
particularly the thigh musculature. Have patient 
squat, sitting on heels, and observe hesitancy, 
weakness, and presence or absence of pain or 
crepitus. With patient sitting, test for ability to 
extend the knee fully and test power in extension 
by making pressure on lower leg with knee 
extended. Compare equality of power in each leg. 
With knee flexed, test for hamstring power by 
attempting to pull leg into extension; compare 
equality of strength in each leg. Palpate entire 
knee for tenderness. 

(b) With the applicant still sitting on the 
table's edge, sit and grasp his heel between the 
knees; then test for cruciate ligament stability by 
first pulling the tibia anteriorly on the femur and 
by then pushing the tibia posteriorly on the 
femur (the so-called "Drawer sign"). With the 
patient supine, mark on each leg a distance I" 
above the patella and 6" above the patella, 
making sure this is done with muscles relaxed. 
Measure circumferences at these levels and note 
presence or absence of atrophy. Test the medial 
and lateral collateral ligaments by placing varus 
and valgus strain on the extended knee. Manipu- 
late the knee through a complete range of flexion 
and extension, noting any difference between the 
sides and any abnormal restriction, 

(c) In the presence of any history of 
"locking," recurrent effusion or instability, as 
well as when atrophy measured is more than ¥%" 
or when limitation of motion or ligamentous 
instability is detected, suitable X-rays should be 
obtained which should include an anteroposter- 
ior, lateral, and intercondylar view. 



15-134 

Change 69 



15-90 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-90 



(4) The Elbow.— With the Candida te stripped 
to the waist and holding the upper arms against 
the body with the forearms extended and fully 
supinated, observe for presence of a normal 
carrying angle. Have the patient flex the elbows 
to a right angle and keeping the elbows against 
the body note ability to fully supinate and pron- 
ate the forearms. Test medial and lateral stability 
by placing varus and valgus strain on the joint 
with the elbow extended. Test the power of the 
flexor, extensor, supinator and pronator muscles 
by having the patient contract these muscles 
against manual resistance of the examiner. If indi- 
cated, X-rays should include an anteroposterior 
and lateral views. 

(5) The Wrist and Hand.— 

(a) Palpate the wrist for tenderness in the 
anatomical snuff box often present in undiscov- 
ered fractures of the carpal navicular. Observe 
and compare range of motion- of the wrists in 
flexion, extension, radial deviation, and ulnar 
deviation. Test muscle power in each of these 
positions. 

(b) Inspect the palms and extended fingers 
for excessive perspiration, abnormal color or 
appearance, and tremor indicating possible 
underlying organic disease. Have the candidate 
flex and extend the fingers making sure the distal 
interphalangeal joints flex to allow the anger 
tips to touch the flexion creases of the palms. 
Observe the contour of the palm for possible 
atrophy of the thenar and hypothenar eminences, 
have the candidate touch the thumb tip to each 
finger tip and test the strength of pinch between 
the thumb and forefinger. With the hands pron- 
ated observe the contour of the dorsum of the 
hands for atrophy of the soft tissues between the 
metacarpals seen in disease or malfunction of 
peripheral nerves. With the fingers spread, test 
for strength, and interosseous muscle function by 
forcing the spread fingers together. Test also by 
pulling apart adjacent fingers against the resist-, 
ance of the candidate. If indicated, anteroposter- 
ior and lateral X-rays of the wrist as well as 
anteroposterior and oblique views of the hand 
should be obtained. 

(6) The Hip.~ With the candidate stripped 
and standing observe from behind for symmetry 
of the buttocks, the intergluteal cleft, and the 
infragluteal fold. Palpate the iliac crests and 
greater trochanters for symmetry. Have the 
candidate stand first on one foot and then the 
other, flexing the non-weight-bearing hip and 
knee and observing for ability to balance as well 
as for possible weakness of hip muscles or insta- 
bility of the joint, as indicated by dropping 
downward of the buttock and pelvis of the flexed 
(i.e., the non-weight-bearing) hip. This, if pres- 



ent, is a positive Trendelenburg sign and necessi- 
tates X-ray evaluation. With the patient supine 
have patient flex the hip, abduct, and adduct the 
hip and rotate the leg inward. Observe for hesit- 
ance in performing these motions, incomplete 
range of motion or facial evidence of pain on 
motion. Test muscle strength in each position. 
With candidate prone test for ability to extend 
each leg with knee extended and test for power 
in each hip in extension. If abnormalities are 
detected requiring X-rays, an anteroposterior 
view of each hip and a lateral view of each hip 
should be obtained so that the abnormal hip can 
be compared with the normal for possible evi- 
dence of disease or abnormality. 

15-90. Roentgenographic Examination of Chest 

(1) Whenever practicable, roentgenographic 
examination of the chest shall be made as a part 
of the physical examination to determine physi- 
cal fitness for original entry into the service and 
for active duty, and of candidates for entrance to 
the Naval Academy as midshipmen or candidates 
for officer training, either as a part of the exami- 
nation to determine their fitness for training or 
upon reporting to the School. If it is impractica- 
ble to obtain the roentgenographic examination 
or to have the examination read or to send the 
examination with the Standard Form 88, a state- 
ment to this effect shall be made on the SF 88 
with an explanation of why it is impracticable, 
with a request roentgenographic examina- 
tion be obtained if and when the applicant 
reports for active duty. The following entry shall 
be made on Standard Form 600 of the individual 
concerned: "Chest X-ray study has not been 
conducted in this case. It should be conducted at 
the first opportunity and a report thereof entered 
on block 46 of SF 88, and on SF 600." A recruit 
who has received roentgenographic examination 
of the chest during his physical examination for 
enlistment or induction with negative findings 
does not require another roentgenographic study 
upon arrival at a naval training station or Marine 
recruit depot. 

(2) (a) Chest examinations of active duty per- 
sonnel are required annually only for those with 
positive tuberculin skin tests as defined in 
15-91(3)(c). Causes for further clinical study to 
determine the significance of lesions noted shall 
be thpse listed in article 15-18; such clinical 
study is best accomplished on the chest service of 
a naval hospital. Personnel who have X-ray find- 
ings of possible future significance shall receive 
this examination every 6 months, where possible, 
using 14- x 17-inch film. 

(b) Those Navy and Marine Corps person- 
nel with positive tuberculin skrn tests should 



15-135 
Change 69 



15-90 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-90 



have roentgenographic chest examinations prior 
to return to the United States. If this is imprac- 
ticable, then X-ray examinations shall be per- 
formed at the point of debarkation or at the first 
duty station upon arrival within the United 
States. This does not include shipboard personnel 
not home ported in the Far East. 

(3) Roentgenographic examination of the 
chests of all Navy and Marine Corps personnel 
shall be made and the interpretation entered in 
the Health Record during the physical examina- 
tion at the time of release from active duty or 
discharge from the service except in cases involv- 
ing release from active duty with a view to 
immediate recall to active duty or discharge for 
immediate reenlistment. In those cases X-ray 
examination need not be done if made and the 
interpretation entered in the Health Record 
during the previous 6 months. 

(4) All Navy and Marine Corps activities with 
the necessary X-ray equipment shall be consid- 
ered as available for these examinations, and 
whenever practicable, the examinations shall be 
made by the photofluorographic technique for 
convenience and economy. Photofluorographic 
units are located in the naval shipyards for the 
examination of the personnel of naval vessels and 
naval personnel of the shipyard, and at other 
shore stations where the number of such exami- 
nations is sufficiently great. 

(5) Individuals in whom the photofluoro- 
graphic film discloses abnormal conditions or any 
recruit or midshipman whose tuberculin test 
reaction, done in accordance with article 15-91, 
is positive shall be reexamined by means of a 14- 
x 17-inch film prior to final action in their cases. 
The interpreter of such reexaminations shall be 
informed of the reason for the reexaminations. 
Transfer to a naval hospital solely for this reex- 
amination is not necessary if means for obtaining 
it are otherwise available. When individuals are 
not available for reexamination, their command- 
ing officers shall be notified by letter making 
reference to photofluorogram number, name in 
full, service or file number, and date and place of 
birth, with the request that a reexamination be 
made at the first opportunity. The results of the 
reexamination shall be entered in the Health 
Record or Jacket in accordance with article 
15-90(6) (d) and (e). 

(6) The results of photofluorographic and 
roentgenographic examinations of the chest shall 
be recorded and reported as follows: 

(a) Identification and Forwarding of Photo- 
fluorographic Film. — Upon each photofluoro- 
gram must appear the following data: 

(1) Station symbol of the station (or of 
the mobile unit) on which examination is made. 



(2) The film number (place capital "C" 
after film number when a civilian employee is 
examined; capital "D" in case of dependents; and 
capital "O" to indicate other military). 

(3) Date of examination. 

Examples.— (I) (2) (3) 

NY 1-99,999 3-5-71 
or 

MU12/99,999C 3-5-71 

In order that films filed in the rolls may be 
quickly found upon request, it is essential that all 
photofluorographic film be numbered in consecu- 
tive numerical order. Numbering shall progress 
from 1 to 99,999 and then repeat. The rolls 
should contain approximately 500 70-millimeter 
films or 1,000 35-millimeter films. Splicing shall 
be done with a view to permitting ready passage 
of the finished roll through the viewer. Splicing 
is easily done by using narrow strips of cello- 
phane adhesive tape on both sides of the splice. 
Films which show positive findings or which are 
considered to be technically unsatisfactory shall 
be left in the roll. Technically unsatisfactory film 
shall be defaced by crossed lines made with a 
colored wax pencil or other means. Entries shall 
be made in the Health Records and Jackets as 
indicated in 1 5-90(6) (d) and (e) below. 

(b) Reviewing Photofluorographic Films. 
— Photofluorographic films shall be reviewed and 
read twice where taken, when personnel trained 
in interpretation are available. Photofluoro- 
graphic films taken by units which do not have 
personnel trained in interpretation available shall 
be forwarded to an interpretation center desig- 
nated by the district, river command, or fleet 
medical officer, as applicable. Photofluorographic 
films taken in naval training centers or Marine 
Corps recruit depots shall be viewed and read 
twice. Those taken elsewhere shall be viewed and 
read twice when feasible. Hospitals or other 
activities designated by the district, river 
command, or fleet medical officer to interpret 
photofluorographic films shall do so within a 
period not exceeding 10 days following receipt of 
the films. 

(c) Identification and Filing of 14- x 17- 
lnch Roentgenograms. — When 14- x 17-inch 
roentgenograms are made, the same data shall be 
entered, and whenever possible the same film 
number shall be used which appears on the corre- 
sponding photofluorogram. The 14- x 17-inch 
roentgenograms shall be disposed of in accord- 
ance with SECNAV Instruction P5212.5 series. 

(d) Health Record.— -The place, date, film 
number, and a report of interpretation shall be 
entered on SF 600 and in block 46 of SF 88 if the 
purpose of the examination requires the prepara- 
tion of a SF 88. The station and film number 



15-136 

Change 69 



15-91 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-91 



mentioned above must be entered without fail, 
for without this information the film cannot be 
located in the files. 

(e) Health Jacket (Civilian Employees). — 
The place, date, film number, and report of inter- 
pretation shall be recorded in the health jacket in 
the case of civilian employees. When reexamina- 
tion by 14- x 17-inch roentgenogram is made of a 
civilian employee, the report of this reexamina- 
tion shall also be filed in the health jacket of the 
individual. 

(f) Logs and Films. — Hospitals or other 
activities designated to review photofluoro- 
graphic films shall upon completion of their 
review forward the logs, together with the pho- 
tofluorographic films, at 90-day intervals (quart- 
erly during the calendar year), to the Navy 
Branch, Military Personnel Records Center, 9700 
Page Boulevard, St. Louis, Mo. 63132. 

(1) NAVMED-1161 (Photofluoro graphic 
Log) and NAVMED-1161 A (Following Sheet) 
as Necessary. — The log shall contain the photo- 
fluorogram number, last name, first name and 
middle initial, rate or grade, service or file 
number, date and place of birth of the individual 
examined, ship or duty station, the interpreta- 
tion, and upon each sheet the name and signature 
of the roentgenologist. The examination of all 
personnel shall be recorded in the same log and 
be included in the same serial numerical number- 
ing, except that films on other than Navy and 
Marine Corps personnel will be identified in 
accordance with article 15-90(6)(a)(2). At 
those activities making routine rcentgenographic 
examinations of the chests of recruits and mid- 
shipmen, the following statement shall be 
inserted on the log: "All recruits (midshipmen) 
reported above have received a tuberculin test 
and provisions of subarticle 15-90(1) and (5) 
have been complied with." 

(2) Copies of the Reports of 14- x 17-Inch 
Roentgenograms Made of Service Personnel 
Whose Photofluoro grams Are in the Roll. — 
These reports shall contain the date and place of 
examination, the 14- x 17-inch film number, the 
corresponding photofluorogram number, the 
name of the examinee in full, the service 
number, rate or grade, ship or duty station, date 
and place of birth, the interpretation, disposition 
of the case, and signature of the roentgenologist. 
In order that appropriate followup procedures 
can be initiated in the case of service personnel, 
every effort should be made to reexamine by 14- 
x 17-inch roentgenogram those persons whose 
photofluorograms disclose suspicious findings. 
Forward report of reexamination to custodian of 
Health Record for entry on current SF 600. 

(3) Copies of Notification to Command- 



ing Officers as prescribed in subarticle 15-90(5). 

(4) NAVMED 6224/6 (or Old 618), 
Report of Photofluoro graphic Chest Survey, 
MED-6224-5. — A separate report summarizing 
the photofluorographic and roentgenographs 
findings shall be prepared and appropriately 
identified for military personnel, civilian employ- 
ees, dependents, and other personnel. It is essen- 
tial that units preparing the report enter on the 
reverse side the photofluorogram numbers of per- 
sons who are reexamined by 14- x 17-inch films, 
and place an asterisk before the appropriate pho- 
tofluorogram number when the reexamination 
resulted in a recommendation for further clinical 
study or disqualification. The report shall be for- 
warded to the interpretation center along with 
the films and logs for review. 

15-91. Tuberculin Testing of Navy and Marine 
Corps Personnel First Reporting for Duty 
in Excess of 30 Days 

(1) Personnel To Be Tested. — All personnel 
first entering for duty in the Regular Navy, the 
Naval Reserve, the Marine Corps, or Marine 
Corps Reserve for periods of duty in excess of 30 
days, including duty for training, shall be tuber- 
culin tested by the Mantoux method utilizing 
intermediate test strength purified protein deriva- 
tive (PPD) of tuberculin (0.0001 mgm per test 
dose). 

(2) Recording and Reporting. — 

(a) Health Record Entry, — The result of the 
test shall be entered in the Health Record on SF 
601 under SENSITIVITY TESTS. The entry 
shall contain the place and date of test, the mate- 
rial and strength of dilution used, and the results 
recorded 'in millimeters of induration at the 
widest diameter transversely across the arm. The 
entry shall be completed in accordance with 
article 16-50, 

(b) Tuberculin Testing of Recruits, Mid- 
shipmen, and Other Special Personnel, 
MED-6 224-1, Report. — A record of all such tests 
performed at Navy and Marine Corps recruit 
training centers and depots, the Naval Academy 
at Annapolis, and officer candidate schools of the 
Navy and Marine Corps shall be maintained and 
reported by letter to BTJMED after the end of 
each calendar year, giving the number tested and 
the number of negative and positive reactors. A 
negative reaction is one with 0 — 9 mm, of indur- 
ation while a positive reaction is one of 10 mm. 
or greater induration. Tests are to be read from 
48 to 72 hours after injection of the antigen. 

(3) The Tuberculin Test. — 

(a) Materials. — (Stock numbers are from 
the Federal Supply Catalog Identification List.) 
(1) Purified Protein Derivative Test Kits. 



15-137 
Change 69 



15-92 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-92 



—(Stock No. 6505-153-8290, 50-test size.) Solu- 
tions shall be prepared according to directions in 
the kit. Solutions shall be stored in a refrigerator 
(not frozen) for not longer than 4 days, after 
which they must be discarded. When properly 
prepared, each 1/10 cc. test dose contains 0.0001 
mgm. PPD. 

(2) Syringes. — (Stock No. 
6515-282-9600.) Syringes shall have been used 
for no other purpose, and shall be tightly fitted, 
chemically clean, and sterile. They may be 
reused, with proper precautions as to cleanliness 
and sterility, for these tests or other purposes. 
Once used for any other purpose, however, they 
shall not again be used for these tests. 

(3) Needles.— (Stock No. 
6515-349-5900.) A chemically clean and sterile 
needle which has been used for no other purpose 
shall be used for each test. Needles may be reused 
for these tests, after cleansing and sterilizing, */ 
they have not been used for any other purpose. 

(b) Technique. — The testing and interpret- 
ing shall be performed by a medical officer or by 
adequately trained personnel of the Medical 
Department under the supervision of a medical 
officer. Following aseptic preparation of the skin 
an intradermal injection of one-tenth cubic centi- 
meter of the tuberculin solution shall be made 
upon the volar aspect of the left forearm. (The 
point of the needle should be plainly visible just 
within the outer layers of the epidermis.) The 
result, immediately after injection, should be a 
definite wheal, pale and sharply demarcated. 
Great care must be exercised to avoid subcuta- 
neous injection. (Note. — When the tuberculin 
test is read the forearm should be in a good light 
and flexed a little at the elbow. Tautness of 
underlying muscles may be sufficient to obliterate 
the redness and edema. It is well, also, to look 
across the forearm rather than down upon it. 
Pass the finger over the test area; the induration 
caused by the edema can be felt even when it 
does not produce an elevation that can be seen.) 

(c) Result of Test. — The test shall be exam- 
ined after an interval of not less than 48 hours 
nor more than 72. Redness without induration 
does not constitute a reaction. Response to injec- 
tion is classified according to the extent of the 
induration measured in millimeters at its widest 
diameter transversely across the arm. The result 

is recorded in the following form: "Date 

Tuberculin test (state material and strength or 
dilution used) (results) mm. induration." 
Absence of induration is reported as "zero mm." 
When induration is present, the widest diameter 
measured transversely across the arm is recorded, 
using Arabic numerals; e.g., "9-17-58 PPD 
intermed, 6 mm. induration" or "9-17-58 0.0001 



mgm. PPD zero mm. induration." Induration of 
10 or more mm. will be regarded as a positive 
test, while that of 0 through 9mm. will be 
regarded as negative. 

(4) Potency. — All persons administering tub- 
erculin tests are cautioned that the intermediate 
test strength for this program is five times as 
potent as the usual "First Test" tuberculin test, 
and one-fiftieth as potent as the "Second Test" 
test. 

15-92. Testing Intraocular Tension 

(1) General. — Approximately 2 percent of the 
general population, age 40 and over, have 
chronic simple or open angle glaucoma and are 
without symptoms. Routine tonometry per- 
formed annually on the age 35 and older individ- 
uals will detect hitherto undiagnosed glaucoma. 
This examination shall be performed by a physi- 
cian, optometrist, or a technician who has 
received instruction in the proper performance 
and interpretation of this test. 

(2) Instrument. — The Schiotz Tonometer esti- 
mates the intraocular pressure (IOP) or tension 
by the amount its plunger indents the cornea 
with a standard plunger weight. 

(a) Standardization. — A new instrument 
with its case, testing plate, and weights should 
contain a certificate stating its correctness by a 
tonometer testing station approved by the 
Committee on Standardization of Tonometers of 
the American Academy of Ophthalmology and 
Otolaryngology. 

(b) Care.— The Schiotz Tonometer should 
be kept in its case, being protected from dust and 
injury. The standard weight and plunger should 
be removed and cleatied daily or between use on 
patients. Ether solution and a pipe cleaner can be 
used to clean the plunger column and the 
plunger. Thorough drying should be permitted 
prior to using on a patient. 

(c) Testing.— With the instrument setting 
vertically on its individual test foot plate, there 
should be a scale reading of zero. If the plunger 
is not sticking and is freely movable and the test 
plate reading is not zero, then the instrument 
should be returned for repair and calibration. 

(3) Technique. — 

(a) Anesthesia. — One to two drops of pro- 
paracaine hydrochloride ophthalmic solution, 
0.5% (FSN 6505-753-9902) are instilled into the 
eye by having the patient look up and by pulling 
the lower lid down. The patient is instructed to 
keep the eyes closed and to tell the examiner 
when the irritation from the topical anesthetic 
drops has ceased. Neither the patient nor the 
examiner should press on the eye at any time, 
and blotting of excess drops should be at the 
outer corner of the eye over bone. 



15-138 
Change 69 



15-93 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-94 



(b) Patient. — Each patient should be 
informed that this is a test of the "water pres- 
sure" in the eye, that the anesthetic drops 
numb only the surface of the eye and will not 
affect the pupil or vision, and that the procedure 
is painless. As relaxation is essential for the valid- 
ity of the test, the patient should be reclining in 
a comfortable position, collar loosened, and with 
both eyes open, fixing straight up on a target on 
the ceiling or looking at his own extended 
thumb. 

(c) Use of the Schiotz Tonometer. — The 
individual's lids are spread with one hand of the 
examiner so as to exert no pressure on the globe. 
The tonometer is brought in from the side and 
placed vertically on the center of the cornea in a 
free-riding position and the tonometer reading 
noted, first right eye (TOD), then left eye 
(TOS). At no time should the examiner obstruct 
the fixation of the patient nor touch the eye 
lashes with the tonometer. A satisfactory reading 
is obtained when the needle fluctuates with the 
pulse. Routinely, the 5.5 gm. weight of the tono- 
meter is used for the IOP. If the patient is not 
relaxed or squeezes his lids during the procedure, 
the readings are inaccurate and should be 
repeated again or at another time. 

(d) Calibration Scale or Conversion Table. 
— The scale reading in units is converted into 
mm. Hg Schiotz by using the conversion table 

and is recorded as TOD mm. Hg Schiotz 

(5.5), TOS mm. Hg Schiotz (5.5). 

(4) Normal Schiotz Intraocular Pressure. — 
The upper limit of normal IOP is between 20 to 
25 mm. Hg, or an average of 22 to 23 mm. Hg 
Schiotz. Thus, a tonometer reading of 3 with a 
5.5 gm. weight equals 24.4 mm. Hg, or a tonome- 
ter reading of 5.5 with a 7.5 gm. weight equals 
23.8 mm. Hg. As a check on the accuracy of the 
tonometer and the reading, the pressure with a 
5.5 and a 7.5 gm. weight on the same eye should 
be very nearly the same. When the 7.5 reading 
gives a higher pressure than the 5.5 reading, 
there is rigidity of the sclera present, and the 
IOP is lower than either of the two; when the 
7.5 reading gives a lower pressure than the 5.5 
reading, there is a decreased rigidity of the 
sclera, and the IOP is really higher than either of 
the two. 

(5) Conditions for Referral for Ophthalmo- 
logic Evaluation. — 

(a) A nonrelaxed or uncooperative individ- 
ual. 



(b) An individual with known sensitivity to 
proparacaine. 

(c) Consistent elevation of IOP of greater 
than 25 mm. Hg Schiotz in either eye. 

(d) Consistent differences of IOP between 
the two eyes of 5. mm. Hg Schiotz or more, even 
if both pressures are below 25 mm. Hg Schiotz. 

15-93. Eustachian Tube Patency Test (Valsalva's 
Maneuver Modified) 

(1) General. — The "Valsalva's Maneuver 
Modified" is a test to evaluate the Eustachian 
tubes. A retracted tympanic membrane, a history 
of aerootitis media, or abnormalities about the 
ostia of the Eustachian tubes make it necessary to 
determine their patency. 

(2) Technique. — With the tympanic mem- 
brane in view of the examiner, the examinee 
pinches his nostrils closed with the fingers of one 
hand, shuts his lips tightly, and tries to exhale 
forcefully. Positive pressure is produced in the 
nasopharynx and air will enter the middle ear 
cavity, if the Eustachian tube is patent. The 
examiner is able to note a movement of the tym- 
panic membrane caused by the increased convex- 
ity in Shraphell's area and the posterior superior 
quadrant of the membrane. 

(3) Interpretation. — An individual who is 
unable to perform the "Valsalva's Maneuver 
Modified" should not be assigned to duties 
involving flying. 

15-94. Special Examination Requirements 

(1) This article establishes guidelines relative 
to the additional medical information often 
required in connection with the physical exami- 
nation of applicants for appointment to commis- 
sioned grade, enrollment in officer candidate 
training programs, or entry into various special 
programs. 

(2) All naval medical examining facilities 
and/or medical examiners are directed to insure 
that reports of medical examination (SF 88 and 
93) are complete and contain adequate evalua- 
tion of each defect noted, prior to submission of 
the reports to cognizant reviewing authorities. 

(3) The following enumerates certain condi- 
tions, defects, and items of personal history 
which require thorough evaluation and sets forth 
the special test, examination, or report desired in 
each instance: 



15-139 

Change 69 



1S-94 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



15-94 



Item 



Examination and information desired 



ALBUMIN, findings or history 
of. 

ASTHMA, history of subse- 
quent to age 12. 



BACKACHE, back injury or 
wearing of back brace, his- 
tory of. 

BLOOD PRESSURE, elevated, 
findings or history of. 

COLOR PERCEPTION defect. 

CONCUSSION 

CONVULSIONS or 
SEIZURES, history of. 

DIABETES, family history of 
in parent, sibling, or more 
than one grandparent. 



DIZZINESS or FAINTING 
SPELLS, history of. 

ENURESIS or history of into 
late childhood or adoles- 
cence. 

FLATFOOT, symptomatic find- 
ing or history of. 

GLYCOSURIA, finding or his- 
tory of. 
HAY FEVER, history of. 



HEADACHES, frequent or se- 
vere, history of. 

HEAD INJURY with loss of 
consciousness in past 5 years, 
history of. 

HEMATURIA, history or find- 
ing of. 

HEPATITIS, history of. 
JAUNDICE, history of in past 
5 years. 

JOINT, KNEE, internal de- 
rangement, history of. 



JOINT, SHOULDER, disloca- 
tion, history of. 



Two daily specimens of urine for 3 days tested for albumin only, report of. The 
1st specimen to be collected upon arising and the 2d in the afternoon. Report 
positive findings of albumin in mgm%. 

Detailed report of asthma and other allergic conditions and a statement from 
cognizant physician on (1) number and approximate dates of attacks of asthma, 
asthmatic bronchitis, or other allergic manifestations; (2) signs, symptoms, and 
duration of each attack; and (3) type and amount of broncho-dilating drugs 
used, particularly adrenalin, ephedrine, and aminophylline. 

Current orthopedic consultation and report on strength, stability, mobility, and 
functional capacity of back. Report of appropriate X-rays to be accomplished 
by a qualified physician. Transcript of any treatment from cognizant physician. 

Repeated pulse and blood pressure (sitting position) readings in the a.m. and 
p.m. for 3-5 days without prolonged rest or any sedation. Completion of all 
sections of SF 88 items 57 and 58. 

Farnsworth Lantern examination and report of color perception. 

See HEAD INJURY. 

Neurological consultation and electroencephalogram. Transcript of any treatment 

from cognizant physician. 
Standard single-dose oral 100GM glucose tolerance test (after assurance that 

subject's carbohydrate intake has been liberal for several days before the test) 

with notation of the fasting, '/2-hour, 1-hour, 2-hour, and 3-bour blood glucose 

values and concomitant tests for glycosuria. 
OR 

Tolbutamide response test (after assuring that the subject's carbohydrate intake 
has been liberal for several days before the test) with notation of the fasting, 
20-minute, and 30-minute blood sugar values. 

NOTE: When either of the above tests is conducted, indicate in the report the 
method of blood sugar determination and the normal values of the test used. 

Neurological consultation. 

Comment on applicant's affirmative reply to question "bed wetting" to include 
number of incidents and age at last episode. 

Current orthopedic consultation with detailed report on strength, stability, mo- 
bility, and functional capacity of foot. Report of appropriate X-rays to be 
accomplished by a qualified physician. 

See DIABETES. 

Detailed report of hay fever and other allergic conditions and a statement from 
the cognizant personal physician on (1) number, severity, and duration of 
attacks of hay fever or any other allergic manifestations, and (2) type and 
amount of drugs used in treatment thereof. 

Neurological consultation. 

Electroencephalogram; neurological consultation; clinical abstract of treatment 
from cognizant physician. 

Medical consultation with evaluation report, including appropriate laboratory 
studies and/or complete urological evaluation if examining physician feels 
indicated. 

Serum bilirubin and bromsulphalein retention. 
Serum bilirubin and bromsulphalein retention. 

Current orthopedic consultation and report on strength, stability, mobility, and 
functional capacity of knee. Report of appropriate X-rays together with com- 
parative mensuration of the thighs, knees and legs, to be accomplished by a 
qualified physician. 

Current orthopedic consultation and report on strength, stability, mobility, and 
functional capacity of shoulder. Report of appropriate X-rays to be accom- 
plished by a qualified physician. 



15-140 

Change 69 



15-94 



CHAPTER 15. PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 



15-94 



hem 



Examination and information desired 



MALOCCLUSION, TEETH. 



MASTOIDECTOMY, bilateral, 
history of. 

MOTION SICKNESS, history 
of. 

NASAL POLYPS, history of.. 



SKULL FRACTURE, in past 5 
years, history of. 

SLEEPWALKING, beyond 
childhood, history of. 



SQUINT 



STUTTERING or STAMMER- 
ING, finding or history of. 

TRICK KNEE, history of. 

VERTEBRA, fracture or dis- 
location, history of. 



Report of examination by a dentist with comment as to whether incisal and 
masticatory function is sufficient for satisfactory ingestion of the ordinary 
diet, and statement as to presence and degree of facial deformity with jaw in 
natural position. 

Current ENT consultation to include audiogram. 

Detailed report of all occurrences of motion sickness (such as air, train, sea, swing, 
carnival-ride), and the age at time of the last occurrence. 

Ear, nose, and throat consultation, with comment as to date polyps removed if 
no longer present. Detailed report by cognizant physician on allergic history 
and manifestation to include required medication. 

See HEAD INJURY. 

Detailed comment by physician. Comment on applicant's affirmative reply to 
question "been a sleepwalker" to include number of incidents and age at last 
episode. 

Examination for degree of strabismus and presence of complete and continuous 
3d degree binocular fusion. Request completion of SF 88 items 62 and 65 
and notation of degree of strabismus. 

Report of Reading Aloud Test in art. 15-21(l)(i). 
See JOINT, KNEE. 

Current orthopedic consultation and report on strength, stability, mobility, and 
functional capacity of spine. Report of appropriate X-rays to be accomplished 
by a qualified physician. 



(4) It is desired that a detailed report of a 
consultation by a qualified neuropsychiatrist for 
evaluation of maturity, emotional stability, and 
suitability for commissioned service be obtained 
and submitted with the SF 88 and 93 in the 
following instances: 

(a) When any one of the following ques- 
tions in items 9 and 11 on the SF 93 is checked in 
the affirmative by an applicant: 

9. Have you ever — 

Attempted suicide. 
1 1 . Have you ever had or have you now — 
Loss of memory or amnesia. 

(b) When any combination of two or more 
of the following questions in items 9, 10, and 11 
on the SF 93 is answered in the affirmative and 



questioning by the examiner reveals that any one 
of the conditions was present beyond early child- 
hood: 

9. Have you ever — 
Been a sleepwalker. 

10. Do you — 

Stutter or stammer habitually. 

11. Have you ever had or have you now — 
Bed wetting since age 12. 

(c) When the examining physician feels 
that the individual's response to further question- 
ing is inappropriate to any of the following 
questions in item 11 on the SF 93: 

11. Have you ever had or have you now — 
Frequent trouble sleeping. 
Depression or excessive worry- 
Nervous trouble of any son. 



15-141 
Change 69 



( 



( 



( 



Chapter 16 

HEALTH RECORD 



Sections 

Articles 

I. General l6 ~ 1 through 16- 4 

II. Opening the Health Record through 16- 8 

III. Closure of Health Record 16- 9 through 16-17 

IV. Custody of Health Record 16-18 through 16-27. 

V. DD Form 722, Health Record Jacket, and DD Form 722-1, Dental Folder 16-28 through 16-29 

VI. NAVMED 6150/3, Sick Call Treatment Record 16-30 through 16-36 

VII. Standard Form 88, Report of Medical Examination 16-37 through 16-40 

VIII. Standard Form 93, Report of Medical History 16-41 through 16-43 

IX. Standard Form 600, Chronological Record of Medical Care 16-44 through 16-48 

X. Standard Form 601, Immunization Record 16-49 through 16-51 

XI. Standard Form 602, Syphilis Record 16-52 through 16-53 

XII. Standard Form 603, Dental 16-54 

XIII. NAVMED 6150/4, Abstract of Service and Medical History 16-55 through 16-57 

XIV. NAVMED 6150/2, Spscial Duty Medical Abstract 16-58 through 16-60 

XV. DD Form 1141, Record of Occupational Exposure to Ionizing Radiation 16-61 through 16-64 

XVI. Adjunct Health Record Forms and Reports 16-65 through 16-69 

XVII. DD Form 689, Individual Sick Slip, and Cross Medical Service Notification 16-70 through 16-73 

XVIII, Illustrations of Component Health Record Forms 16-74 



16-1 

Change 69 



\ 

o ! 



c ; 




16-1 



CHAPTER 16, HEALTH RECORD 



16-4 



Section I. GENERAL 



Purpose of Health Record 

Contents of Health Record 

Verification of Health Record 

Release of Information 

16-1. Purpose of Health Record 

(1) The purpose of the Health Record is to 
provide an individual - chronological record of 
medical and dental examinations, evaluations, 
and treatment afforded members of the naval 
service. The record has significant medicolegal 
value to the member concerned, his beneficiaries, 
and the Government. Accuracy is of the utmost 
importance in the recording of all entries. 

16-2. Contents of Health Record 

(1) Each member's Health Record shall consist 
of the DD 722, Health Record Jacket, with the 
following dental records on the left side of the 
jacket, and with the following medical records 
on the right side, arranged in top-to-bottom 
sequence; 

(a) Left Side, Dental. — 

DD Form 722-1 Dental Folder, containing the 

Standard Form 603 .... Dental 

N AVMED -6600/3 Dental Health Questionnaire 

NAVMED 6600/4 Navy Periodontal Screening 

Examination 

(b) Right Side, Medical. — 

NAVMED 6150/3 Sick Call Treatment Record 

Standard Form 88 Report of Medical Examination 

Standard Form 93 Report of Mjdical History 

Standard Form 600 Chronological Record of Medi- 
cal Care 

♦Standard Form 502 . . Narrative Summary 

* Standard Form 513 - . .Consultation Sheet 
♦NAVMED 6100/1 . . . Medical Board Report 
NAVMED 6150/4 Abstract of Service and Medi- 
cal History 

Standard Form 601 .... Immunization Record 

tN AVMED 6150/2 . . . .Special Duty Medical Abstract 

fStandard Form 602 ... Syphilis Record 

fDD Form 1141 Record of Exposure to Ionizing 

Radiation 

tN AVMED 6420/1 Report of All Diving Accidents 

(See art. 2-146.) 

* If included as authorized by Section XVI. 
t When required. 



Article 

16-1 

16-2 

16-3 

16-4 

(2) Other than the above official forms, no 
extraneous documents shall be permanently 
incorporated in a Health Record except baseline 
audiograms or baseline electrocardiograms (see 
arts. 16-12 and 16-69). 

(3) Cumulative official Health Record forms 
shall be filed in their assigned sequence, and the 
most recent placed on top of each previous form. 

(4) All dates recorded on the component 
forms of the Health Record shall be entered in 
the following sequence: day (numeral), month 
(in capitals, abbreviated to the first three let- 
ters), and year (numeral); i.e., 4 JAN 71. 

16-3. Verification of Health Record 

(1) When practicable, verification of the 
Health Record shall be conducted in conjunction 
with that of the Service Record and Pay Record. 
In addition, verification shall be accomplished 
upon reporting, at the time of physical examina- 
tion, and upon detachment. Annual verification 
of Marine Corps Reserve Health Records shall be 
accomplished for Class II reservists in conjunc- 
tion with the audit conducted concurrently with 
the annual screening of the Ready Reserve. 

(2) Each record shall be carefully reviewed, 
and any errors or discrepancies noted shall be 
corrected. Special attention shall be given to 
insure the accuracy of the name; social security 
number; designator or military occupational spe- 
cialty; date and place of birth; blood group and 
Rh factor; and recording of any newly acquired 
murks or scars. A signed entry to the effect that 
the verification has been accomplished shall be 
recorded in the designated space of the left inner 
surface of the Health Record Jacket. 

16-4. Release of Information 

(1) The policy on release of information from 
Health Records is in chapter 23. 



16-3 
Change 7*' 



( 



( 



( 



16-5 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-7 



Section II. OPENING THE HEALTH RECORD 

Article 

General 16-5 

Officers 16-6 

Naval Academy Midshipmen, Officer Candidates, and Student Officers 16-7 

Enlisted Members 16-8 



16-5. General 

(1) A Health Record shall be opened when- 
ever an individual becomes a member of the 
naval service, whenever a member on the retired 
list is returned to active duty, or in the event the 
original record has been lost or destroyed. All 
applicable spaces on each of the component 
forms designated for personal identification data 
shall be completed. Official abbreviations of 
grade or rating shall be used. The social security 
numbers of officers shall be followed by the des- 
ignator code or MOS, as appropriate. 

(2) If an individual is appointed, enlisted, or 
reenlisted with disqualifying defects which have 
been waived by BUPERS or MARCORPS, the 
description of each defect with authority for 
waiver shall be entered on the SF 88 and SF 600. 

(3) When the initial Health Record is opened 
it shall consist of (a) DD 722-1 (Dental Folder) 
containing the original SF 603, and (b) DD 722 
(Health Record Jacket) containing component 
forms assembled in top-to-bottom sequence as fol- 
lows: NAVMED 6150/3, SF 88, SF 93, SF 600, 
NAVMED 6150/4, and SF 601. For retired mem- 
bers being recalled to active duty, the NAVMED 
6150/2 and 6150/4 and the SF 601 shall be 
requested from BUMED. 

(4) See article 16-26(2) for procedures for 
reconstruction of Health Record for inactive 
reservists who desire to affiliate with Ready 
Reserve units. 

16-6. Officers 

(1) A Health Record shall be opened at the 
time of acceptance of appointment for individu- 
als appointed from civil life, and the record shall 
be forwarded to the initial place of active duty. 

(2) If the member is appointed and retained 
on inactive duty, the record shall be disposed of 
as follows: 

(a) Class II Marine Corps reservist — for- 
ward to or retain at the Organized Marine Corps 
Reserve unit to which assigned. 

(b) Class III Marine Corps reservists — for- 
ward to BUMED (Code 3342). In addition, a 
copy of the entrance SF 88 and SF 89 shall be 
forwarded with the service record to Marine 
Corps Reserve Forces, Class III, 1500 East Bannis- 
ter Road, Kansas City, Mo. 64131. 

(c) Naval reservists assigned to a drilling 



unit of the Selected Reserve in pay or nonpay 
status — forward to unit to which assigned. 

(d) Naval reservists assigned to a specialist 
or composite unit — deliver to commanding 
officer for transmittal in same package with 
service record to cognizant naval district 
commandant. 

(e) Naval reservists assigned a 19XX desig- 
nator — deliver to commanding officer for trans- 
mittal in same package with the service record to 
the cognizant naval district commandant. 

(f) Naval reservists not included in (c), 
(d), or (e) above — forward to BUMED. In addi- 
tion, deliver a copy of the entrance SF 88 and 89 
to the commanding officer for transmittal with 
the service record to the Commanding Officer, 
Naval Reserve Manpower Center, Bainbridge, 
Md. 21905. 

(3) When a midshipman or enlisted member 
is appointed to commissioned or warrant rank, 
the existing Health Record shall be continued in 
use. The activity having custody of the record at 
the time of acceptance of appointment shall (a) 
make necessary entries to indicate the new rank 
and file and social security numbers and the des- 
ignator or MOS and (b) prepare summary infor- 
mation entries on SF 600 and NAVMED 6150/4 
to include date, place, and rank to which 
appointed. 

16-7. Naval Academy Midshipmen, Officer 
Candidates, and Student Officers 

(1) Health Records of civilian candidates 
selected for appointment to the Naval Academy 
shall be prepared at the Naval Academy by the 
Permanent Board of Medical Examiners at the 
time of appointment. 

(2) Health Records for civilian applicants 
selected for an officer candidate program shall be 
opened upon enrollment in the particular pro- 
gram. The Health Record shall be opened in 
accordance with article 16— 5 except for NROTC 
applicants. In the case cf NROTC applicants: 
(a) the DD 722 (Health Record Jacket) contain- 
ing copies of the SF 88 and 93 shall be prepared 
at the time of enrollment; (b) the NAVMED 
6150/3 and 6150/4 and the SF 601 shall be pre- 
pared and included in the DD 722 by the Profes- 
sor of Naval Science as the needs for such arises; 
and (c) the DD 722-1 (Dental Folder) and orig- 
inal SF 603 shall be completed either at the time 



16-5 

Change 69 



16-8 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-8 



of the precommissioning physical examination or 
the first annual physical examination, whichever 
occurs first. 

(3) The existing Health Record shall be 
continued in use when Navy and Marine Corps 
members are (a) assigned to the Naval Prepara- 
tory School, (b) appointed to the Naval 
Academy, or (c) enrolled in an officer candidate 
program. Entries shall be made by the activity 
having custody of the record to indicate the 
change in the member's status. 

16-8. Enlisted Members 

(1) The Health Record shall be opened by the 
activity executing the enlistment contract upon 
original enlistment in the naval service. An 
exception to the foregoing would be in the case 
of those members who are enlisted or inducted 
and ordered to immediate active duty at a recruit 
training facility. In these cases the Health Record 
shall be opened by the naval training center or 
MARCORPS recruit depot, as appropriate. 

(a) In all cases the original SF 88 and SF 93 
shall be attached to the enlistment contract and 
forwarded with other entrance documents to 
BUPERS or MARCORPS. Copies of the SF 8S 
and SF 93 shall be forwarded to the appropriate 
naval training center or recruit depot. These 
forms with other applicable Health Record forms 



(and the 70 mm, AFEES entrance X-ray film, if 
on hand) shall be incorporated into the mem- 
ber's Health Record. 

(b) The Health Record of persons who are 
enlisted or reenlisted in a Reserve component and 
retained on inactive duty shall be disposed of as 
follows: 

(1) Class II Marine Corps reservist — for- 
ward to the Organized Marine Corps Reserve 
unit to which assigned. 

(2) Class III Marine Corps reservist — for- 
ward to Marine Corps Reserve Forces, Class III, 
1500 East Bannister Road, Kansas City, Mo. 
64131. 

(3) Naval reservists assigned to a drilling 
unit of the Selected Reserve in pay or nonpay 
status — forward to unit to which assigned. 

(4) Naval reservists assigned to a special- 
ist or composite unit and Naval Reserve officer 
school personnel — deliver to commanding officer 
for transmittal in the same package with the 
service record to the cognizant naval district 
commandant. 

(5) Naval reservists not included in (3) 
or (4) above — deliver to commanding officer for 
transmittal in the same package with the service 
record to the Commanding Officer, Naval 
Reserve Manpower Center, Bainbridge, Md. 
21905. 



16-6 

Change 69 



16-9 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-12 



Section III. CLOSURE OF HEALTH RECORD 



Article 

General Instructions 16- 9 

Disappearance, Missing, or Missing in Action 16-10 

Desertion 16-11 

Discharge or Death 16-12 

Discharge of Member Convicted by Civil Authorities , 16-13 

Release to Inactive Duty 16-14 

Retirement 16-15 

Disenrollment of Midshipmen or NROTC Members 16-16 

Supernumeraries 16-17 



16-9, General Instructions 

(1) Closure.— The Health Record shall be 
closed when a member (a) dies, (b) is dis- 
charged, (c) resigns, (d) is released to inactive 
duty, (e) is retired, (f) is transferred to the 
Fleet Reserve and released to inactive duty, (g) 
is declared missing or missing in action, (h) is 
declared a deserter, and (i) when an officer 
candidate or midshipman is disenrolled. 

(2) Entries. — Closing entries shall be recorded 
on NAVMED 6150/4. Entries shall include the 
(a) date of separation, (b) title of servicing 
activity, and (c) explanatory circumstances as 
may be indicated. 

(3) Disposition. — Except as otherwise pro- 
vided in the following articles, the closed record 
shall be forwarded to BUMED (7424) within 5 
working days after the official closing date. The 
DD 722 (Health Record Jacket), DD 722-1 
(Dental Folder) and NAVMED 6600/3 and 
6600/4 shall not be forwarded to BUMED. All 
forms shall be securely stapled together with the 
current SF 88 uppermost. Prior to forwarding, 
each form shall be checked for accuracy, 
completeness of name, grade or rate, and social 
security number. Care should be taken to insure 
that sick call treatment records and dental 
records are included. 

16-10. Disappearance, Missing, or Missing in 
Action 

(1) Whenever a member disappears and the 
available information is insufficient to warrant an 
administrative determination of death, a sum- 
mary of the relevant circumstances shall be 
entered on the SF 600. The entry shall include 
circumstances pertaining to the presumed disap- 
pearance of the individual, as supported by the 
available evidence; i.e., missing or missing in 
action. The record shall then be closed and for- 
warded to BUMED. 

16-11. Desertion 

(1) When a member is officially declared a 
deserter, an explanatory entry of this fact shall be 
recorded on the SF 600 and NAVMED 6150/4. 



The Health Record shall be retained until 60 
days (in the case of a Marine, 180 days) after the 
initial date of absence when it shall be forwarded 
to BUMED. Commanding officers of ships and 
mobile units, prior to sailing from the United 
States and the Canal Zone on an extended cruise, 
shall transfer the Health Record of deserters to 
the nearest receiving/naval station or other large 
naval activity. A copy of the letter of transmittal 
of these records shall be sent to BUMED with the 
envelope clearly marked "Deserter — Attention 
Code 742." 

(2) A deserter shall be physically examined at 
the first activity assuming jurisdiction of the 
member following his surrender or apprehension. 
A statement shall be prepared by the medical 
examiner setting forth the purpose and findings 
of the examination. A specific opinion about the 
member's physical fitness for confinement, and 
ability to perform active duty at sea, on foreign 
service, or in the field, as appropriate, shall be 
included in each case. The statement shall be 
recorded on SF 600, for inclusion in the mem- 
ber's Health Record. 

(3) Upon apprehension or surrender of a 
deserter, the commanding officer of the jurisdic- 
tional activity shall submit a request for the 
member's records to BUPERS or CMC, as appro- 
priate. A separate request to BUMED for the 
member's Health Record is not required. The 
activity concerned will be advised if the Health 
Record is not on file in BUMED. Such an activity 
should then submit a request for the record to 
the ship or station from which the member was 
declared a deserter. Copies of this request shall be 
furnished each interim activity to which the 
member may have been processed subsequent to 
his return to military jurisdiction. 

16-12. Discharge or Death 

(1) The Health Record shall be closed and 
forwarded to BUMED (7424) upon discharge. 
However, upon discharge and immediate reenlist- 
ment of enlisted members, the SF 88 and all 
other portions of the member's Health Record 
shall be retained in his field Health Record. No 



10 Feb 75 



16-7 
Change 83 



16-13 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-17 



part of the Record is to be forwarded to BUMED 
upon discharge and immediate reenlistment. 

(2) The Health Record shall be closed upon 
death of the service member. Proper closing 
entries shall be made and the Record, along with 
a copy of the death certificate, shall be forwarded 
to BUMED (7424). 

16-13. Discharge of Member Convicted by 
Civil Authorities 

(1) When discharge of a member convicted by 
civilian authorities is directed by Chief BUPERS 
or CMC, arrangements for the physical examina- 
tion and report thereof shall be made by the 
commanding officer or the area district comman- 
dant in which the member is confined. In the 
interest of precluding the incurrence of unneces- 
sary travel by the examiner with attendant 
expense and loss of time from his regular duties, 
the physical examination may be conducted and 
reported by any of the following: (a) Medical 
officer of the Armed Forces or other Federal Gov- 
ernment agency, (b) penal institution physician, 
or (c) in the absence of the services of the fore- 
going listed physicians, a certificate signed by the 
official in charge of the penitentiary reflecting an 
opinion about the present state of health of the 
person to be discharged will ordinarily suffice. 
The original SF 88, or the statement received 
from the prison official, shall be forwarded ,to 
BUMED with the closed Health Record. 

16-14. Release to Inactive Duty 

(1) The Health Record shall be closed (a) 
whenever members of the Reserve components 
are released from active duty, including active 
duty for training in excess of 30 days, (b) upon 
transfer to Naval or Marine Corps Reserve inac- 
tive duty from the Regular Navy or Marine 
Corps, and (c) upon transfer to the Fleet Reserve 
or Fleet Marine Corps Reserve and release to 
inactive duty. 

(2) In all cases except 6-month reservists or 
naval reservists and Marine Corps Class II re- 
servists returning directly to a drilling status 

(see (4) below), the complete Health Record, 
less the DD 722, DD 722-1, and NAVMED 
6600/3 and 6600/4, with the original of the SF 88 
conducted at the time of release stapled to the 
top, shall be forwarded to BUMED (7424). The 
International Certificate of Vaccination (PHS 
Form 731) shall be given to the member. 

(3) A copy of the release physical examination 
(SF 88) and a copy of the most recent SF 93 
shall be delivered to the commanding officer for 
transmittal with the service record. 



(4) For naval reservists and Marine Corps 
Class II reservists returning directly to an 
active drilling status, the DD 722 containing a 
copy of the release SF 88 and most recent SF 93, 
the SF 601, the NAVMED 6150/2, and the 
NAVMED 6150/4 shall be delivered to the 
commanding officer for transmittal in the same 
package with the service record to the cognizant 
Reserve unit. Particular attention must be given 
at this time to insure that all treatment records 
are removed and are included in the portion of 
the record to be forwarded to BUMED. 

16-15. Retirement 

(1) When, for any reason, a member of the 
naval service is placed on the retired list and 
released to inactive duty, the Health Record shall 
be closed and forwarded to BUMED. Upon 
release to inactive duty of a retired member per- 
forming active duty, the Health Record shall be 
closed and forwarded to BUMED. Closing entries 
on the NAVMED 6150/4 should indicate that the 
member is being released to inactive duty on the 
retired list. 

16-16. Disenrollment of Midshipmen or NROTC 
Members 

(1) When for any reason a midshipman's 
connection with the naval service is terminated, 
his Health Record shall be closed and forwarded 
to BUMED (7424). This includes midshipmen 
who graduate from the Naval Academy but do 
not receive commissions. In the case of midship- 
men who retain a status in the naval service after 
disenrollment from the Naval Academy, the 
Health Record shall be forwarded to the mem- 
ber's prospective commanding officer. 

(2) When for any reason an NROTC mem- 
ber's connection with the naval service is termi- 
nated, his Health Record shall be forwarded by 
the commanding officer of the member's NROTC 
unit to the area district medical officer for closure 
and transmission to BUMED (7424). In the case 
of members of the NROTC who retain a status 
in the naval service after disenrollment, the 
record shall be forwarded to the member's pro- 
spective commanding officer. 

16-17. Supernumeraries 

(1) When a patient in a naval hospital is 
separated from the naval service, but subse- 
quently retained in the hospital for further treat- 
ment and hospitalization, the Health Record 
shall be closed on the effective date of the separa- 



16-8 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



16-17 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-17 



tion and forwarded to BUMED (7424). In such 
cases a new Health Record shall not be prepared. 
However, the medical history shall be continued 
on SF 600, and forwarded to BUMED (7424), 
upon disposition of the former member from the 
hospital. 

(2) A copy of a clinical summary prepared 



incident to the hospitalization of a member 
whose name is carried on the Temporary Disabil- 
ity Retired list shall be forwarded to BUMED 
(7424) upon termination of hospitalization. All 
forms, in each case, shall show the individual's 
birthplace in addition to other personal identifi- 
cation data required in the form. 



10 Feb 75 



16-9 
Change 83 



0 

1 



< 



16-18 CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 16-19 
Section IV. CUSTODY OF HEALTH RECORD 

Article 

Responsibility for Custody 16-18 

Cross-Servicing Health Records 16-19 

Transfers to Ships or Stations 16-20 

Hospitalization at Naval Medical Facilities 16-21 

Hospitalization and Transfer to Federal Medical Facilities Other Than Naval 16-22 

Emergency Hospitalization and Direct Admission at Federal Medical Facilities Other Than Armed Forces. 16-23 

Hospitalization at Non-Federal Medical Facilities 16-24 

Admission to Hospital of Foreign Nation 16-25 

Reserve Members Not on Active Duty 16-26 

Unidentified, Lost, Damaged, or Destroyed Health Records 16-27 



16-18. Responsibility for Custody 

(1) The Health Record shall be retained in 
the custody of the medical officer of the ship or 
station to which the member is attached. When 
the member is attached to a ship or station 
having a dental facility, the DD 722-1 contain- 
ing the SF 603 shall be placed in the custody of 
the dental officer. On ships or stations having no 
medical officer, the Health Records may be 
placed in the custody of the Medical Department 
representative at the discretion of the command- 
ing officer. In those cases where Medical Depart- 
ment personnel are not assigned, it shall be the 
responsibility of the commanding officer of the 
Medical Department facility providing medical 
support to assume custody of the Health Records 
of the members assigned to such activity. 

(2) Health Records shall be subject to inspec- 
tion at any time by the commanding officer, his 
superiors in the chain of command, the fleet 
medical officer, or other duly authorized medical 
inspectors. Otherwise, the Health Record is for 
official use only and adequate security and 
custodial care are required. 

(3) When a Health Record is received, it shall 
be carefully examined to determine that all errors 
are corrected and that no omissions exist. Appro- 
priate corrective action shall be taken if addi- 
tional data is required. 

(4) A Health Record Receipt, File Chargeout 
and Disposition Record, NAVMED 6150/7, shall 
be maintained for each Health Record by 
Medical Department personnel having custody of 
Health Records. 

(5) All signatures in the Health Record shall 
be signed in blue-black ink. The name, grade, or 
rating of Medical Department officers and other 
authorized Medical Department personnel 
making entries in the Health Record shall be 
typed, printed, or stamped under their signature. 
Stamped facsimile signatures shall not be used on 
any medical or dental forms of the Health 
Record unless so authorized by BUMED. In sign- 
ing, the individual assumes responsibility for the 
correctness of the entry over his signature. 



(6) The senior medical officer or his desig- 
nated representative of the ship or station shall 
approve or enter reason for disapproval of all 
entries made in the forms (except SF 603) of the 
Health Records in his custody. 

(7) If an erroneous entry is made in a Health 
Record, it shall not be stricken out. An addi- 
tional entry shall be made showing wherein and 
to what extent the original entry is erroneous. 

(8) Each medical officer or Medical Depart- 
ment representative is responsible for the 
completeness of any required Health Record 
entries while the record remains in his custody. 

16-19. Cross-Servicing Health Records 

(1) Policy. — The Army, Air Force, and Coast 
Guard have Health Records for their personnel. 
In general, their procedures for maintaining and 
transferring the records are similar to those of 
the Navy. Full cross-servicing of Health Records 
is intended. However, when Army, Navy, Air 
Force, and Coast Guard procedures differ, Navy 
custodians of Health Records shall comply with 
Navy instructions. Similarly, Army, Air Force, 
and Coast Guard will follow their procedures. 

(2) Procedure When Army and Air Force Per- 
sonnel Are Treated At Navy Facilities. — 

(a) When Army and Air Force personnel 
are attached to Navy facilities for primary 
medical care (sick call) or dental care, the Navy 
medical facility will assume custody of their 
Health Records when appropriate. 

(b) When Army and Air Force personnel 
are treated in naval hospitals, commanding 
officers shall request that the patients' Health 
Records be forwarded whenever they are needed 
in connection with treatment. 

(c) When Army and Air Force personnel 
are treated in Navy facilities, and their Health 
Records are not available, commanding officers 
shall forward the documents ordinarily included 
in Navy Health Records to the appropriate 
commanding officers for insertion in the Health 
Records. 



16-11 
Change 69 



16^20 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-21 



(3) Procedure When Navy and Marine Corps 
Personnel Are Treated at Army and Air Force 
Facilities. — 

(a) Commanding officers shall forward 
Navy Health Records to Army and Air Force 
medical officers concerned when (1) members of 
the naval service are attached for primary 
medical or dental care to Army or Air Force 
facilities, or (2) the records are required in 
connection with treatment. 

(b) Health Record documents received for 
Navy personnel from Army and Air Force facili- 
ties shall be inserted in Navy Health Records. 

(4) When Active Duty Coast Guard Personnel 
Are Hospitalized at Navy Facilities. — 

(a) When active duty Coast Guard person- 
nel are hospitalized at Navy facilities, command- 
ing officers shall request the patient's Health 
Records be forwarded whenever they are needed 
in connection with treatment. 

(b) When active duty Coast Guard person- 
nel are discharged from a Navy facility follow- 
ing a period of hospitalization, the original 
signed narrative summary shall be inserted in the 
Health Record and the Health Record returned 
to the unit or station where the member is 
assigned. If the Health Record is not available, 
the narrative summary shall be furnished to the 
unit or station where the member is assigned for 
insertion in the Health Record, In either case, a 
copy of the narrative summary shall be furnished 
to the Commandant (PM), U.S. Coast Guard, 
Washington, D,C. 20226. 

16-20. Transfers to Ships or Stations 

(1) It is not intended to prescribe specific reg- 
ulations applicable to all activities for a standard 
filing sequence of component forms in the Health 
Record during custody; however, when a record 
is transferred, the forms shall be chronologically 
assembled as set forth in 16-2(1). 

(2) When a member is transferred, the 
medical officer or Medical Department represent- 
ative shall ascertain that all necessary entries 
have been recorded in the Health Record, and 
that the member has been processed in accord- 
ance with the provisions of article 15-50. When 
the Dental Folder and NAVMED 6150/3 (or 
other component forms) have been maintained 
on file elsewhere than in the Health Record, they 
shall be included, prior to transfer. 

(3) When an officer is ordered to active duty 
or transferred to another ship or station, he may 
be allowed to deliver his Health Record in 
person; otherwise, the record shall be forwarded 
via official channels. When an enlisted member is 
transferred, the Health Record shall be for- 
warded with the service record and pay record to 



the receiving command, except as noted below in 
(4) and (5). 

(4) When a member is ordered to participate 
in a foreign service expedition and the possibility 
of loss or seizure of the record makes it inadvisa- 
ble that the record accompany him, it shall be 
retained in the staging area. Interim entries shall 
then be recorded on an SF 600 or 603, for subse- 
quent insertion in the Health Record. 

(5) If a member is ordered to independent 
duty where there is no Medical Department rep- 
resentative, or if the duty destination is not 
obvious, the Health Record shall be forwarded to 
BUMED with an explanatory letter. 

(6) When practicable, the Health Record shall 
accompany any member conveyed by the Military 
Sealift Command. 

(7) In cases of unauthorized absence prior to 
departure of a ship or other unit on an extended 
cruise, the Health Record of the absentee shall be 
forwarded to the nearest receiving station or 
naval activity. 

(8) Upon receipt of notification concerning 
the apprehension or voluntary return to naval 
custody of an absentee who because of circum- 
stances cannot be returned to his unit, immedi- 
ately transfer the Health Record to the interme- 
diate activity or advise about the location of the 
record. 

(9) When a patient is received aboard ship for 
the purpose of transportation, the medical officer 
or the Medical Department representative shall 
maintain the Health Record. It is essential that 
the record of the chain of events remain unbro- 
ken; therefore, a patient received from transfer 
must be taken up as "From Transfer" with the 
same diagnosis under which transferred. Any 
subsequent entries or changes of diagnosis shall 
be recorded in the prescribed manner. 

16-21. Hospitalization at Naval Medical 
Facilities 

(1) When a patient is transferred to a naval 
medical facility the Health Record shall be deliv- 
ered with the patient. 

(2) In event of emergency, if a member on 
active duty is admitted directly to a naval 
medical facility while away from his duty sta- 
tion, the Health Record shall be forwarded as 
soon as practicable to the admitting facility. 

(3) Upon completion of treatment, the Health 
Record shall be returned to the member's duty 
station. However, the member shall not be 
retained after completion of treatment solely for 
the completion of any pending entries or adjunct 
reports. In such instance appropriate information 
will be included on the transfer authorization to 
indicate that the member's Health Record or 



16-12 
Change 69 



16-22 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-25 



related reports will be furnished as soon as prac- 
ticable. 

(4) When a member is discharged from treat- 
ment at a naval hospital and is directed to 
proceed home and await final action on the 
recommended findings of a physical evaluation 
board, an entry to this effect shall be recorded in 
the Health Record. 

16—22. Hospitalization and Transfer to Federal 
Medical Facilities Other Than Naval 

(1) Upon transfer of a Navy or Marine Corps 
patient to any Federal medical facility to which a 
naval medical unit or Navy liaison officer is 
attached, the Health Record shall accompany the 
patient, or be forwarded as soon as practicable. 

(2) Upon transfer of a Navy or Marine Corps 
patient to an Armed Forces or a Federal medical 
facility to which no naval medical unit or Navy 
liaison officer is attached, the following shall 
apply: 

(a) Army or Air Force Facilities. — The 
Health Record shall accompany the patient, or be 
forwarded as soon as practicable, for direct cross- 
servicing (see art, 16-19). The Health Record is 
returned to the member's duty station upon dis- 
position of the case. 

(b) Veterans' Administration Hospitals. — 
The Health Record of a patient transferred to a 
VA hospital shall be forwarded to the comman- 
dant of the naval district in which the hospital is 
located, or in the case of Marine Corps personnel, 
the commanding officer of the activity designated 
by the effective edition of MCO 6320.2. The 
activity receiving the Health Record shall take 
up the record and continue maintenance thereof 
until disposition of the patient is accomplished. 
Prior to forwarding the record, an entry shall be 
recorded on SF 600 to indicate the name and 
location of the VA hospital to which the patient 
has been transferred. If the member has appeared 
before a physical evaluation board, the recom- 
mended findings shall be recorded on the SF 600. 
The VA hospital shall be furnished with a dupli- 
cate or photocopy of the current SF 600 for 
inclusion in the member's Clinical Record at that 
activity. Upon completion of treatment or separa- 
tion from the naval service, a clinical summary 
will ordinarily be forwarded by the VA hospital 
to the activity maintaining the Health Record. In 
such instances the Health Record will be for- 
warded by the cognizant activity to the member's 
next duty station or, if closed, to BUMED. (See 
art. 16-23.) 

16-23. Emergency Hospitalization and Direct 
Admission at Federal Medical Facilities 
Other Than Armed Forces 

(1) When it is expected that hospitalization 



will not exceed 7 days and the unit to which the 
member is attached is not scheduled to depart the 
area, the Health Record shall be retained by the 
activity having custody. (See art. 16-19.) 

(2) When the parent command is not 
expected to remain in the area during the period 
of hospitalization, or when it is anticipated that 
the hospitalization will exceed 7 days, the Health 
Record shall be forwarded to the commandant of 
the naval district in which the hospital is located 
or to the activity designated by the Commandant 
of the Marine Corps for Marine Corps patients. 
The activity receiving the Health Record shall 
take up the case and continue it until disposition 
is accomplished. 

(3) Upon return of a patient to duty where 
the Health Record is retained by the custodial 
activity, the clinical records received from the 
medical facility shall be incorporated in the 
Health Record or a summary regarding hospitali- 
zation shall be requested and entered in accord- 
ance with article 16-47. 

16-24. Hospitalization at Non-Federal Medical 
Facilities 

(1) When a member is admitted directly to a 
non-Federal medical facility for treatment involv- 
ing brief periods of hospitalization, the Health 
Record shall be retained by the activity having 
custody. However, if it is apparent that the 
period of hospitalization will exceed 48 hours or 
the cognizant activity is a vessel or unit sched- 
uled for deployment, the Health Record shall be 
transmitted to the commandant of the area in 
which that hospital is located or to the activity 
designated by the Commandant of the Marine 
Corps for a Marine Corps patient. The activity 
receiving the Health Record shall take up the 
case and continue it until disposition is accom- 
plished. Upon return of the patient to duty in 
those cases in which the Health Record was 
retained by the parent activity, the procedure in 
article 16-47, pertaining to recording of informa- 
tion in the record, is applicable. 

16-25. Admission to Hospital of Foreign Nation 

(1) When a member is hospitalized at a 
medical facility of a foreign nation, an entry of 
this fact shall be made in the Health Record; 
however, this entry shall not be designated as an 
official transfer to that hospital. The Health 
Record shall be retained on board and continued 
until the patient either returns to duty or is 
transferred to another U.S. Navy vessel or U.S. 
military activity. Upon departure of the vessel 
from the port, the member shall be transferred in 
a patient status to any other U.S. naval vessel 
remaining in the port. The medical department 
of the vessel to which the patient is transferred 



16-13 

Change 69 



16-26 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-27 



shall assume responsibility for custody of the case 
and continue the Health Record. If, upon depar- 
ture, there is no other U.S. naval vessel remain- 
ing in the port, the cognizant medical depart- 
ment official shall forward the Health Record via 
the commanding officer to the nearest U.S. 
embassy or consul. The letter of transmittal shall 
contain information and instructions that the 
Health Record must accompany the patient in 
the event of transfer or be forwarded to the 
commanding officer of the next U.S. naval vessel 
which arrives in port. Upon arrival of a U.S. 
naval vessel in such a foreign port, the ship's 
medical officer shall, if practicable, assume 
medical cognizance of the patient and continue 
the Health Record. 

16-26. Reserve Members Not on Active Duty 

(1) Health Records of members of the Naval 
Reserve, Fleet Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, 
and Fleet Marine Corps Reserve NOT ON active 
duty shall be maintained as follows: 

(a) Naval reservists assigned to a drilling 
unit of the Selected Reserve in pay, nonpay, or 
nondrill status — by unit to which assigned. 

(b) Naval reservists assigned to a specialist 
or composite unit and Naval Reserve officer 
school personnel — by the cognizant naval district 
commandant. (The commandant may delegate 
maintenance responsibility to an appropriate 
training center or facility.) 

(c) Naval reservists holding appropriate 
duty orders, tv-th or without pay — by the train- 
ing center or facility to which assigned. 

(d) Other naval reservists and fleet reservists 
— by BUMED; additionally, a copy of the most 
recent SF 88 and 93 is to be filed in the service 
record. 

(e) Class II, Marine Corps reservists — by the 
Organized Marine Corps Reserve unit to which 
assigned. 

(f) Fleet Marine Corps Reserve members — 
by BUMED; additionally, a copy of the most 
recent SF 88 and 93 is to be filed in the service 
record. 

(g) Class HI Marine Corps reservists — by 
BUMED; additionally, a copy of the most recent 
SF 88 and 93 is to be filed in the service record. 

(2) For inactive reservists who desire to affili- 
ate with Ready Reserve units, the NAVMED 
6150/2 and 6150/4 and SF 601 can be, if needed, 
requested from BUMED (3342). These pages 
along with the SF 88 and SF 93 filed in the 
member's service record shall be used to construct 
a Health Record. The Dental Record is not neces- 
sary unless the member receives dental treatment 
after affiliating. Additional pages may be added 
as necessary. 



16-27. Unidentified, Lost, Damaged, or 
Destroyed Health Records 

(1) "When a Health Record is lost or 
destroyed, the cognizant custodian shall notify 
BUMED (Code 334) by speedletter or by a copy 
of the search message, giving the name in full, 
social security number and file or service number, 
grade or rating, and circumstances such as 
destroyed or activity or person who lost the 
record and efforts to recover the record. A 
replacement Health Record shall be opened. The 
designation REPLACEMENT shall be promi- 
nently entered on the jacket and all forms 
replaced. A synopsis of the circumstances requir- 
ing a replacement and date accomplished shall be 
set forth as a note on the replacement SF 600. If 
the missing record is subsequently recovered the 
additional information or entries contained in 
the replacement record shall be inserted in the 
original record. Since BUMED does not maintain 
a copy of current Health Records, it is unable to 
furnish replacements for original records either 
lost or destroyed. 

(2) A Health Record or any portion thereof 
shall be duplicated whenever it approaches a 
state of illegibility or deterioration which may 
possibly endanger its future use or value as a 
permanent record. The duplicate Health Record 
or duplicate portion thereof shall be a like repro- 
duction of the original insofar as possible. Partic- 
ular attention to detail shall be employed in the 
actual transcription. When an entire Health 
Record is duplicated the designation DUPLI- 
CATE shall be prominently entered on the jacket 
and all forms duplicated. When only component 
forms are duplicated, the new forms shall be 
individually identified as DUPLICATE. The 
circumstances necessitating the duplication and 
date accomplished shall be set forth as a note on 
the SF 600. The original Health Record, or any 
portion thereof, which is replaced by a duplicate 
shall be forwarded to BUMED as an enclosure to 
an explanatory letter of transmittal. (For excep- 
tion, see art. 16-28.) 

(3) If a Health Record or component form is 
held for a member of the Armed Forces whose 
present duty station, status, or location cannot be 
determined, it shall be forwarded to BUMED 
(Code 3342) with an explanatory letter of trans- 
mittal. The DD 722 (Health Record Jacket) and 
DD 722-1 (Dental Folder) shall not be for- 
warded to BUMED. All forms shall be securely 
stapled together with the current SF 88 upper- 
most. Prior to forwarding each of the component 
forms they shall be checked for accuracy, 
completeness of full name, grade or rate, and 
social security number if known. 



16-14 

Change 69 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 16-29 

DD FORM 722, HEALTH RECORD JACKET, AND DD FORM 722-1, 
DENTAL FOLDER 

Article 

16-28 



16-28 

Section V. 



General 

Preparation .... 

16-28. General 

(1) A new Health Record Jacket (DD 722) or 
Dental Folder (DD 722-1), in addition to being 
prepared upon the entry or reentry of a member 
into the naval service, shall also be prepared 
when either the existent jacket or folder has been 
damaged or because of deterioration is approach- 
ing the point of illegibility. In the latter 
instance, the old jacket or folder shall be 
destroyed following replacement. (See art. 6-109 
for additional data on the DD 722-1.) 

16-29. Preparation 

(1) Where To Place. — The data noted below 
shall be entered on the lip of the DD 722. The 
same data, less blood group and Kh type, shall be 
entered on the lip of the DD 722-1. 



16-29 

(2) What. — Enter full name (last, first, and 
middle name, in that order). The name shall be 
followed by the member's social security number, 
date of birth, and, only on the DD 722, the blood 
group and Rh type. If there is no middle name, 
the entry "n" or "NMN" shall not be used. If the 
member uses initials instead of first or middle 
names, show this by enclosing the initials in quo- 
tation marks; e.g., "J" "G". Indicate JR, SR, III, 
etc., following the member's middle name, or in 
the absence of a middle name the first name, 

(3) How. — The information may be typed, 
printed, stamped, or attached by gum label or a 
combination thereof. 

(4) Format Examples. — 



JONES, HARRY WILL, SSN 111-22-3333 29 MAR 1923 O NEG 



JONES, Harry William, Jr, 

SSN 111-22-3333 3-29-23 O Neg 



JONES Harriet Marie SSN 1 1 1-22-3334 23 Mar 1929 Blood Group B Neg 



JONES, "T" "X" III 

SSN 111-22-3335 1 Apr 30 O neg 



16-15 
Change 69 



r 



( 



( 



16-30 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-35 



Section VI. NAVMED 6150/3, SICK CALL TREATMENT RECORD 

Article 

General 16-30 

Preparation and Entries 16-31 

Line-of-Duty and Conduct Entries 16-32 

Maintenance of File , 16-33 

Transfer Action 16—34 

Unavailability of Health Record 16-35 

Disposition 16-36 



16-30. General 

(1) The purpose of the NAVMED 6150/3, 
Sick Call Treatment Record, is to provide a 
complete chronological record of all outpatient 
medical treatment and associated examinations 
received by a member at sick call. The record 
shall include conditions or complaints presented 
by the member regardless of whether or not 
treatment was administered. 

16-31. Preparation and Entries 

(1) A NAVMED 6150/3 shall be prepared 
simultaneously with opening of the Health 
Record. Entries in the personal-identification-data 
section at the top of the form, whenever possible, 
shall be typewritten; if ink entries are necessary, 
they shall be printed, 

(2) Sufficient space shall be reserved at the top 
of each side of the form to record information 
relative to the member's sensitivity to any drugs 
or chemicals. When recording this information, 
the entry shall be made in bold type or printed 
letters and underlined in red ink. 

(3) Entries shall be made in accordance with 
the block captions on the form as amplified in 
this section, 

(a) Treating Facility. — The name of the 
treating facility shall be entered in the upper 
portion of the same line in which the complaint 
is recorded. 

(b) Complaint — Treatment Administered. 
— Entries shall contain each complaint or condi- 
tion presented, and any treatment rendered. 
Information pertaining to treatment of disease or 
injury should also describe the nature and perti- 
nent history. In the case of injury or poisoning, 
the duty status of the individual at the time of 
occurrence, and the circumstances of occurrence 
shall be recorded in accordance with the proce- 
dures in current BUMED directives in the 6310 
series governing reporting and recording patient 
statistical information. 

(c) Signature and Grade /Rate of Person 
Administering Treatment. — These items shall be 
recorded on the line below each entry on the 
right side of the form. 

(d) Miscellaneous. — Abbreviations and sym- 
bols of general usage in medicine as well as any 



official abbreviations authorized in military 
records may be used. Legibility of ink entries is 
essential. Both sides of each sheet shall be used. 

16-32. Line-of-Duty and Conduct Entries 

(1) An entry on the NAVMED 6150/3 
concerning line of duty and misconduct shall be 
made in each case in which a member of the 
naval service incurs an injury which might result 
in a permanent disability or which results in his 
physical inability to perform duty for a period 
exceeding 24 hours (as distinguished from a 
period of hospitalization for evaluation or obser- 
vation). See JAG Manual chapter VIII. 

(2) , When an entry is made on the NAVMED 
6150/3 concerning line of duty and misconduct, it 
shall include facts specific as possible concerning 
time, place, names of persons involved, and a 
brief of circumstances surrounding the incident 
leading to injury. 

(3) Line of duty and misconduct entries on 
NAVMED 6150/3 are not required if the 
member, even though first seen in sick call, is 
admitted to the sicklist. (See art. 16-45(2).) 

16-33. Maintenance of File 

(1) Generally, the current NAVMED 6150/3 
will be located in the outpatient treatment record 
section at the medical facility to which members 
report for outpatient care. Completed forms may 
either be retained in the Health Record in the 
respective sequence, with the most recent one on 
top, or attached to the current form and retained 
in the' outpatient treatment record section. 

16-34. Transfer Action 

(1) The current NAVMED 6150/3 shall be 
fastened as the top sheet in the Health Record 
upon transfer of a member, 

16-35. Unavailability of Health Record 

(1) Whenever outpatient treatment is fur- 
nished to a member of the Armed Forces whose 
Health Record is not available, the information 
shall be reported on a DD 689, Individual Sick 
Slip. (Instructions concerning use and prepara- 
tion of this form are in section XVII.) 

(2) When a DD 689 is received at the treat- 
ment facility that provides medical care for the 

16-17 
Change 69 



16-36 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-36 



member, the facts and treatment date(s) shall be 
transcribed to the member's NAVMED 6150/3. 
This entry should include name and status of the 
individual who administered the treatment, and 
signature and grade or rate of the person respon- 
sible for the transcription. 



16-36. Disposition 

(1) The NAVMED 6l50/3's shall be for- 
warded to BUMED together with other desig* 
nated forms upon closure of the Health Record 
(art. 16-9). 



16-18 

Change 69 



16-37 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-38 



Section VII. STANDARD FORM 88, REPORT OF MEDICAL EXAMINATION 

Articles 

General 16-37 

Preparation 16-38 

Identifying Body Marks 16-39 



16-37. General 

(1) SF 88, Report of Medical Examination, is 
to be prepared whenever a complete report of 
physical examination is required by the Bureau 
for Health Record purposes. When not otherwise 
indicated, each physical examination shall be 
recorded on SF 88. 

(2) Entries on the SF 88 shall not be pretyped, 
preprinted, or otherwise entered or reproduced 
in advance. Past experience has shown that such 
advance entries often resulted in the inclusion of 
observations or judgments not actually made by 
the medical examiner, or in failure to incorporate 
data noted during the course of the examination. 

16-38. Preparation 

(1) Specific requirements for submittal and 
disposition of the forms in the major categories 
are tabulated in article 15-82. 

(2) D eta': is of Entries. — 

(a) Item 1, Last Name — First Name — Mid- 
dle Name. — The surname shall be recorded in 
capitals. The Christian name(s) shall be recorded 
in full without abbreviation. If the individual's 
first or middle name consists only of an initial, 
each initial shall be enclosed with quotation 
marks. Designations such as "JR" or "II" shall 
appear after the middle name or initial. In the 
absence of a middle name or initial, and if "JR" 
or "II" is applicable, the "JR" or "II" shall be 
entered in the space. 

(b) Item 2, Grade and Component or Posi- 
tion, — Use official abbreviation of current rank 
or rate, branch of service, class and status; i.e., 
regular, reserve, or retired and if active or inac- 
tive. For officers also show the assigned designa- 
tor or MOS. 

(c) Item 3, Identification No. — Enter the 
social security number, 

(d) Item 4, Home Address. — Enter the 
official home address as reported in the current 
service record or enlistment contract. 

(e) Item 5, Purpose of Examination. — Use 
phraseology similar to that contained in the 
second column of article 15-82. Avoid use of 
nonstandard abbreviations. When necessary 
continue under "Notes." 

(f) Item 6, Date of Examination. — Actual 
date of examination is to be written in the 
format of 5 JAN 59. Abbreviations for months 
shall consist of the first three letters of the month 
only. 



(g) Item 7, Sex. — Spell out; do not abbrevi- 
ate. 

(h) Item 8, Race. — Entries shall be confined 
to one of the following five classifications: 

(1) Caucasian. (Puerto Rican (White) 
shall be recorded as Caucasian.) 

(2) Negroid. (Puerto Rican (Negro) 
shall be recorded as Negroid.) 

(3) Mongolian. (Chinese, Japanese, 
Korean, and Eskimo shall be recorded as Mon- 
golian.) 

(4) Indian (American). 

(5) Malayan (Filipino, Samoan, 
Chamorro, and Hawaiian shall be recorded as 
Malayan.) 

(i) Item 9, Total Years Government Serv- 
ice. — In "Military" block enter the time (ex- 
pressed in years and months) served in any branch 
of the U.S. military services, to include both 
active and inactive service; i.e., USAF 3y 3m, 
USA 3y 3m, USN & USNR 3y 3m. The "Civilian" 
block shall ordinarily be left blank. 

(j) Item 10, Agency. — Leave blank for mili- 
tary personnel. 

(k) Item 11, Organization Unit. — List name 
of ship or station to which examinee is attached. 

(1) Item 12, Date of Birth, — Use format of 6 
JUN 40. 

(m) Item 13, Place of Birth. — Enter city, 
town, or village; and State. If rural, the name of 
the county may be used. For foreign born, enter 
the name of country as known at the time of the 
individual's birth. 

(n) Item 14, Name, Relationship, and 
Address of Next of Kin, — List as reported on the 
member's current Record of Emergency Data, 
DD 93-1. 

(o) Item 15, Examining FacHity or Exam- 
iner, and Address. — Record official title and loca- 
tion of the activity or office at which the exami- 
nation was conducted. 

(p) Item 16, Other Information. — Religion 
shall be shown in this block as "P" for Protes- 
tant, "C" for Catholic, or "H" for Hebrew. The 
specific denomination of any of the religions 
(i.e., Baptist, Lutheran, Methodist, Presby- 
terian), although desirable, is not required, 
unless requested by the individual. The religion 
of persons belonging to other religious faiths 
shall be fully recorded. If a person does not 
desire to state his religious preference the space 
will be left blank. The word "None" is to be 



16-19 

Change 69 



16-38 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-38 



used only when the person claims no religious 
convictions. 

(q) Item 17, Rating or Specialty. — Use only 
for designated aviation personnel and for quali- 
fied submarine and diving personnel. For avia- 
tion personnel enter type (for example, NA for 
Naval Aviator, and NFO for Naval Flight 
Officer), Following type, enter date of designa- 
tion as naval aviator or class 2 aviation personnel 
and anthropometric size code. In block "Time in 
This Capacity" enter total flight hours. Hours of 
flying time in last 6 months shall be entered in 
the appropriate block. For submarine and diving 
personnel, record respective specialty for which 
qualified: i.e., "Qualified for Submarine Duty" or 
"Qualified Diver 1st class." 

(r) Items 18-43 (Inclusive), Clinical Evalu- 
ation. — Check each item in appropriate column. 
Enter "NE" for any items not evaluated. The 
medical examiner shall describe each abnormality 
in detail in the space designated "Notes" on the 
face of the form; if additional space is required, 
continue in item 73. Marks and scars indicated in 
block 39 shall also be shown under "Notes" 
using descriptive designations as outlined in 
article 16-39. 

(s) Item 44, Dental. — If a dental officer is 
not available, the examinee's dental qualifica- 
tions, other than of candidates of the U.S. Naval 
Academy, shall be determined by the medical 
officer and entered under "Remarks" of item 44 
with the statement, "Examination not performed 
by dental officer." Also under "Remarks" show 
Type of Examination (see art. 6-100) and Dental 
Classification (see art. 6-101). 

(t) Items 45-50, Laboratory Findings. — Re- 
port findings of laboratory tests or other exami- 
nations required incident to a physical examina- 
tion, insert in item 47 the date of any serological 
examinations of the blood, and in 49 enter Rh 
factor and record blood group by use of interna- 
tional classification letters O, A, B, or AB. In the 
absence of proper facilities to accomplish any of 
the foregoing examinations or any other portion 
of the physical examination, a notation to this 
effect shall be entered in block 73 of the form, 
followed by the stipulation that the examina- 
tion^) shall be completed at the member's first 
active/training duty station where adequate 
medical facilities are available. The result of any 
special tests conducted incident to the physical 
examination shall be continued in item 73 or on 
additional sheets if necessary. Specify any tests 
which are listed but not required and those 
which are required but not accomplished. 

(u) Item 51, Height. — Record in inches, to 
the one-half inch, except for aviation physical 
examinations where it shall be to the nearest 
one-tenth inch. The sitting height and the but- 



tock-leg length shall be recorded to the nearest 
one-tenth of an inch. The sitting height shall be 
recorded in parentheses and the buttock-leg 
length in the margin above. See article 16-74, 
illustration 2A. 

(v) Item 52, Weight. — Record in numerals 
to the nearest pound. 

(w) Item 53, Color Hair. — The color of the 
hair shall be entered as flaxen, sandy (yellow- 
red), auburn (red-brown), brown (light, 
medium, or dark), black, gray, etc. Race classifi- 
cation shall not be used in connection with color 
description. 

(x) Item 54, Color Eyes. — In entering color 
do not use race classification with color descrip- 
tion. 

(y) Item 55, Build. — Indicate by X in 
appropriate block, 

(z) Item 56, Temperature. — Record degree; 
use Fahrenheit scale. 

(aa) Item 57-72, Physical Evaluation. — To 
provide uniformity and completeness in the 
recording of information in these items, refer- 
ence shall be made to chapter 15 or current direc- 
tives which prescribe the nature and scope of 
each physical examination and the application of 
these items to the particular program and rate, 
rank, or grade involved. 

(bb) Item 73, Notes and Significant or 
Interval History. — 

(1) Indicate any pertinent medical his- 
tory; include resume for any condition which is 
likely to recur or cause more than minimal loss 
of time from duty. An accurate and comprehen- 
sive history may be of great value in pointing to 
future diagnosis. Also include any information 
acquired incident to special referral or consulta- 
tion. On all aviation posthospitalization physical 
examinations, give a resume of hospitalization 
and include name of hospital, date of admission 
and discharge, diagnosis, and a brief summary of 
treatment; also, prognosis if not completely 
recovered. 

(2) For all aviation physical examina- 
tions, a space 4 inches on the right side shall be 
reserved for the required BUMED endorsement 
(see art. 16-74 illustration 2A). 

(cc) Item 74, Summary of Defects and Diag- 
noses. — 

(1) All defects and diagnoses found must 
be recorded and described adequately. The 
defects shall be listed in the summary in the 
order of their importance. The irremediable, dis- 
qualifying, and permanent defects shall be listed 
first. All minor defects noted shall be recorded to 
protect the Government in the event of future 
claims for disability compensation. When an 
individual has a disease or other physical condi- 
tion that, although not disqualifying, requires 



16-20 

Change 69 



16-39 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-39 



medical treatment, the nature of the condition 
and the need for treatment shall be clearly stated. 

(2) For all aviation physical examina- 
tions, a space 4 inches on the right side shall be 
reserved for the required BUMED endorsement 
(see art. 16-74 illustration 2A). 

(dd) Item 75, Recommendations. — Indicate 
any medical or dental recommendations. Specify 
the particular type of any further medical or 
dental specialist examination indicated (continue 
in item 73 or use additional sheets if necessary). 

(ee) Item 76, Physical Profile. — There is no 
requirement for the physical profiling of Navy 
and Marine Corps personnel except for the initial 
physical profiling accomplished at Armed Forces 
Entrance and Examining Stations (AFEES). 

(ff) Item 77, Examinee's Qualification. — Re- 
gardless of the purpose of the examination, a 
determination about an examinee's physical abil- 
ity to perform active duty at sea, and/or on for- 
eign service, or in the field, as appropriate, and 
such other information as may be required by 
current instructions shall be stated. 

(gg) Item 78, Disqualifying Defects. — Indi- 
cate item number only. 

(hh) Items 79-82, Signature. — The name, 
grade, branch of military service, and status of 
each medical and dental examiner shall be type- 
written, printed, or stamped in the left section. 
Each examiner shall sign with blue-black or 
black ink in the right section. Facsimile signa- 
ture stamps shall not be used. When attachment 
sheets are used as a supplement or continuation 
to the report, they shall be serially numbered 
(both sides); however, only the actual number 
of attached sheets shall be indicated in the 
bottom right block of SF 88. 



16-39. Identifying Body Marks 

(1) The medical examiner shall make a 
careful inspection of the body, front and rear, on 
each side of the median line separately, com- 
mencing with the scalp and ending at the foot, 
and record under the "Notes" section of the face 
of the SF 88 all body marks, tattoos, and scars of 
value for purposes of identification. If no marks 
or scars are found, this fact shall be stated. 

(2) The sizes of scars, moles, warts, birth- 
marks, etc., shall be indicated in inches or frac- 
tions thereof, except in the case of pinhead moles 
for which the abbreviation "p.m." shall be used. 
Pinhead moles are those presenting a diameter of 
less than one-eighth of an inch. When recording 
the location of a tattoo mark, a narrative descrip- 
tion of the design shall be included. Tattoo tran- 
scriptions of words or initials shall be recorded 
in capital letters. The size of a tattoo need be 
described only regarding its general dimension. 
A statement relative to color or pigment is not 
required. Amputations and losses of parts of 
fingers and toes should be noted, showing the 
number of the particular digit injured and the 
extent or level of absence. 

(3) The following are authorized abbrevia- 
tions for the description or conditions indicated: 
amp. — amputation, f. — flat, fl. — fleshy, h. — hairy, 
lr. — linear, m. — moles, p. — pitted, p.m. — pinhead 
mole, r. — raised, s. — scar or smooth, var. — vari- 
cose veins or varicocele, va. — vaccination scar, w. 
— wart. Combinations of the above abbreviations 
are permissible; such as p.s.l^d. — pitted scar Vi 

inch in diameter, f.p.s. 1 x Vj flat pitted scar 

1 inch long and Vi inch wide, r.h.m.Vid. — raised 
hairy mole Va inch in diameter. Abbreviations 
shall not be used in description of tattoo marks 
since they are likely to be mistaken as signifying 
tattooed letters on the individual's body. 



16-21 

Change 69 



( 



( 



16-41 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-42 



Section VIII. STANDARD FORM 93, REPORT OF MEDICAL HISTORY 

Article 

General 16-41 

Preparation , 16-42 



16-41. General 

(1) The purpose of the SF 93, Report of 
Medical History, is to provide a complete per- 
sonal medical history report and a source of 
information supplemental to that reported on the 
SF 88. Since the Health Record is not prepared 
until the person enters the service, the SF 93 
provides a current, concise, and comprehensive 
record of a member's personal medical history, 
prior to entrance into the naval service and any 
subsequent change in his status. 

16-42. Preparation 

(1) The personal-information items 1 through 
8 of the SF 93 shall be completed (ink, indelible 
pencil, or typewritten) in accordance with the 



instructions applicable to corresponding items of 
the SF88 (art. 16-38(2)). 

(2) Every assistance shall be afforded to the 
examinee in order that he may fully and clearly 
comprehend the terminology appearing in items 
9 through 24, thereby enabling him to provide a 
concise and accurate history. 

(3) Item 25 (Physician's summary) shall be 
prepared and signed by the medical examiner 
and in no instance shall this item be left blank. 

(4) Preparation of carbon copies is authorized 
subject to the requirement that all copies bear 
the signature of the examinee and the medical 
examiner and that complete legibility is main- 
tained. 



16-23 
Change 69 



r 



< 



16-44 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-46A 



Section IX. STANDARD FORM 600, CHRONOLOGICAL RECORD OF MEDICAL CARE 

Article 

General 16-44 

Binnacle List and Sicklist Entries 16-45 

Physical Examination Entries 16-46 

Blood Grouping and Typing Record I6-46A 

Other Entries 16-47 

Disposition 16-48 



16-44. General 

(1) The SF 600, Chronological Record of 
Medical Care, provides a current, concise, and 
comprehensive record of a member's military 
medical history. Properly maintained, the SF 600 
should facilitate the evaluation of a patient's 
physical condition; greatly reduce correspond- 
ence to obtain medical records; eliminate unne- 
cessary repetition of expensive diagnostic proce- 
dures; and serve as an invaluable permanent 
record of medical treatment, care, and physical 
examinations received. 

(2) Entries shall be typewritten when practic- 
able and shall include the name and address of 
the activity responsible for the entry. Each entry 
shall be dated and signed by the responsible 
medical officer or Medical Department represent- 
ative. Care shall be taken to number each page 
(front and back) consecutively and to enter the 
full name, grade or rate, social security number, 
and date of birth. 

(3) The SF 600 shall be continuous and 
include information pertaining to complaints, 
duration of illness or injury, physical findings on 
admission, clinical course, results of pertinent 
laboratory and special examinations, treatment 
(to include operations), physical fitness at time 
of disposition from sicklist, and disposition. 

16-45. Binnacle List and Sicklist Entries 

(1) When a member's name is placed on the 
binnacle list for treatment, an entry shall be 
made on the SF 600 showing date, diagnosis, and 
a resume of treatment. 

(2) When a member is admitted to the sick- 
list, entries shall be made on the SF 600 or SF 502, 
showing the nature of the disease, illness or 
injury, pertinent history or circumstances of 
incurrence, treatment rendered, and disposition. 

(3) Upon admission of an active duty member 
to the sicklist, the medical officer or the Medical 
Department representative shall enter informa- 
tion on the SF 600 or SF 502 regarding whether 
the disease or injury was or was not suffered in 
the line of duty and was not due to the member's 
own misconduct (see chap, VIII, JAG 
MANUAL). 

(a) Whenever the cause of admission results 
in the submission of an injury report or investi- 



gative report to JAG in accordance with the 
guidelines in the JAG MANUAL, an entry 
should be made, if practicable, on the SF 600 
reflecting the final determination of JAG. 

(b) In any case not reported to JAG by an 
injury report or investigative report, the Health 
Record entry shall contain facts as specific as pos- 
sible concerning time, place, names of persons 
involved, and a brief of the circumstances sur- 
rounding the incident leading to a disease or 
injury. 

16-46. Physical Examination Entries 

(1) The results of all physical examinations 
shall be recorded on the current SF 600 showing 
the purpose, result, and physical defects noted 
incident to any physical examination prescribed 
in chapter 15 or current BUMED directives and 
conducted upon members of the naval service 
including the Reserve components. Similar 
entries are required for examinations pertaining 
to qualifications for special duty assignment 
(aviation, diving, submarine service, etc.) and 
other prescribed periodic physical, laboratory, 
X-ray, or special examinations conducted. 

(2) Each of the above examinational entries 
shall bear the signature of the medical examin- 
er (s) and shall also indicate the date of the par- 
ticular examination, and title of the examining 
activity. 

16-46A. Blood Grouping and Typing Record 

(1) Determination of blood group and Rh 
type on recruits at naval training centers and 
Marine Corps recruit depots shall be accom- 
plished by specified naval hospitals on a semiau- 
tomated mechanical system, known as the Auto- 
matic Blocd Typing AutoAnalyzer. The inter- 
preted machine output shall be affixed to a sepa- 
rate SF 600, which shall be identified as "Blood 
Grouping and Typing Record." When the 
"Blood Grouping and Typing Record" is incor- 
porated in a Health Record, no additional entry 
as to blood group and Rh type is required on the 
SF 601, Immunization Record, for that Health 
Record. 

(2) The "Blood Grouping and Typing 
Record" SF 600 shall be prepared with column 
headings to indicate what each respective column 
on the machine output represents. Persons 



16-25 
Change 69 



16-47 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-48 



knowledgeable in the technique of automated 
blood grouping and typing will be able to verify 
the interpretation of the results at any time, for 
administrative purposes, merely by reading the 
machine output. The specific interpretative infor- 
mation provided on the "Blood Grouping and 
Typing Record" shall ident'fy the individual by 
the appropriate ABO group and Rh type (posi- 
tive or negative). Matching the sequential 
number on the machine output with the process- 
ing or blood number near the bottom of the page 
is verification that the correct machine output 
has been affixed to the correct SF 600, "Blood 
Grouping and Typing Record." 

(3) The "Blcod Grouping and Typing 
Record" shall contain a syphilis screening test 
and possibly other screening tests for the pres- 
ence of certain disease conditions. These will be 
identifiable by respective column headings deter- 
mined at the processing hospital. In addition, the 
machine output may indicate the presence of 
abnormal blood antibodies. 

(4) The "Remarks" section on the form shall 
contain an entry when there is agglutination in 
channel 8 (O cells) of the machine output. 

(5) This SF 600 shall constitute the source 
document for blood group and type entries 
required elsewhere in the Health Record (i.e., 
DD Form 722, SF 88, etc.) or on official docu- 
ments. 

(6) In the event of machine unavailability, the 
required determination of ABO group and Rh 
type shall be performed manually and entered in 
the Health Record as appropriate. 

16-47. Other Entries 

(1) When a member of the naval service is 
injured or contracts a disease while on leave, or 
when for any other reason the facts concerning 
an injury or sickness have not been entered in 
the individual's Health Record, the medical 
officer or Med : cal Department representative 
having custody of the record shall ascertain the 
facts in the case and make the necessary entries. 

(2) When, for any reason, an enlisted member 
undergoing treatment at a naval hospital is held 
in the custody of civil authorities, every effort 
shall be made to ascertain the length of time he 
will be held pending disposition of his case. 
Upon receipt of information that the individual 
will be retained in the custody of civil authori- 
ties for a period in excess of 7 days, he shall be 
officially transferred to an intermediate naval 
activity. This activity should be the nearest naval 
command which has facilities to receive and 



process personnel discharged from treatment. 
Complete information regarding the case and the 
need for further hospitalization shall be entered 
in the Service Record for naval personnel, and 
the Service Record Book for Marine Corps per- 
sonnel. A letter setting forth all the facts in the 
case shall be forwarded to BUPERS or the CMC, 
as appropriate, and to the intermediate activity 
to which the transfer is made. The current SF 
600 shall be closed as to D (Discharged From 
Sick List), This procedure prevents charging the 
health of the Navy with the sick days not 
actually incurred as a result of service conditions. 

(3) Dental treatments shall be recorded on SF 
600 as required (art. 6-119). 

(4) Results of laboratory examinations made 
on personnel exposed to radiological hazards 
shall be entered on SF 600, listing any abnormali- 
ties and indicating action taken. 

(5) The prescription for spectacles shall be 
entered on the SF 600 and shall include data 
concerning frame measurements. This can be 
accomplished by (a) transcribing the data from 
the prescription to the SF 600 or (b) securely 
attaching the prescription form to the SF 600 
with transparent tape. 

(6) When a patient is transferred and radi- 
ographs are transferred with him, a notation to 
that effect shall be entered on the SF 600 or SF 
502, as appropriate. 

(7) Each time a photofluorographic examina- 
tion of the chest is made, the place, date, film 
number, and report of the interpretation shall be 
entered on the SF 600 or the SF 88 if the purpose 
of the examination requires the preparation of a 
SF 88. Entries are not required on both the SF 
600 and SF 88 for the same examination. 

(8) Any hypersensitivity to drugs or chemicals 
known to exist shall be indicated on a separate 
SF 600. The "Page No." shall be "special" and 
this SF 600 shall be placed on top of all other SF 
600's. Appropriate entries regarding any hyper- 
sensitivity should be made on this page. Hyper- 
sensitivity to a local anesthetic or other substance 
shall also be recorded on the SF 603, the DD 
722-1, and the NAVMED 6150/3. 

16-48. Disposition 

(1) The SF 600 shall be forwarded to BUMED 
along with the remainder of the Health Record 
when the record is closed for any reason. Excep- 
tion to the foregoing would be in the case of 
discharge and immediate reenlistment (see art. 
16-12(1)). 



16-26 

Change 69 



16-49 CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 16-51 

Section X. STANDARD FORM 601, IMMUNIZATION RECORD 

Article 

General 16-49 



Entries 

International Travel 

16-49. General 

(1) The purpose of the SF 601 is to record 
information which pertains to prophylactic 
immunizations; sensitivity tests; reactions to 
transfusions, drugs, sera, food, and allergies; and 
blood typing. The recordings shail be continued 
on the current record until additional space is 
required under any single category. In such cases, 
a new SF 501 shall be inserted and retained with 
the old SF 601's. Concurrently, a thorough verifi- 
cation of the entries shall be made and all immu- 
nizations brought up to date. Replacement of the 
current SF 601 is not required because of a 
change in grade, rating, or status of the member 
concerned. All SF 601 's shall be forwarded to 
BUMED together with other parts of the Health 
Record upon closure of the record, except as pro- 
vided in article 16-14(4). 

16-50. Entries 

(1) The name of the medical officer or the 
name of the Medical Department representative 
administering the immunization or test, or deter- 
mining the nature of the sensitivity reaction, 
shall be typed or a rubber stamp used. Signatures 
on SF 601 are not required; however, in the 
event of their use, care shall be taken to ensure 
complete legibility. 



16-50 

16-51 

(2) The medical officer or the Medical Depart- 
ment representative administering the immuniza- 
tions shall be responsible for the completion of 
all entries in the appropriate section of SF 601, 
including required entries on reactions. 

(3) Information concerning a determined 
hypersensitivity to a drug or chemical shall be 
ind.cated under "Remarks and Recommenda- 
tions." Appropriate entries (such as HYPER- 
SENSITIVE TO ASPIRIN, HYPERSENSITIVE 
TO PROCAINE) shall be typed in capitals. This 
is in addition to a similar entry required on the 
SF 603, the NAVMED 6150/3, and the SF 600 
which is retained in the Health Record. 

16-51. International Travel 

All military and nonmilitary personnel 
performing international travel under the cogni- 
zance of the Department of the Navy shall be 
immunized in accordance with BUMED Instruc- 
tion 6230 series and current edition of the publi- 
cation NAVMED P-5052-15; and shall have in 
their possession a properly completed and 
authenticated PHS Form 731, International 
Certificates of Vaccination. 



16-27 
Change 69 



( 



( 



16-52 CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 

Section XI. STANDARD FORM 602, SYPHILIS RECORD 



General , 

Explanation to Patient 

16-52. General 

(1) The SF 602, Syphilis Record, shall be pre- 
pared upon the occurrence of a syphilitic infec- 
tion, including any complication or sequela 
thereof. This record shall be retained as a perma- 
nent component part of the member's Health 
Record until termination or closure of the Health 
Record {art. 16-9). The above procedure is 
applicable regardless of whether or not more 
than one SF 602 is required during the member's 
term of service. An entry shall be made covering 



16-54 



Article 
16-52 

16-53 

each course of treatment given and each luetic 
examination or test conducted. 

16-53. Explanation to Patient 

(1) The medical officer shall carefully and 
thoroughly explain to the patient the nature of 
the infection and the reasons why treatment, pro- 
longed observation, and the repeated perform- 
ance of certain prescribed tests are necessary. The 
patient shall then be requested to sign the state- 
ment in section II of SF 602. 



Section XII. STANDARD FORM 603, DENTAL 



General 

16-54. General 

(1) The SF 603, Dental, shall be prepared in 
accordance with the detailed instructions in arti- 
cles 6-107 through 118. 



Article 

16-54 

(2) Article 6-118 contains illustrations of 
markings on dental charts. 



16-29 
Change 69 



( 



( 



< 



16-55 CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 16-57 

Section XIII. INAVMED 6150/4, ABSTRACT OF SERVICE AND MEDICAL HISTORY 

Article 

Purpose 16-55 



Entries 

Disposition 

16-55. Purpose 

(1) The NAVMED 6150/4, Abstract of Service 
and Medical History, provides (a) chronological 
history of the ships and stations to which a 
member is assigned for duty and treatment and 
(b) an abstract of medical history for each 
admission to the sicklist. 

16-56. Entries 

(1) SHIP OR STATION Column.— Enter the 
name of the ship or activity to which attached 
for duty or treatment. 

(2) DIAGNOSIS, DIAGNOSIS NO., AND 
REMARKS Column. — Enter the diagnosis title 
and number each time final disposition from the 
sicklist is made. 

(3) DATE Column.— Indicate in the FROM 
and TO subcolumns all dates of reporting and 
detachment for duty, or dates of admission and 



16-56 

16-57 

discharge from the sicklist. Upon transfer for 
temporary duty, an entry shall be made only if 
the Health Record is to accompany the individ- 
ual to the place of temporary duty. 

16-57. Disposition 

(1) The NAVMED 6150/4 shall be retained as 
a permanent component part of the Health 
Record until closure of the record (art. 16-9). 
The entry upon closure shall indicate date, title 
of servicing activity, and explanatory circumstan- 
ces as may be indicated. 

(2) Upon discharge and immediate reenlist- 
ment, extension of enlistment, or change in 
status, an appropriate entry to this effect shall be 
made on the current NAVMED 6150/4; the sub- 
sequent chronological entries shall be continued; 
and the NAVMED 6150/4 shall be retained in 
the Health Record. 



16-31 
Change 69 



c 



( 



16-58 



General . 
Entries . . 
Disposition 

16-58. General 

(1) The purpose of the NAVMED 6150/2, 
Special Duty Medical Abstract, is to provide a 
record of physical qualifications, special training, 
and periodic examinations of members desig- 
nated for performance of special duty, such as 
aviation, submarine, diving, and exposure to ion- 
izing radiation. The object of the special duty 
examination, and the instructions incident 
there :o, is to select only those individuals who 
are physically and mentally qualified for such 
special duty, and to remove from such status 
those members who may become temporarily or 
permanently unfit for such duty because of physi- 
cal or mental defects. Also, in this connection, 
special money disbursements are often based 
upon the determination of a member's physical 
and mental qualifications or continued requalifi- 
cation for performance of a special duty. There- 
fore, accuracy and content of information are 
essential in the reporting of information applica- 
ble to these categories. 

16-59. Entries 

(1) The entries shall be recorded upon 



16-60 



Article 

16-58 
16-59 
16-60 

completion of each physical examination and 
completion of designated special training. When 
a previously qualified member is suspended from 
special duty for physical reasons the period of 
suspension and reason therefore shall be entered 
on the NAVMED 6150/2. 

(2) The scope of the physical examination and 
technical training prescribed for these special 
categories often differs from the general service 
requirements; therefore, entries reporting results 
which pertain to these particular examinations or 
training involved shall be approved only by 
medical officers or specially designated medical 
service officers who are familiar with their scope 
and nature (i.e., aerospace physiolgists for aero- 
space physiology training) . 

16-60. Disposition 

(1) The current NAVMED 6150/2 shall be 
retained as a component part of each Health 
Record. Procedures for disposition, when neces- 
sary upon closure of a record, are outlined in 
articles 16-9 and 16-14. 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 
Section XIV. NAVMED 6150/2, SPECIAL DUTY MEDICAL ABSTRACT 



16-33 
Change 69 



( 



( 



16-61 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-63 



Section XV. DD FORM 1141, RECORD OF OCCUPATIONAL 
EXPOSURE TO IONIZING RADIATION 



General 

Method of Recording 

Disposition 

16-61. General 

(1) The DD Form 1141, Record of Occupa- 
tional Exposure to Ionizing Radiation, shall be 
initiated when military personnel are first 
exposed to ionizing radiation. (Exception: Ioniz- 
ing radiation incurred by patients undergoing 
diagnostic procedures and treatment.) There- 
after, it shall become a permanent part of the 
member's Health Record. 

16-62. Method of Recording 

(1) Instructions for preparation of DD Form 
1141 are contained on the back of the form. Fur- 



Article 

16-61 

16-62 

16-63 

ther instructions concerning the applicability and 
use of the form and the source of necessary infor- 
mation are contained in the BUMEDINST 
6150.18 series and NAVMED P-5055, Radiation 
Health Protection Manual. 

16-63. Disposition 

(1) The DD 1141 shall be retained as a perma- 
nent part of the Health Record until closure of 
the Record (art. 16-9). Upon discharge and 
immediate reenllstment, extension of enlistment, 
or change in status, the current form shall be 
incorporated in the new Health Record. 



16-35 

Change 69 



( 




16-65 CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 16-69 

Section XVI. ADJUNCT HEALTH RECORD FORMS AND REPORTS 



Article 

General 16-65 

Standard Form 502, Narrative Summary 16-66 

Standard Form 513, Consultation Sheet 16-67 

Medical Board Report (NAVMED 6100/1) 16_gg 

Disposition of Adjunct Forms or Reports 16-69 



16-65 General 

(!) This section provides instructions for the 
use of certain forms in the Health Record in lieu 
of transcribing data therefrom to the SF 600, 
Chronological Record of Medical Care. 

16-66. Standard Form 502, Narrative 
Summary 

(1) The purpose of the SF 502 is to summarize 
pertinent clinical data relative to treatment 
received during periods of hospitalization. For all 
members (officer and enlisted), the original 
(typewritten) of the SF 502 shall be placed in 
the Health Record in lieu of transcribing the 
information therefrom to the SF 600. For both 
officers and enlisted, the entries concerning 
admissions to the sicklist required by article 
16-^5 shall be entered on the SF 502. 

16-67. Standard Form 513, Consultation Sheet 

(1) When a report of consultation on an out- 
patient is recorded on SF 513, it may be incorpo- 
rated directly in the Health Record, thereby 
eliminating transcription to the SF 600. 

(2) The SF 513 may be used by dental officers 
requesting a medical consultation on a dental 
patient. The SF 513 is to be included in the 
member's Health Record. 



16-68. Medical Board Report (NAVMED 
6100/1) 

(1) Whenever a member of the naval service 
is reported on by a medical board, a legible copy 
of the report may be placed in the Health Record 
in lieu of transcribing the clinical data to the SF 
600. A notation shall also be made on the current 
SF 600 to indicate that the clinical data is 
contained in the copy of the medical board 
report which has been incorporated in the Health 
Record. When the medical board report is for- 
warded to the Navy Department for review and 
appropriate disposition, a report of the depart- 
mental action shall be entered on the current SF 
600. 

16-69. Disposition of Adjunct Forms or 
Reports 

(1) All original SF 502's, SF 513's, baseline 
audiograms, baseline electrocardiograms, and a 
copy of Medical Board Reports shall be retained 
in the member's (officer and enlisted) Health 
Record until the member is released from active 
duty or discharged; see article 16-12 for dis- 
charge and immediate reenlistment of enlisted 
members. 



16-37 
Change 69 



( 




16-70 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-73 



Section XVII. DD FORM 689, INDIVIDUAL SICK SLIP, AND 
CROSS MEDICAL SERVICE NOTIFICATION 



General 

Initiation and Completion 

Use for Army and Air Force Personnel 

Use for Naval Personnel 

16-70. General 

(1) The DD 689, Individual Sick Slip, is 
devised for the purpose of cross medical service 
notification between the armed services. The DD 
689 may also be used to exchange information 
between the medical officer concerned and unit 
commander within the naval establishment. 
When a member, following treatment, is unable 
to return to his organization either for duty or 
reporting purposes, use of the form does not pre- 
clude the immediate notification of a member's 
unit commander by telephone or message, if 
practicable, and considered necessary. 

(2) The DD 689 may be initiated for an indi- 
vidual who has requested and/or received medical 
treatment of a sick call nature. It serves as an 
interim document to furnish information from 
which subsequent entries shall be recorded in the 
Health Record. 

(3) The DD 689 is not a record document and 
should be disposed of as soon as it accomplishes 
its primary purpose, except where further use is 
indicated such as in connection with line-of-duty 
determination. 

16-71. Initiation and Completion 

(1) The DD 689 consists of three sections: 

(a) Personal Identification Data. — This 
section may be filled in by or for the patient 
either at his place of duty or at the medical 
treatment facility, depending upon local arrange- 
ments. 

(b) Unit Commander's Section. — When 
completed by the individual's commanding 
officer, any additional information may be 
entered under "Remarks" which the unit 
commander feels may aid the medical officer, or 
any specific request made of the medical facility, 
or information which may be of value in deter- 
mining line-of-duty status. 

(c) Medical Officer's Section. — This section 
is to be completed by the medical officer or 
Medical Department representative administering 
treatment. If it appears that line-of-duty determi- 
nation will be predicated on a medical opinion, 



Article 

16-70 

16-71 

16-72 

16-73 

the "line-of-duty" block shall be completed. The 
disposition of the patient shall be indicated by a 
check mark in the appropriate box. An individ- 
ual excused from duty shall be reported under 
one of the following dispositions: 

(1) Sick Bay or Dispensary. 

(2) Hospital. 

(3) Other (specify). 

The ship or station rendering medical treatment 
shall be indicated under "Remarks" of the 
Medical Officer's Section. Any additional infor- 
mation or instructions which the medical officer 
wishes to convey to the patient's unit commander 
may be entered under "Remarks." 

16-72. Use for Army and Air Force Personnel 

(1) When an Army or Air Force member 
reports at a naval facility for medical treatment 
of a sick-call nature and action is taken to have 
him excused from duty, a DD 689 shall be 
completed by the naval facility, indicating one of 
the dispositions listed in article l6-71(l)(c), 
and forwarded to the individual's commanding 
officer. 

16-73. Use for Naval Personnel 

(1) At Army or Air Force Medical Facilities. 
— Naval activities will receive DD 689 for mem- 
bers of their units who receive medical treatment 
of a sick-call nature at Army or Air Force facili- 
ties. When circumstances preclude direct cross- 
servicing of the Health Record, appropriate 
entries shall be made on the NAVMED 6150/3 
from DD 689. 

(2) At Navy Medical Facilities. — If it is 
impracticable to remove the NAVMED 6150/3 
from the Health Record, as in the case of a 
member who is carried in transient status, the 
information ordinarily entered thereon shall be 
recorded on DD 689. The DD 689 may likewise 
be used when a member attached to a command 
equipped with several dispensaries receives treat- 
ment at a dispensary other than that at which his 
Health Record and NAVMED 6150/3 are on file. 
The information shall be transcribed to the 
NAVMED 6150/3 as soon as possible, and in all 
cases prior to transfer of the member. 



16-39 
Change 69 



( 



c 



( 



16-74 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-74 



Section XVIII. ILLUSTRATIONS OF t 

16-74. Illustrations 

1. NAVMED 6150/3, Sick Call Treatment 
Record. 

2. Standard Form 88, Report of Medical Exam- 
ination (Front). 

2A. Standard Form 88, Report of Medical 
Examination (Back). 

3. Standard Form 93, Report of Medical His- 
tory (Front). 

3 A. Standard Form 93, Report of Medical His- 
tory (Back). 

4. Standard Form 600, Chronological Record of 
Medical Care (Front). 

4A. Standard Form 600, Chronological Record 
of Medical Care (Back), 



UPONENT HEALTH RECORD FORMS 

5. Standard Form 601, Immunization Record 
(Front). 

5 A. Standard Form 601, Immunization Record 
(Back). 

6. Standard Form 602, Syphilis Record 
(Front). 

6A. Standard Form 602, Syphilis Record 
(Back). 

7. NAVMED 6150/4, Abstract of Service and 
Medical History. 

8. NAVMED 6150/2, Special Duty Medical 
Abstract (Front), 

8A. NAVMED 6150/2, Special Duty Medical 
Abstract (Back). 

9. Blood Grouping and Typing Record (using 
SF 600). 



16-41 

Change 69 



( 



( 



16-74 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-74 



SICK CALL TREATMENT RECORD 
NAVMED 61 50/3 (REV. 12-67) FRONT 

{FerKtrl, KAWEQ JO) 



V, T hen required the social 
security number will be 
| entered in lieu of service no. 

(TYPE OB PRINT ISEIOH I DENT t f I C AT 1 M DATA) | 



(LAST XbMf.\ 

DOE, 



|fi RST BAMLI 

John 



fM ■ DDL F. 

James 



123 h5 6? 



DATE OP & PTl 



9 May 36 



Cxi us« D 



NAME Of TREATING FACILITY. COMPLAINT, TREATMENT ADMINISTERED. SIGNATURE AND 
GRADE/HATE OF PER SO". ADMINISTERING TREATMENT 



Note: This space shall be reserved to record any hypersensitivity 
to a drug or chemical. (See art. 16-31(2).) 



5-10-65 



NTC, GrtLks., Til. 

Headache and chills. Temp. 100. APC f force fluids and 



To Binnacle List. 



5-11-65 



NTC. ( GrtLks., in, 

C ornrn on c 



:J/. ft. mmZjNl, <JSN 



tLks., Til. Mfkk * 

old. Temo. 99. A PC and PZB qijh. To duty. .VJ.R. Dunn". HM1. r JSN 



1 SEP 65 



Naval Dispensary, 'fevSta., Nor., Va . 

Rash on ankles. Temp, normal, n aloTrnna lot-' on annli ed 



3 ot tie (lice) of calomine provided with instructions to /]/ 
apply 3 times a day. To duty. B.lr. 



L6n 



11/11/66 



USS CARRIER ( CV 00) 

Trans cribed from DP 689 - Dispensary. -I A S . . NorVa. 



Man injured right hand when he struck hand on backboard during C1KNAVATRLANT 
league basketball r-ame on 10 >Jov. 66. X-ray of rt. hand nee;.: impression 



contusion of rt. hand; Rx. Hot soaks for next several^da 
pain. To duty, /s/ CDR P.P. QUI UN. MO, tJSN 



/e. &t 3ims 



ASA for 



". SI~MS, HMC, USN 



USS CARRIER (CV 00) „ 

g/ 7 $hav*n StTfill, LOov *<j c-(BHviJ Audi soToietJr TsJai^-* , LoS/e/? . 




j&dk JL-^. i^mjJe£S3c ^v-Jr-x-ittM . Cu***£ 



OSS Ruxtrn, &£~Zf iUJ d6) 



Qn*vjJhwz/ j£ Jdigj tZEfeA ^J-'"-' 



H O 



^7 





7 "tod 



(Over ) 



Illustration 1* Sick Call Treatment Record, (See sec, VI for details.) 



Change 69 



16-7U 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-71* 



Standard Form 88 

Revised April 19C8 
General Services Adminisrralnjn 
Interagency Comm. on MedicaJ Records 
FPMR 101-1 1.809-3 



REPORT OF MEDICAL EXAMINATION 



I. LAST NAME — FIRST NAME — MIDDLE NAME 

DOE, John Jame s 



2. GRADE AND COMPONENT OR POSITION 

See art. 16-38(2) (b) 



3. IDENTIFICATION NO. 

See 16-38(2)(c) 



», HOME ADDRESS (A'urotir, Jlrfrf or RFD, city or town , Salt and ZIP Coil) 

444 West Street 

Bay City, N. Y. 



;. sex 
Male 



e. RACE 

Caucasian 



5. PURPOSE OF EXAMINATION 

See art. 16-38(2)(e) 



t. OATE OF EXAMINATION 

1 MAY 1971 



9. TOTAL YEARS GOVERNMENT SERVICE 

uW Y 3v3m — 



II. ORGANIZATION UNIT 



NAVAL STATION. BLANK r V A. 



!2. DATE OF BIRTH 
9 MAY 36 



1J. PLACE OF BIRTH 

Bay City, N. Y. 



II, NAME, RELATIONSHIP. AND ADDRESS OF NEXT OF KIN 

Father: John Paul DOE 

444 West Street, Bay City, N. Y. 



IS. EXAMINING FACILITY OR EXAMINES. AMD ADDRESS 

U. S. NAVAL STATION, BLANK, VA. 



II. OTHER INFORMATION 

See art. 16-38(2)(p) 



17. RATING OR SPECIALTY 

See art. 16-38(2)(q) 



TIME IN THIS CAPACITY {Total) LAST SIX MONTHS 

See art. 16-38(2) (q) | 



CLINICAL EVALUATION 



NOR- 
MAL 


((Stuck *tech item in eppraprimte col- 
umn, enter "NE' it nor nvttuAted.) 


ABHOR. 
MAL 


X 


11. HEAD. FACE, NECK AND SCALP 




X 


19 NOSE 




v. 


20 SINUSES 




X 


II. MOUTH AND THROAT 




X 


22 EARS— GENERAL lt *' "* [Ai.dir.ri, 




X 


21. DRUMS (Ptrfaraliott) 




X 


?i FYF<;— RFNFR1I 1 ^'«uol MUlly rind ttfrbtlien 
ETE5 GENERAL f ^ „ j„ a „ Jt;| 




X 


25 OPHTHALMOSCOPIC 




X 


26. PUPILS {EntuslUo osii rtoclinn) 




X 


17. OCULAR MOTILITY ^.T'r.ZjZT ""' 




X 


U LUNGS AND CHEST (/nrhlllf brtasli) 




X 


». HEART (Thru*, lirt, rs\fUtm, jouniii) 




X 


30. VASCULAR SYSTEM ( I'lrrcotiilM, lit.) 




X 


11. ABDOMEN AND VISCERA [Imllidi hemic) 




X 


12 ANUS AND RECTUM W'mofrlMHt. Utvla't 




X 


13. ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 




X 


J4. G-U SVSTEM 




X 




35. UPPES EXTREMITIES 2,'™'"' 




X 


3*. FEET 




X 


37. LOWER EXTREMITIES ^ r 7 n '»' A '7» ( ,„ /mJ ,, nl 




X 


31. SPINE. OTHER MUSCULOSKELETAL 






31. IDENTIFYING BODY MARKS. SCARS, TATTOOS 


X 


X 


AO. SKIN. LYMPHATICS 




X 


11. NEUROLOGIC (Cguitorium g«e« urttflr iUm tti 




X 


42. PSYCHIATRIC IrTK.r/.. » jr.rn.iliItrlouli.nl 






41. PELVIC (FcmoldOJif,) (CA«k «oic dim) 

□ VAGINAL □ RECTAL 





NOTES. (Daseribt * v * r J ibnormality in dttaif £ni#r pertinent limm numb»t bmfort mach 
commenr. Continue in itmm 73 and as* additional Mh«mt a 11 nmcwM**>ry > 



#39- (identifying Body Marks) 
ANT 



(see art. 16-39) 



circ e. ; p. s . fcd, forehead; s. l%x»jlt knee; 
m.fcd.rt hip; b.1x% It cheek; s.ljd. rt thumb 
POST; mult m,%d. upper It calf; mult m. rt leg and back; 
wart It thigh 



{Continue: in item 73) 



44, DENTAL (Piatt apprxif limit symbols, shown isi txamplts, abot-i or Mow mirnbtr of upptr anil louiir tiitk.) 

HrkV U-i^ Hr&"!%* fH" 

R 1 

i i a 3 4 s a j s 9 io li iz 

H K 31 



demttrtt 



2S 



24 



Keptttcrd \ i ! Find 
J* , ™ dtntum 

11 H 18 18 £ 

17 F 

T 



19 



It 



REMARKS AND ADDITIONAL DENTAL 
DEFECTS AND DISEASES 

ACCEPTABLE - EXAMINATION 
NOT PERFORMED BY DENTAL 
OFFICER, 

See art. 16-38(2) (s) 



45. URINALYSIS: A. SPECIFIC GRAVITY 


4E. CHEST X RAY (Pitct. toll, film iiuntKr and rtndt) 

NAVAL STATION, BLANK, VA. 
1 MAY 71 . 017 56 - NEGATIVE 


B. ALBUMIN Neg 


D MICROSCOPIC 

NE 


C sugar Beg 


47. SEROLOGY (Sj><ci/F tut Ulld out TtBllt) 

1 MAY 71 
VDRL - Negative 


41. EKG 

NE 


49. rJLOOO TYPE AND RH 
FACTOR 

B - POS 


50. OTHER TESTS 

NE 



Illustration 2. Report of Medical Examination (Front). (See sec. VII for details) 

16-Uj 
Change 6° 



88-1 16 



16-7U 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-7U 



1 BLL = 4 2.2 



MEASUREMENTS AND 0 T H FINDINGS 



SI. HEIGHT 


52. WEIGHT 


| 53. COLOR HAIR 


54. COLOR EYES 


55. BUILD: 


0 MEDIUM (~J MJAVT F~] OSESE 


54. TEMPERATURE 


70% (37.6) 


160 


| Lt . Broun 


Brown 


| | SLENDER 


98.6 



57. 






BLOOD PRESSURE {Arm at Ararf Itttl) 




53. 




PULSE Mrro a( Ajar/ (iiyI) 








A. 




SYS 


110 


3 


SYS. 


118 


<=■ 


S " 108 


A SITTING 


B 


AFTER EXERCISE 


C. 2 MIN. AFTER 


0 


RECUMBENT 


E 


AFTER STANDING 
1 MIN. 


SITTING 




OIAS 


76 


RECUM- 
BENT 


OIAS. 


74 


STANDING 
(3 min.) 


dias. 74 


80 




120 


84 




72' 




96 


59. 






DISTANT VISION 


. 




(0 


REFRACTION 






ti. 




WEAR VISION 






RIGHT M/ 


20 




CORR. TO SSI 




BY 


s. 




cx 




CORR TO 






BY 


LIFT »/ 


20 




CORR TOM/ 




BY 


5, 




cx 




CORR. TO 






BY 



C-J 



42. HETERGPHORIA tSpcct/y diltancc) 

t3 . SEE ARTICLE 16-3^,^2} (aa) JSpNCERNIp^ Q0MPLETI0N pQft C0H v. 
ITEMS 57 THRU 72 CT 



(3. ACCOMMODATION 


M. COLOR VISION ( Till u»td and mull) 


65. DEPTH PERCEPTION 
(Tut utti and KQTt) 


UNCORRECTED 


RIGHT LEFT 




CORRECTED 


66. FIELD Of VISION 

Normal 


17. NIGHT VISION iTtlt altd and itott) 

NE 


it. RED LENS TEST 

NE 


69. INTRAOCULAR TENSION 

Normal 



w 

u 
1-1 

8- 

w ' 
w 

CO 



70. 


HEARING 




n. 






AUDIOMETER 








72. PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PSYCHOMOTOR 

{Tfff/ uied and tcott) 


BIGHT WV 


1 5 /is SV 


/IS 




iw 


400 
Jf# 


1000 
I0*i 


2000 
lOig 


3000 


4OO0 
iOM 


i-i 


9000 
H31 


LEFT »I 


1 5 /IS SV 


/IS 


RIGHT 


















NE 


LEFT 








NE 













71. NOTES (CbnfiniwO AND SIGNIFICANT OR INTERVAL HISTORY 

SEE ARTICLE 16-38(2) (bb) 



f Utt addiiionc. 



74. SUMMARY OF DEFECTS ANO DIAGNOSES (iu( diaoHMM wUh Uim tmm6«T»> 



SEE ARTICLE 16-38(2) (cc) 



FOR ALL AVIATION 
PHYSICALS , LEAVE 
4 INCHES — 



BLANK SPACE FOR 
BUMED ENDORSEMENT 
EXTENDING THROUGH 



ITEM 74. SEE ARTICLE 
16-38(2) (bb) (2) & (cc)(2) 



71 RECOM MENDAT ION S — FUHT HEN SPECIALIST EXAMINATIONS IHDICATEO (,Sp«i/r) 

SEE ARTICLE 16-38 (2) (dd) 





u 


Sr-F 


H 


E 


S 


1 


1 


1 


I 


1 


1 



77. EXAMINEE (C*A:*I 

A, Q IS QUALIFIED FOR 

I. □ II NOT QUALIFIED FOR 



SEE ARTICLE 16-38(2) (ff) 



76. 



A. PHYSICAL PROFILE 



ARTICLE 

I PHYSICAL CATEGORY 

16-38(2) (ee) 



71. IF NOT QUALIFIED. LIST DISQUALIFYING DEFECTS BY ITEM NUMBER 

SEE ARTICLE 16-38(2) (gg) 



71. TYPED OR PRINTED HAME OF PHYSICIAN 

C. T. BAIRD. LT MC USN 



H. TYPED OR PRINTED HAME OP PHYSICIAN 

R. M. BRIGHTEN, LT MC, USN 



II. TYPED OR PRINTED NAME OF DENTIST OS PHYSICIAN (Judical! which) 



SIGNATURE 



Z — 3 ^ 



VL TYPED OR PRINTED NAME Of REVIEWING OFFICER OR APPROVING AUTHORITY 



NUMBER OP AT- 
TACHED SHEETS 



« U. 1 GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE , IHt Q— 351-173 (*9J1 

Illustration 2A. Report of Medical Examination (Back), 

16-Ii5 
Change 69 



16-7U 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. U.S. NAVY 



16-7U 



Approved 

Oflice of Management and Budget No. 29-R0191 



REPORT OF MEDICAL HISTORY 

(THIS INFORMATION IS FOR OFFICIAL AHD MEDICALLY -CONFIDENTIAL USE ONLY AKD WILL NOT EE RELEASED TO UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS) 



1. LAST NAME!— FIRST NAME— MIDDLE NAME 

DOE, John James 


2. SOCIAL SECURITY OR IDENTIFICATION NO. 

512 18 3433 


3. HOME ADDRESS INo. street or HFO, city or [own. State, and ZIF CODE) 

444 West Street, Bay City, N.Y. 22180 


A- POSITION (Title, grade, component) 

See art. 16-38(2) 


5. PURPOSE OF EXAMINATION 

See art. 16-38(2) 


6. DATE OF EXAMINATION 
1 HAY 1971 


7. EXAMINING FACILITY OR EXAMINER, AND ADDRESS 

(Include ZIP Corfu) 

NAVAL STATION, BLANK, VA. 



8. STATEMENT OF EXAMINEE'S PRESENT HEALTH AND MEDICATIONS CURRENTLY USED (Follow by detection of peat hlatory, if comprint a*leta) 



STANDK^D FORM 93 

JANUARY 1971 
GSA FPMR 101-11.8 



9. HAVE YOU EVER (Please cfieek •■eh Hem) 


10. DO YOU (Please cheek eeeD item; 


YES 


NO 


(Cheetc each item; 


YES 


NO 


(Chtck each ittm) 






Lived with anyone who had tuberculosis 






Wear glasses or contact TflnStt 




y 


' Coughed up brood 


y 




Have vision in both eyai 




y 


Bled excessively after injury or tooth extraction 






Wear a hearing aid 






Attempted suicide 






Stutter or stammer habitually 






Been a sleepwalker 




y 


Wear b brace or back support 



1 1, HAVE YOU EVER HAD OR HAVE YOU NOW (Please check et left of each Jtem) 



YES 


NO 


DON'T 
KNOW 


| ! 

fCnrfcK cacft item) \ YES{ NO 


DON'T 
KNOW 


(Check flpch i(em) 


YES 


NO 


DON'T 
KNOW 


(Cnecft each it«m) 




y 




Scarlet tever, erysipelas j *^ 




Cramps in your legs 




V 




■Trick" of locked knee 




y 


| Rneurnatit fewer 


1 ^ 




Frequent indigestion 




y 




foot trouble 




y 




Swollen or painful joints 




Stomach. Iiv»f, or inlaStini! trouble 








Neuritis 








Frequent or severe headache 




V 


Gill bister trouble or fiillstontn 








Paralysis {include infantile) 









Dizziness or fainting spells 




y 




Jaundice or hepatitis 




y 




Epilepsy or fit» 








Eye trouble 








Adverse reaction to serum, drug 
or medicine 




y 




Car, train, sea or air sickness 


IS 






Ear. nose, or throat trouble 




y 




Frequent trouble sleeping 




y 




Hearing loss 




— 





Broken bones 




y 




Depression or excessive worry 








Chronic or frequent colds 




y 




Tumor, growth, cyst, cancer 




y 




Loss of memory or amnesia 




■y 




Severe tooth or gum trouble 




y 




Rupture/hernia 




y 




Nervous trouble o< any sort 




y 




Sinusitis 




y 




Piles or rectal disease 




<y 




Periods of unconscloutnesa 




y 


j Hay Fever 




y 


] Frequent or painJul urination. 












y 


i Head Injury 


1 i0r j Bed wetting since, ago 12 












y 


| Shin diseases 




y\ 


Kidney stone or blood In urine 












y 




Thyroid trouble 




A- 


Sugar or albumin In urine 












y 




Tuberculosis 






VD— - Syphilis, gtnorrhea, etc. 












y 




Asthma 




y 


■ 


Recent gain or loss of weight 












y 




Shortness of breath 




y 


■ 


Arthritis, Rhn-mitiim, Of Bunitii 












y 




Pain or pressure In chett 




y 




Bone, joint or other deformity 












y 




Chronic cough 




y 




Lameness 












y 




Palpitation or pounding heart 




y 




Loss oT finger or toe 


12. FEMALES ONLY: HAVE YOU EVER 




y 




Heart trouble 




/ 




Punful or "trick" ihoulder or elbow 








Bean trailed far * female disorder 








High or low blood pressure 




y 




Recurrent back pain 








Hid a change in menstrual pattern 


















































13. 


WHAT IS YOUR USUAL OCCUPATION? 


14. ARE YOU (Chee* one) 

|~^lfight hand*d m | Left handed 



5/N oi 0 9 - 742 0 93-101 

Illustration 3. Report of Medical History (Front) 
, ,, See Sec. VIII for details.' 

16-1+6 

Change 6? 



16-71* 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-7U 



CHECK EACH ITEM YES OR NO. EVERY ITEM CHECKED YES MUST BE FULLY EXPLAINED IN BLANK SPACE ON RIGHT 



y 

A 



1 certify that 1 have reviewed the foregoing information supplied by me and that it Is true and complete to the bast of my knowledge. 
1 authorize any of the doctors, hospitals, or clinics mentioned above to furnish the Government a complete transcript of my medical record for purposes 
of processing my application for this employment or service. 


TYPED OR PRINTED NAME OF EXAMINEE 


SIGNATURE 





15. Have- you been refused employment or 
been unable to hold a job or stay in 
school because of: 

A + Sensitivity to chemicals, dust, sun- 
tight, etc. 



B. Inability to perform certain motions. 



C. Inability to assume certain positions, 



D , Other medical reasons (IF yes, give 
re asons. ) 



16. Have you ever been treated for a mental 
condition? {If yes, specify when, where, 
and give details). 



17. Have you ever been denied life insur 
ance? (It yes, state reason and give 
details.) 



18. Have you had* or have you been advised 
to have, any operations? (If yet, destine 
and give age at which occurred.) 



19. Have you ever been a patient in any type 
of hospitals? fff yes, specify when, where, 
why, and name of doctor and complete 
addrsss of hospitaf.) 



20. Have you ever had any illness or injury 
other than those already noted? (It yes, 
specify when, where, and give details. J 



21. Have you consulted or been treated by 
clinics, physicians, healers, or other 
practitioners within the past 5 years for 
other than minor illnesses? (If yes, give 
complete address of doctor, hospital, 
clinic, and details.) 



22. Have you ever been rejected for military 
service because of physical, mental, or 
other reasons? (ff yes, give date and 
reason fo^ rejection.) 



23. Have you ever been discharged from 
military service because of physical, 
mental, or other reasons? {If yes, give 
dare, reason, and type or discharge 
whether honorable, other than honorable, 
for unfitness or Lrrcsuiiabi'Jity.) 



M^.. ^ ^^^ 

<L% W '^^^^ 



24. Have you ever received, is there perming, 
or have you applied for pension or 
compensation for existing disability? {If 
yes, specify what hind, granted by whom, 
and what amount, whan, why.) 



NOTE: HAND TO THE DOCTOR OR NURSE, OR IF MAILED MARK ENVELOPE "T^lt OPENED MEDICAL OFFICER ONLY. 
25. Physician's summary and elaboration of all pertinent data fPf^ysician shell comment on all positive answers in items 9 through 24. Physician may 
develop by interview any additional mudicwl history he deems important, and record any significant findings here.) ,.' , 




/ 



TYPED OR PRINTED NAME OF PHYSICIAN OR 
EXAMINER 



DATE , 



iu L 



NUMBER OF 
ATTACHED SHEETS 



REVERSE OF STANDARD FORM 93 



Illustration 3A. Report of Medical History (Back) 



16-1*7 

Change 69 



16-71+ 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-71* 



HEALTH RECORD 



CHRONOLOGICAL RECORD OF MEDICAL CARE 



DATE 



SYMPTOMS, DIAGNOSIS, TREATMENT, TREATING ORGANIZATION (Sign each entry) 



1 NOV 69 



NAVAL STATION , BLANK. VA, 

Examined this date and found physically qualified for (enlistment - 



reenlistraent) in the (U.S. Navy - Marine Corps) serology (VDRL) Negative. 
Chest X-ray; Film No. 01756 - Negative. 



C. T. BAIRD, LT HC USN 



NAVAL STATION, BLANK, VA. 



15 MAR 70 



Physically qualified for transfer. C 



C. T. BAIRD, LT MC USN 



1 APR 70 



USS CARRIER (CV-00) 

DIAGNOSIS: Tonsillitis, acute, viral, ICDA Code 4620 



Line of duty. Not due to own misconduct. 

Sore throat developed while on watch during past 24 hours. 



Temp. 101. Pulse 
Pharynx injected. 



90. 

Tonsils slightly inflamed. No exudate. 



TREATMENT r Alkaline aromatic gargles; ASA grs X q6h. 
Bed rest. 



8 APR 70 



To duty. Well, 



0. A. BASE, LT MC USN 



21 AUG 70 



USS CARRIER (CV-00) 

DIAGNOSIS: Contusion, left thoracic region. 



ICDA Code No. 9220 



Line of duty. Not due to own misconduct. 
While descending hatchway, slipped a n d fell, 



striking left chest against 



hatch combing. 

Patient complains of shortness of breath with pain and discomfort in 



left thoracic region. 
Examination indicates possibility of internal injuries, and as this ship 



is leaving port tomorrow on extended operation, it Is deemed medically 
advisable to transfer this patient to a hospital. 



21 AUG 70 



Transferred to Naval Hospital, gl^nk^Y^ 

A. A. BATCN, LT MC USN 




REED 
CAPT MC USN 



PATIENT'S IDENTIFICATION f Use this Space 
for Mechanical Imprint) 



PATIENT'S N AMP (Last, First, Middle initial) 

DOE, John James 



SEX 

Male 



YEAR OF BIRTH 

1936 


RELATIONSHIP TO SPONSOR 
N/A 


COMPONENT OR STATUS 


DEPARTMENT OR SERVICE 


SPONSOR'S NAME 

N/A 


RANK/GRADE 
HM1, USN 



SVC OR IDENTIFICATION NO. 

MSN: 123 45 67 
0C 



ORGANIZATION 



SSN: 000-00-0000 CHRONOLOGICAL RECORD OF MEDICAL CARE 

Standard Form 600 

Chronological Record of Medical Care (Front) Gcnt . rll s.rrie™AdSr«i«. and 

(See Sec. IX for details) Interageney Comm. on Medical Records 

FPMR 101-11.809-} 
600-103 



Illustration 4, 

16-1*8 
Change 69 



16-7U 



CHAPTER 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-7U 



DATE 


SYMPTOMS, DIAGNOSIS. TREATMENT, TREATING ORGANIZATION (S,'/n e.ch ,nt,r) 


21 AUG 70 


NAVAL HOSPITAL, BLANK, VA. 

DIAGNOSIS: Contusion, left thoracic region. T.CDA Code No. 9220 




Line of duty. Not due to own misconduct. 

Admitted from USS Carrier (CV-00) where while descending hatchway, patient 




slipped and fell, striking left chest against hatch combing. 

Complains of shortness of breath and severe pain in area of 4th thoracic 




rib. 

X-RAY: Examination of entire r ; ght and left thoracic regions, reveals 




no evidence of fracture or bone pathology. 
TREATMENT: Heat application and bed rest. 




Slight pain with motion. Discomfort subsiding. 
On 24 Aug 70 patient developed acute sore throat. 




Temp. 101.2; pharynx injected, tonsils Intiamed. Exudate cultured. 




DIAGNOSIS CHANGED on 26 Aug 70 by reason of intercurrent diagnosis. 
Tonsillitis, Acute, Streptococcal, ICDA Code No. 4630 




Line of, duty. Not due to own misconduct. 
Placed on an antibiotic therapy. (Penicillin.) 




Alkaline aromatic gargles q4h. 

On 5 Sep 70 Temp. 98.6; all medication discontinued. Slight discomfort and 




tenderness remain in left thoracic region. Ward privileges authorized. 


8 SEP 70 


No complaints. 

Todut ?- Wel1 - £Mirr?< <&U£^ 




APPROVED: Edw. D. EDSELL, LT MC USN 




— V^-fcf 




M. E. BEAL, CAPT MC USN 
CHIEF, SERVICE 


15 NOV 70 


USS CARRIER (CV-00) 

Annual chest X-ray; Film #12345 - Negative 




G . I . "FORD , LT MiTTTSTI 



illustration 4A, Chronological Record of Medical Care (Back). 

U5- GOVeVWnT PRINTING OFFICE : 1 >6> OF — 1*0- *ia IS0-J* % * 



16-U9 
Change 69 



16-74 



MANUAL Or THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-74 



Standard Form SOI 

Promulgated Nov. KSJ 
J3j Bureau at tie ludfst 
Circular A-33 



HEALTH RECORD 



IMMUNIZATION RECORD 



Afl entriaa in ink to bt 
mmtfain block htter* 



VACCt NATION AGAINST SMALLPOX {Numbf of pttviou* rmcclnmtion *cari) 





DATE 


ORIGIN 


BATCH NUMBER 


RESULT* 


STATION 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 


M DAYI 


7-10 D*YJ 


I 


5 JAN 56 


Eli Lilly 


L 292 856 


Vesicle 


Primary 


NTC Bainbridge f Kd 


. J. A. Jonea 


«; 


nFEBS7 


Parke-Davis 


A LdA 25 


Accel. 


Accel, 


USS GOOD SHIP 


T. P. Brown 


i 


1 JTINSS 




Immune 




USS GOOD SHIP 


T. P. Brown 


4 
















5 
















< 

















•ENTER RESULTS AS: IMMEDIATE REACTION (of immunity); ACCELERATED REACTION (ViccjfiOicO; TYPICAL PRIMARY VACCINA 
TRIPLE TYPHOID VACCINE! 





DATE 


DOSE 


UNTOWARD REACTION 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 




DATE 


DOSE 


UNTOWARD REACTION 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 


1 




n.5cc 


Nona 


.Ji A* Jones 


j 










! 


P.TANSfS 




Nona 


J. A. Jones 


a 










a 






None 


J. A. Jones 


9 










4 


8MAE57 


n . ic.r- 


Mod. Systemic 


X, P. Brown 


10 










■ 










II 










e 










11 










TETANUS TOXOID 




DATE 


DOSE 


UNTOWARD REACTION 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 




DATE 


DOSE 


UNTOWARD REACTION 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 


1 


MAN56 


!j.*5cc 


Nona 


J. A. Jones 


4 










a 




Q*5-Ct 


Mod. Local 


J. 1. Jones 


s 












7JAN' 1 7 


n .5cc 


Mod. Local 


A. M. Doe 


e 










SCHICK TESTING ANO DIPHTHERIA IMMUNIZATION 


DATE 


DOSE 


REACTION 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 


DATE 


DOSE 


REACTION 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 


TEST 


O.lcc 


Positive 


A, M. Doe 


TEST 
























•k)EC56 O.lcc 


Noise 


A. M. Doe 


> 










2 


tr\nECi6 f>.5ee 


Nona 


At H. Doe 


• 










3 






Hone 


A. M. Doe 


7 










4 


5FEB57 


l.Dcc 


Nona 


A. M. Doe 


a 










TYPHUS VACCINE 




DATE 


DOSE 


REACTION 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 




DATE 


DOSE 


REACTION 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 


1 


9JAN57 


l.Occ 


Nona 


A. M. Doe 


4 










z 


30JA»57l.0cc 


None 


A. M. Doe 


a 










s 








a 











CHOLERA VACCI NE 





DATE 


ORIGIN 


BATCH NO. 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 




DATE 


ORIGIN 


BATCH NO. 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 


I 


7JAN57 


Lederle 


A iWi 


A, M, Doe 


7 










I 

s 


I4JAN57 


Ledarla- 


A 5555 


A. Hi Pee 


j 


















9 










4 










10 










I 










11 










■ 










it 











YELLOW FEVER VACCINE 



DATE 



ORIGIN 



STATION 

NaTBaae, Norfolk, Va. 



PHYSICIAN'S NAME 

A. M. Doe 



28JAN57 National Drug Y QlPl 



Co. 



Male 



RACE 

CAU 



GRADE. HATING OR POSITION 

HKL f USN 



ORGANIZATION UNIT 



PATIENT'S LAST NAME— FIRST NAME— MIDDLE NAME 

DOE, John James 



COMPONENT OR BRANCH 



SERVICE, DEPT. OR AGENCY 



DATE OF BIRTH (OAr-HONTH-YEAR) 

9 MAI 36 



IDENTIFICATION NO. 

123 45 67 



Illustration 5. Immunization Record (Front). (See sec. X for details.) 



16-50 

Change 69 



16-74 



CHAPTEK 16. HEALTH BECOUD 



16-74 



OTHER IMMUNIZATIONS 





DATE 


TYPE 


DOSE 


REACTION REMARKS 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 


1 


22DEG5 


3 Poliomyelitle 


i.pcc 


Hone lit arm) 


f£i Lilly 


J. A. JnrtQfl 


2 




7 Poliomyelitis 


1.0 cc 


Hone (rt arm) 


F A Lilly 




s 


UIOCT*) 


7 Poliomyelitis 


l.Qcc 


none annj 


tfP / -FT 1 Mil* 




1 














S 
» 

0 

~ 


15NGV5 


7 Influenza 


l.Qcc 


Nona 




T. P. Brown 














3 Plague 


0.5cc 


None 




T. P. Brown 




3 Plague 


l.Q?C 


None 




T, P. Brown 














10 














tl 














12 














13 














M 














l» 















SENSITIVITY TESTS (Tui.fcu/r'n, e(c > 





DATE 1 TYPE 


DOSE 


ROUTE 


RESULTS 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 


_ 




Tuberculin {PPD) 


5.t.U. 


Intracutaneous 


Negative 


J. A. Jones 
















































































































10 















REACTIONS {To fi-ani/us/oni, drugs, avra. foodl. altar gem, etc.} 





DATE 


AGENT 


TYPE OF REACTION 


SEVERITY 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 






























































BI.C 


)Ot> TYPING 




DATE 


TYPE (Jnf«rn«rronal) 


Rh FACTOR 


PHYSICIAN'S NAME 




AB 


Negative 


J. A. Jones 























REMARKS AND RECOMMENDATIONS (Including history of <fr**«»f for which mny of the abor* immunising atfonfp were given with T**r 
■ ntf pi*c» of attack} 



(1) HYPERSENsrrrra to aspirin. 

(2) history moderately severe reaction to parenteral penicillin in 1955. 



Illustration 5A. Immunization Record (Back). 



Change 69 



16-74 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-74 



•uhduH Form 80S 
PrannkttM! Not. 1WJ 
Bj Bunan ot«B Budftf 
ci™j»t A-sa 



HEALTH RECORD 



SYPHILIS RECORD 



SECTION ]. HISTORY OF PAST VENEREAL INFECTIONS OR TREATMENTS 





□ATE 


DISEASE 
(Gin ini>) 


PRIOR TO MIL, SERVICE 


TREATMENT 
(Give type, amount and dates') 


TES 


NO 


1 












2 












1 




NONE 








4 














TREATING AGENCY 


PLACE 


INFORMATION FROM (Patient, r.coi-d., ate.) 


1 








I 








3 








4 









SECTION II. HISTORY OF PRESENT INFECTION 



CAME TO MEDICAL ATTENTION BY: VOLUNTARY 



CONTACT REPORT fj 



PHYSICAL INSPECTION Qj 



FOOD HANDLER |~~| 



fNCI DENT TO HOSPITALIZATION fj PREMARITAL Q PRE NATAL Q OTHER (Specify) OtTTFATrENT TREATMENT 

DATES: ONSET SYMPTOMS J JJ^Jf ^ REQUESTED TREATMENT lQ JAN 5? DIAGNOSIS ESTABLISHED 10 JAN 57 



DIAGNOSIS tirtcJude it^gt and diagnoaiM no.} , 

SYPHILIS, primary, seronegative #0210 
(chancre, glans penis). 



LIST VP CONTACT FORM SERIAL r 

B 126696 



DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA (Enter results of tests) 
LESION i_Type and location 



fchancre on glans penis. 
darkfield 10 JAN 57-Pos B. t. 8. VDHL - Neg 



SPINAL FLUID (II Indicated) 
OTHER PROCEDURES 



CLINICAL DATA (Include chief complaint, physical findings — eye, cardiovascular and nervous system, even in early syphilis, 

Hard "sore" on penis for 3 days. No other symptoms. In addition to a 1 en. ulcer 
with markedly indurated base on glans penis has slightly enlarged, non-tender, hard 
inguinal lymph nodes. 



RECOMMENDED TREATMENT AND FOLLOW-UP 

Penicillin Therapy - Standard 2-year follovup. 




DATE 

18 JAN 57 



I HAVE BEEN INFORMED BY THE MEDICAL OFFICER THAT I HAVE BEEN DIAG- 
NOSED AS HAVING SYPHILIS AS INDICATED ABOVE; THE NATURE OF THIS DISEASE 
HAS BEEN EXPLAINED TO ME: I UNDERSTAND THAT MY COOPERATION IS NECES- 
SARY IN THE TREATMENT AND PROLONGED OBSERVATION {Including certain pre- 
scribed teats') FOR THE CARE OF THIS DISEASE. 



18 JAN 57 



SECTION I 



TREATMENT 



DRUG (Specify type and vehicle) 


DATES (f<om-lo) 


AMT- PER DOSE 


INTERVAL 


TOTAL DOSE 


SIG^ATlrfAND STATION OF PHYSICIAN 


1 


Procaine Penicillin 


10 JAN 57 t 
17 JAN 57 


3 

600,000tT 


Daily 


A, 800,0 


VT'T^ HATCH. LT MC (ISN 


1 












NavSta, Blank, Va. 


1 














4 














TREATMENT REACTIONS (O/r. data, type, severity and disposition) 


SIGNATURE OF PHYSICIAN 



SECTION IV. IDENTIFICATION DATA 
PERMANENT HOME ADDRESS (Street or RFt}, city. State) 

2619 Flower St., Any Town, USA 



Male 



RACE 

Cau 



GRADE, RATING OR POSITION 

HM1 ITSN 



ORGANIZATION UNIT 

USS DESTROXER 



COMPONENT OR BRANCH 



SERVICE, DEPT. OR AGENCY 



PATIENT'S LAST NAME— FIRST NAME— M IDDLE NAME 

DOE. John James 



DATE OF BIRTH (6»Y-M«mi-tiAA) 

9 MAY 36 



IDENTIFICATION NO, 

123 45 67 



Illustration 6. Syphilis Record (Front). (See sec. XI for details.) 



16-52 

Change 69 



16-74 



CHAPTEE 16. HEALTH RECORD 



16-74 



SECTION V. CUMULATIVE LABORATORY SUMMARY 



RESULTS OF QAftKPILLD EXAMINATION 





DATE 


RESULTS 


SOURCE or SPECIMEN 


LABORATORY 


NAME OF CONFIRMING OFFICER 


1 




PflSTTTVE 




NS, BLANK, VA 


W. T. HATCH, LT MC USN 






NEGATIVE 




NS, BLANK, V/ 


. W. T. HATCH, LT MC USN 


I 












4 












I 













RESULTS OF SEROLOGICAL TESTS FOR SYPHILIS 





Date 


TYPE 


RESULT Unc. titer) 


LABORATORY 




□ATE 


TYPE 


RESULT {Inc. titaw) 


LABORATORY 


1 


10JAN5 


7 VDRL 


Negative 


NS, Blank, Va 


.1 


5DEC57 


VDRL 


Negative 


NS, Blank. Va. 




15FEB57 


VDRL 


Negative 


NS, Blank, Va 




5MAR58 


VDRL 


Negative 


NH, Blank ,Va. 


9 


15MAR57 


VDRL 


Negative 


NS, Blank, Va 


H 


5JUNE53 


VDRL 


Negative 


NH, Blank, Va. 


4 


15APR57 


VDRL 


Negative USS CARRIER 


1 5 


L3SEP58 


VDRL 


Negative 


USS CARRIER( CVA 


■ 


18KAY57 


VDRL 


Negative | NMS.Bethesda 


16 


LODEC58 


VDRL 


Negative 


USS APA (APA-0) 


• 


19JUN57 VDRL 


Negative 


NAF, Blank, N.Y 


J? 


L5SEP59 


VDRL 


Negative 


USS 0R0 (DD-01 


7 


17JUL57[ VDRL 


Negative 


NAF .Blank. N.Y. 


IS 










• 


18AUG57 


VDRL 


Negative 


USS CARRIER 


19 










9 


17SEP57 


VDRL 


Negative 


USS CARRIER 


20 










10 


190CT57 


VDRL 


Negative 


NH, Blank, Va. 


21 










II 


19NOV57 


VDRL 


Negative 


NH, Blank, Va. 













RESULTS OF SPINAL FLUID EXAMINATIONS 





DATE 


CELLS 


TOTAL 
PROTEIN 


COMPLEMENT FIXATION 




COLLOIDAL 


LABORATORY 
WHERE DONE 


0.1 


0-25 




1.0 


1 


18 JUL 'J 


7 n-1 


30 mg 


.jQ . 




0 


n. 


nnnnnnn 


NH, Blank, N.Y, 


I 




















? 




















4 





















SECTION VI. EVALUATION OF THERAPY 





DATE 


FACILITY WHERE 
EVALUATED 


RESULT 


DATE OF 
BETBUTHDTT 


PHYSICIAN'S SIGNATURE 


5ATISF" 


UNSATISFACTORY! 


1 


10JUL67 


NH f Blank f N.Y. 


X 




None 






15MAR58 


NS. Blank r Va. 


x 




None 




I 


15APR59 


USS ORO(DD-Q) 


X 




None 




4 


28DEC59 


NS. Blank, Fid 


. X 




None 




■ 















•SATISFACTORY RESULT CANNOT BE REPORTED WITHOUT NORMAL SPINAL FLUID FINDINGS 

ISPECIFY: INFECTIOUS RELAPSE: SERO-RELAPSE, N EURO-RELAPSE. INCOMPLETE DATA ON SPINAL FLUID. OTHER (Spaoify) 
REASON FOR INADEQUATE FOLLOW-UP (Can, plana and typ* 0/ i.jMj-«(ion— O1V0 authority tor di«cjiar<«) 



PATIENT'S HOME ADDRESS ON SEPARATION 

2619 Flower St., Any Town. U.S.A. 



CIVILIAN HEALTH DEPT. TO WHICH CASE RESUME WAS SENT 

Any Tovn, U.S.A. 



REINFECTION (Or'vB data new recnid wet opened) 



SECTION VII, REMARKS (Jnojud. ai^nSHcant poattretttnent slimul tindinia) 



SECTION VIII. MEDICAL OFFICER CLOSING THIS RECORD 

A. A. FINE, CDR MC USN *dL/&rf 

NAME (Typed or printed) BiaNAHIRg AyT^A)^ STATION NS, BLANK ,VA. DATE 2gDEC^9 



ING ABSTR"ACT T TO VETERANS ADM IN IS 
TU REt^l^j^jljj^^ j STATION 



A. A. FINE, CDR MG USN 

NS r BLANK VA. 28DEC?? 



Illustration 6A. Syphilis Record (Back). 



16-^3 

Change 69 



16-74 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



16-74 



ABSTRACT OF SERVICE AND MEDICAL HISTORY 
HAVHED 6150/K (Rev. 12-67) 

JFor.trlj HAVHED 1406) 



SHIP OR STATION 



DIAGNOSIS, DIAGNOSIS NUMBER AND REMARKS 



DATE 



FROM 



TO 



NAVAL TRAINING CENTER, 
QREAT LAKES, ILL. 



Duty 



1 MAY 65 



30 JULY 65 



NAVSTA., NORVA. 



Duty 



1 AUG 65 



15 NOV 65 



USS CARRIER ( CV 00) 



Duty 



16 NOV 65 



1 APR 66 



Tonsillitis, acute #14730 



2k DEC 65 



2 JAN 66 



Compression fracture, L3 
#Y03 9-000 



1 APR 66 



1 APR 66 



NAVAL HOSPITAL, PORTS., VA, 



Treatment 



1 APR 66 



7 AUG 66 



Compression fracture, L3 
#Y03 9-000 



1 APR 66 



7 AUG 66. 



USS CARRIER ( CV 00 ) 



Duty 



USS BROWN COUNTY (1ST 00) 



Duty 



7 AUG 66 



3 MAY 67 



Ik MAY 67 



rum 



Whei required the social 
will be 



sec irity number 
entsred in lieu 



:«r 0 



of service 



1 



NAME (Last, first and middle) 

DOE, John James 



BIRTH DATE 

9 May 36 



BRANCH OF SERVICE 

USN 



"SERV CE/ SOCIAL SECURITY = 
NO- . ■ , 

133 H5 67 
987-65-1321 



Illustration 7. Abstract of Service and Medical History. (See set. Xlll for derails.) 



16-5U 
Change 69 



r 



o 



u 



J 



Chapter 18 

MEDICAL DISPOSITION 



SECTIONS 

Articles 

I. Psychiatric Unit 18-1 through 18- 2 

H. Aptitude Board 18-3 through 18-GG 

III. Medical Board 18-7 through 18-24 



Section I. PSYCHIATRIC UNIT 

Article 

The Psychiatric Unit 18-1 

Fitness of Recruits for Service, Determination of 18-2 



18-1. The Psychiatric Unit 

(1) The commanding officer of each recruit 
training centaf or depot will have, as part of his 
medical organization, a psychiatric unit consist- 
ing of at least one psychiatrist, one clinical psy- 
chologist, one psychiatric social worker, and the 
necessary number of hospital corpsmen. 

(2) The medical officer of the command is 
charged with the responsibility of organizing the 
psychiatric unit and of general supervision of its 
functioning. He shall arrange for the proper 
place and equipment for the administrative func- 
tions of the unit as well as sufficient space to 
insure the conduct of the preliminary psychiatric 
examination in such manner that conversation 
between the examiner and recruit will not be 
overheard. Without privacy, the recruit will not 
react freely enough to enable the psychiatrist or 
clinical psychologist to make a satisfactory ex- 
amination. The medical officer also shall put at 
the disposal of the unit a psychiatric observation 
ward, with sufficient bed space for the proper 
observation and care of those recruits who are 
deemed by the psychiatrist to need such observa- 
tion. These facilities shall amount to not less 
than 35 beds per thousand incoming recruits per 
month except on stations where past experience 
has demonstrated that this is not proportionate 
to the actual need. 



(3) Functions of Various Members of the Psy- 
chiatric Unit. — 

(a) The psychiatrist shall conduct the neuro- 
psychiatric examinations of recruits and shall be 
charged with the responsibility for the work of 
the other members of the unit. Decisions within 
the unit rest solely with the psychiatrist and 
further referral of cases for disposition shall be 
based upon his recommendation, subject to ap- 
proval by the medical officer of the station. 

(b) The clinical psychologist shall function 
as an adjunct to the psychiatrist. He shall not 
act independently of the psychiatrist. 

(c) The hospital corpsmen shall perform the 
duties necessary for maintenance of the psychi- 
atric observation ward, and shall keep the rec- 
ords of the unit. 

(d) The psychiatric social worker's duties 
shall be to obtain data pertaining to the life his- 
tories of recruits under consideration by the unit 
and to serve as liaison agent between the naval 
service and the civilian community in arranging 
any necessary aid to recruits discharged from 
service. 

(4) The psychiatric unit is a professional, ad- 
visory, and consultant unit to which neuropsy- 
chiatric problems among recruits are to be re- 
ferred. It is charged with the responsibility of 
selecting neuropsychiatry cases and unsuitable 
recruits for conskWation by the aptitude board 
or medical board. 



18-1 
Change 38 



18-1 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



18-2 



(5) Neuropsychiatric Examination of Re- 
cruits. — 

(a) When practicable, each recruit shall be 
examined by the psychiatrist. This examination 
shall be conducted as a part of the initial physi- 
cal examination, and usually should be brief 
(from 3 to 5 minutes), so as not to interfere with 
the routine procedure to which the incoming re- 
cruit is subjected. If indicated, the psychiatrist 
shall request a psychological or other special 
examination. 

(b) A recruit with obvious and serious neu- 
ropsychiatric handicaps shall be sent to the psy- 
chiatric observation ward pending disposition. 
Recruits with less obvious or serious handicaps 
or about whose fitness for service there is doubt, 
should be returned to a triai of duty and ob- 
served under drill and training conditions in a 
regular recruit company, with the understanding 
that the psychiatrist shall have opportunity for 
further examination of the recruit if he deems it 
necessary. 

(c) A recruit may be referred to the psychi- 
atric unit for examination and observation at 
any time during the training period at the sta- 
tion. During this period of neuropsychiatric ob- 
servation, he shall be admitted to the sicklist if 
patient status is desirable. 

(6) Psychiatric Unit Report (MED-6520-2).— 
All naval training centers and Marine Corps re- 
cruit depots shall submit this report on NAVMED 
6520/6 as of midnight the last day of each month 
in accordance with the instructions on the form. 

18-2. Fitness of Recruits for Service, Determi- 
nation of 

(1) The evaluation of each recruit's fitness 
and suitability for service is a necessary function 
of the activities which serve as centers for train- 
ing of recruits for the U.S. Navy and Marine 
Corps. This evaluation should be conducted with 
a view to separating personnel from service 
when it is determined that they are unsuitable 



for service because they cannot be expected to 
perform useful duty. In this connection, reason- 
able effort shall be made to detect those recruits 
who present defects or tendencies which were 
concealed or not detected at the time of enlist- 
ment or induction. The preliminary evaluation 
of each recruit's physical fitness shall be con- 
ducted by the Medical Department representa- 
tives at the station and the evaluation of each 
recruit's neuropsychiatric fitness and suitability 
for service shall be performed by the psychiatric 
unit. Company commanders and other cognizant 
authorities may assist greatly by referring for 
medical attention those recruits who are not 
adjusting well to training conditions. A recruit 
is unfit because of physical disability when he 
is unable, because of physical disability, to per- 
form the duties of his rate in such a manner as 
to reasonably fulfill the purpose of his employ- 
ment on the active list, 

(2) In determining whether or not a recruit 
is unsuitable for service by reason of personality 
defects, emotional immaturity, mental inade- 
quacy, lack of stamina, functional disturbances 
such as enuresis, or preexisting physical or men- 
tal defects which impair usefulness but do not 
incapacitate him for service in accordance with 
article 18-2(1) his ability to benefit from train- 
ing and to become functionally capable of full 
service must be evaluated. Such individuals may 
be eligible for discharge, but for administrative, 
rather than medical, reasons. The recruit who 
presents preexisting physical or mental defects 
which are not, of themselves, disqualifying for 
useful duty, may be discharged for administra- 
tive reasons but not by reason of physical dis- 
ability. 

(3) If the medical officer or the psychiatric 
unit considers that a recruit is unsuitable for 
service but is not unfit to perform the duties of 
his rate by reason of physical disability, certifica- 
tion shall be made to that effect and the recruit 
may be referred to an aptitude board for dis- 
position. 



18-2 

Change 5t 



18-3 



CHAPTER 18. MEDICAL DISPOSITION 



18-6 



Section II. APTITUDE BOARD 



Article 

Convening Authority 18-5 

Composition 

Function ^ . , 8 _ 5 

Report Preparation 

Aptitude Board Report Cover Sheet (NAVMED 1910/1) . 18-6A 

Report Disposition and Health Record Entry 18-6B 



18-3. Convening Authority 

(1) Aptitude boards are permanently con- 
vened by the commander or commanding gen- 
eral of each naval training center or Marine 
Corps recruit depot and the commanding gen- 
erals of the Marine Corps Bases at Camp Pendle- 
ton and Camp Lejeune, The commander or 
commanding general shall be referred to as the 
"convening authority." 

18-4. Composition 

(1) The aptitude board shall be composed of 
one line officer (LCDR or MA J or higher) and one 
other officer or enlisted member, E-8/E-9 in any 
rating, and one Navy psychiatrist or clinical 
psychologist. If neither of the latter is available, 
the third member should be a medical officer 
with psychiatric training. When the person being 
considered by the board is a reservist, the mem- 
bership shall include a Reserve officer orE-8/E-9 
enlisted member if available. In any case, when 
a Reserve member is not available when the 
board is considering a reservist, the convening 
authority shall so indicate in his forwarding 
endorsement to the board's report. The board 
shall include a female officer or E-8/E-9 en- 
listed member when females are being considered 
by the board. 

18-5. Function 

( 1 ) It is the function of the aptitude board to 
consider the cases of recruits and trainees re- 
ferred to it by (a) the convening authority or 

i designated subordinate line officials, (b) the sta- 
tion psychiatrist or psychiatric unit, or (c) the 
station medical officer. The term "recruit" ap- 
plies to all enlisted or inducted persons or Re- 
serve members ordered to active duty, including 
active duty for training, who are undergoing and 
have not completed recruit training. The term 
"trainee" applies to all enlisted marines who are 
undergoing and have not completed infantry or 
basic specialist training. 

(2) Members may be referred to an aptitude 
board in accordance with the guidelines in 
Bumed Instruction 1910.1 series when considered 
unsuitable for service and not presenting an in- 



capacitating physical or mental disability. The 
board's function is concerned with the actual 
disposition of cases referred to it. No recruit or 
trainee shall be recommended by the aptitude 
board for discharge from the service until such 
member has been counseled concerning his de- 
ficiencies and afforded a reasonable opportunity 
to overcome them if the reason for the unsuit- 
ability discharge is one for which Bupers Manual 
article 3420180 or M ARCORSE PM AN paragraph 
6016, as appropriate, requires such counseling 
and opportunity. 

(3) After weighing the evidence submitted, 
the board may, if it considers the recruit or 
trainee unsuitable for retention in service, recom- 
mend to the convening authority that the mem- 
ber be discharged from the service. If the board 
considers the recruit or trainee fit for full duty, 
it may recommend that the member be returned 
to duty. If doubt exists as to the member's 
unsuitability, or the permanency of his functional 
impairment, the board may recommend return 
to duty for further trial or admission to the sick- 
list for additional study. No recruit or trainee 
shall be recommended by the aptitude board for 
discharge from the service until he has been in- 
formed in writing of the reason (s) he is being 
considered for discharge and has appeared in 
person before the aptitude board. The board 
shall also insure that the member is afforded an 
opportunity to make a statement in his own be- 
half or to decline to do so in writing. If a 
member submits a statement, the board shall re- 
view its contents and consider it in making its 
recommendation and report. 

18-6. Report Preparation 

(1) The aptitude board report shall be sub- 
mitted to the convening authority of the apti- 
tude board on NAVMED 1910/1 (Aptitude 
Board Report Cover Sheet). An original and two 
carbons shall be prepared. The cover sheet shall 
not be mechanically reproduced. The summary 
shall be prepared on plain white bond paper, 
which may, if desired, be mechanically repro- 
duced. The summary shall not make a medical 
diagnosis; sufficient pertinent data, however, 
shall be recorded to support the board's conclu- 



14 Feb 74 



18-3 

Change 81 



18-6A 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



18-6B 



sions and recommendations. This may be in the 
nature of symptoms, signs, social behavior, reac- 
tion to environment, etc. Medical-social reports 
must be held in the strictest confidence and 
should not be shown to the member concerned, 
and the information derived therefrom shall not 
be entered in the board's report. Such data are 
obtained primarily for the benefit of the member 
and may only be used for the purpose of further 
interrogation of the member, if pertinent. Any 
additional history so obtained from the member 
or from other direct sources contacted as a result 
of "lead information" may be incorporated as a 
part of the summary in the case. In all appropri- 
ate cases the summary shall conclude with the 
specific statement. "This member has no mental 
or physical disability which would warrant his 
discharge by reason of physical disability." 

(2) Following appearance of a member before 
an aptitude board, the convening authority shall 
take such final action as may be indicated and 
authorized in accordance with existing directives 
of the BUMED Instruction 1910.1 series. 

18-6A. Aptitude Board Report Cover Sheet 
(NAVMED 1910/1) 

Item 1, FROM: — Enter name and location of 
facility where the aptitude board was held. 

Item 2, DATE— Enter the day, month, and 
year the board met and not the date the report 
was typed, signed, or forwarded. 

Item 3, TO: — Enter the convening authority 
authorized to convene the board, to include name 
and location of facility. 

Item 4, NAME. — Enter full name (last, first, 
and middle). 

Item 5, SERVICE NUMBER.— Enter member's 
service number. 

Item 6, RATE. — Enter abbreviation for mem- 
ber's present grade or rate. 

Item 7, BRANCH OF SERVICE.— Place "X" 
in appropriate block. 

Item 8, DATE OF BIRTH. — Enter day, month, 
and year of birth. 

Item 9, RECRUIT AND TOTAL ACTIVE 
SERVICE. — Enter the length of the current 
period of service in number of days and months, 
computed to date board is held; and, if the mem- 
ber had prior active military service, indicate 
within parentheses, his total active service in 
days, months, and years; also indicate whether 
the latter was continuous. Note: Aptitude board 
loses cognizance over case if the recruit training 
or infantry training has been completed. Fur- 
ther, an aptitude board would have no cognizance 



should the very rare case occur in which a mem- 
ber would have a total of 8 or more years of 
continuous active militaiy service; in such a 
case, the convening authority should be notified 
for possible proceedings in accordance with 
paragraph VIII.C.2. of DOD Directive 1332.14 of 
20 December 1965 (SECNAVINST 1910.3). 

Item 10, BOARD'S CONCLUSIONS AND 
RECOMAiENDATIONS. — Place "X" in appro- 
priate block. 

Item 11, BOARD MEMBERS AND SIGNA- 
TURES.— -Type or stamp the name, grade, corps, 
and branch of service of each member. Signa- 
tures of each member shall appear in the space 
provided. Facsimile signature stamps shall not be 
used. The dissent of any member shall be duly 
recorded on the cover sheet. The board shall then 
forward its report to the convening authority. 

Item 12, FIRST ENDORSEMENT.— (To be 
used only when discharge is effected.) Enter the 
date (day, month, and year) the recruit was actu- 
ally discharged from the service. Place an "X" in 
the appropriate block to indicate type of dis- 
charge certificate issued. To be signed by conven- 
ing authority. 

18-6B. Report Disposition and Health Record 
Entry 

(1) Where discharge is accomplished at the 
local level based on an approved recommendation 
by the board, physical examination of the member 
need not be accomplished if he has not com- 
pleted 90 days of active duty. The medical 
officer shall make a positive statement 
on Standard Form 600 to the effect that the mem- 
ber does not have an incapacitating physical or 
mental disability and shall comment on any con- 
dition for which the member has been to sick 
call during his period of active duty. The follow- 
ing entry shall be made on Standard Form 600, 
signed by the individual, and witnessed by an 
appropriate person: 

You have been examined during the past 90 days and 
it has been determined that you are physically qualified 
for separation from active duty. No defects have been 
noted which would disqualify you for the performance 
of your duties or entitle you to disability benefits from 
the naval service nor have you suffered any injuries or 
illnesses during your period of active duty. Should you 
be of the opinion that this statement is not correct, a 
medical officer wilt evaluate your claim and, if indi- 
cated, refer you to a hospital for further study. To 
receive disability benefits from the Navy you must be 
found unfit to perform the duties of your office, grade, 
rank, or rating because of disease or injury incurred 
while you are entitled to receive basic pay. After you 



18-4 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



18-6B 



CHAPTER 18. MEDICAL DISPOSITION 



18-6B 



are separated, any claims for disability benefits must be 
submitted to the Veterans Administration. You will 
indicate by your signature that you understand the 
foregoing statement. 

Immediately below the signature of the witness 
on Standard Form 600, the following entry shall 
be made: "Subject member separated from the 

naval service by aptitude board action on ," 

The terminated Health Record with the original 
NAVMED 1910/1 attached with the foregoing 
Standard Form 600 as the top page shall be for- 
warded to BUMED. A copy of the completed 
NAVMED 1910/1 shall be forwarded to 
SUPERS or CMC, as appropriate, with the termi- 
nated Service Record. Members who have served 
more than 90 days' active duty shall be examined 



prior to separation in accordance with article 
15-48. 

(2) When the convening authority disapproves 
a board's recommendation for discharge and de- 
termines that the member will be retained in 
the service, the original NAVMED 1910/1 shall 
be forwarded to BUPERS or CMC, as appropri- 
ate, for filing in his duplicate service record. A 
copy shall be filed permanently in the member's 
service record. 

(3) When the convening authority disapproves 
a board's recommendation for retention, he shall 
forward the report to BUPERS or CMC, as ap- 
propriate, via BUMED, for final disposition. A 
copy of the report shall be filed permanently in 
the member's service record. 



10 Feb 75 



18-5 

Change 83 



o 



( 



18-7 CHAPTER 18. MEDICAL DISPOSITION 18-10 

SECTION III. MEDICAL BOARD 

Articl* 

Convening Authority _ __ 18-7 

Composition _ _._ 18-8 

Purpose __ 18-9 

Necessity for Accurate Medical Evaluation 18-10 

Referral of Cases __. _ ... 18-11 

Officers _ 18-12 

Discipline or Administrative Involuntary Separation Cases _ 18-13 

Mental Competency Cases _ __ 18-14 

Patients Who Refuse Medical, Dental or Surgical Treatment 18-15 

Military Unsuitability Cases ^ 18-16 

EPTE Physical Defects _ 18-17 

Return to Duty Cases 18-18 

limited Duty Cases 18-19 

Special Cases _ ^_lJh20_ 

Board Procedure _ 18-21 

Board Preparation 18-22 

Report Routing and Disposition 18-23 

Medical Board Report Cover Sheet (NAVMED 6100/1) 18-24 

Request for Medical Records 18-25 

Requests for Statement of Service 18-26 

Automatic Data Processing Procedures 18-27 

Health Record Entry _ 18-28 

Disposition Tables 18-29 



18-7. CONVENING AUTHORITY 

( 1 ) A medical board may be convened by the 
commander of a fleet, force, squadron, or flotilla, 
by commanding generals of Fleet Marine Force 
units, or by the commandant, commander, or 
commanding officer of a shore (field) activity 
of the Department of the Navy, upon any mem- 
ber of the Armed Forces under his command, 
on the recommendation of the medical officer 
of the command to which such person is at- 
tached. A medical board may also be convened 
by CNO, CMC, CHNAVPERS, or CHBUMED. 

18-8. COMPOSITION 

(1) Medical boards will be composed of two 
Medical Corps officers of the Armed Forces or 
Public Health Service. A third member may be 
assigned at the discretion of the convening 
authority. 

(2) One of the medical board members shall 
be a senior officer with detailed knowledge of 
the directives pertaining to standards of medical 
fitness and unfitness, disposition of patients, and 
disability separation procedures. Whenever pos- 
sible, the medical board shall be composed of 
the Chief of Service (or his designated represent- 
ative) and the medical or dental officer respon- 
sible for the patient's care. Other medical or 
dental officers may be assigned as the convening 
authority directs. 



(3) When a member of the medical board 
does not have training in the specialty of the 
patient's primary impairment, appropriate 
specialty consultations shall be obtained prior to 
consideration of the case by the medical board. 

(4) When the party before the board is a re- 
servist, the membership of the board shall in- 
clude Reserve representation. In any instance 
where Reserve members are not available, the 
convening authority shall so indicate in his for- 
warding endorsement. 

(5) In cases involving questions of mental 
competency, the membership of the board shall 
include a psychiatrist. 

18-9. PURPOSE 

( 1 ) The medical board serves to report upon 
the present state of health of any member of the 
Armed Forces and as an administrative board by 
which the convening authority or higher author- 
ity obtains a considered clinical opinion regard- 
ing physical fitness of service personnel. 

18-10. NECESSITY FOR ACCURATE MED- 
ICAL EVALUATION 

(1) Although medical and dental officers do 
not determine physical unfitness for service, 
they should be familiar with the basic policies 
and concepts to be able to carry out the respon- 
sibility for identifying members whose physical 
fitness for full duty* may be in doubt. There is 



18-5 
Change 70 



18-11 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



18-12 



no provision or authority for waiving a defect 
that would interfere with a member's ability to 
reasonably perform his duties. It is not possible 
to list and define all the medical factors that may 
compromise a member's ability to reasonably 
perform his duties; however, SECNAV1NST 
1850. 3B provides certain guidelines on condi- 
tions which normally render an individual un- 
fit because of physical disability and should be 
referred to in questionable cases. On the other 
hand, there is no substitute for competent and 
mature military medical judgment in appraising 
all the relevant factors in a given case. 

(2) The mere presence of a physical defect 
does not in itself automatically require or justify 
referring a case to a PEB. The test must always 
be whether the defect interferes with the mem- 
ber's reasonable performance of his assigned 
duties. Initial enlistment and commissioning 
physical standards must not be confused with 
physical capability to perform duty. Once he is 
enlisted or commissioned, the fact that a mem- 
ber may later fall below initial entry standards 
does not require that his case be referred to a 
PEB. Similarly, there are prescribed minimum 
physical standards for special duties such as fly- 
ing. Disqualification for special duties does not 
necessarily imply physical unfitness unless the 
disqualifying defect would also interfere with 
the performance of other duties. Medical board 
evaluation is appropriate only in instances where 
the member's ability to reasonably perform 
military service is in doubt. 

(3) Information contained in medical boards 
may play an important role in determining the 
rights of an individual to certain benefits (such 
as pensions, compensation, promotion, retire- 
ment, income tax exemptions, etc.). It is, there- 
fore, essential to include in the report all avail- 
able information with adequate documentation 
concerning the origin, nature, aggravation by 
service, and other significant facts concerning 
all the member's conditions which unfit the 
member and those which do not. 

18-11. REFERRAL OF CASES 

(1) Generally, only those cases which present 
aspects of a problematical or controversial nature 
and those cases in which medical board action is 
required by existing regulations shall be 
evaluated by a medical board prior to disposi- 
tion. 

(2) Patients who are returned to full duty 
without limitation and those who require trans- 
fer to another Armed Forces hospital prior to 
final disposition should not ordinarily be con- 
sidered by a medical board prior to such dis- 
position. 



(3) A medical board is mandatory in the 
following situations: 

(a) When a member is temporarily unfit 
but return to full duty is anticipated and it is 
desired to follow the patient for a short period 
of time before final disposition is made, i.e., 
"limited duty". 

(b) Patients who refuse medical, dental, or 
surgical treatment. 

(c) All cases in which PEB referral is 
required. 

(d) When continued military service would 
probably result in an inordinate amount of 
hositalization or other close medical supervision; 
or would be likely to aggravate the existing con- 
dition. 

(e) When the nature of the member's de- 
fect clearly precludes further military service. 

(f) Cases involving questions of mental 
competency. 

(g) When the member's condition is such 
as to require permanent assignment limitations, 
i.e., geographic, within U.S., etc. 

(h) A member of the Naval Reserve or 
Marine Corps Reserve, on active duty for train- 
ing of 30 days or less, who becomes ill or con- 
tracts disease in line of duty while he is on 
active or performing inactive duty training, and 
who requires hospitalization and incident trans- 
portation and subsistence which may extend 
beyond ten weeks after the member is released 
from active duty. (See BUMEDINST 6320.31 
series. ) 

(4) Articles 18-12 through 18-20 provide 
further guidance concerning various categories 
of cases where referral to a medical board may 
be appropriate, or is required. 

( 5 ) Unless otherwise indicated, a member need 
not be admitted to the sicklist in order to appear 
before a medical board. 

18-12. OFFICERS 

( 1 ) When an officer is to be returned to duty 
after undergoing treatment for a severe or pos- 
sibly incapacitating condition, particularly when 
it may affect his reasonable performance of duty 
during further convalescence, he shall be re- 
ferred to a medical board before being returned 
to duty. 

(2) When an officer candidate or midshipman 
has been undergoing treatment for any impair- 
ment which is likely to be recurrent or pro- 
gressive or to become incapacitating either prior 
or subsequent to appointment, he shall be 
ordered before a medical board before being 
returned to duty. The physical fitness of such 
members is to be evaluated in regard to probable 
ability to perform duty in commissioned grade 



18-6 

Change 70 



18-13 



CHAPTER 18. MEDICAL DISPOSITION 



18-14 



rather than to continue in training. In such 
cases, final determination of the member's phys- 
ical fitness for appointment to commissioned 
grade shall be held in abeyance pending De- 
partmental action on the board's report. 

(3) When an officer is hospitalized as a re- 
sult of a defect or disability noted on his trien- 
nial or annual physical examination, he shall 
be referred to a medical board prior to being 
returned to duty. 

(4) Whenever, in accordance with the in- 
struction in the preceding subarticles, it is 
determined that any class 1 or class 2 aviation 
officer is to appear before a medical board for 
return to limited or full duty he shall be sent to 
the nearest aviation examining facility, with 
abstract of pertinent medical findings, in order 
that a complete flight physical can be performed. 
The flight physical, recorded on SF 88, is to be 
forwarded by the aviation examining facility, 
within 5 working days, to BUMED (Code 511) 
with a note in item #73 that the officer con- 
cerned had recently appeared before a medical 
board. When found fit for duty, the officer may 
be discharged from the sicklist to await Depart- 
mental action on the board's report. A flight 
physical examination is not necessary nor desired 
when the medical board is held incident to an 
officer's pending separation from the active list. 

(5) When an officer of the Navy or the 
Marine Corps (Regular or Reserve) on active 
duty with less than 3 years continuous service 
as an officer is considered unfit by reason of a 
condition which was incurred while he was not 
in receipt of basic pay, and which has not been 
aggravated by a period of active service, he 
shall be ordered before a medical board. Should 
the medical board recommend his separation by 
reason of physical disability which was incurred 
while he was not in receipt of basic pay and 
was not aggravated by service, he shall be ad- 
vised of his rights to a full and fair hearing 
before a PEB. If he does not desire to waive his 
rights to a full and fair hearing, then the case 
shall be referred to the Central PEB. Should 
he waive his rights to a full and fair hearing, he 
shall certify in writing, on Form NAVMED 
6100/3, that he does not demand such a hearing; 
and the medical board report with the NAV- 
MED 6100/3 shall be forwarded to BUMED 
(Code 3322). 

(6) Officers of the Navy or the Marine Corps 
(Regular or Reserve) on active duty with more 
than 3 years continuous service as an officer who 
are considered to be unfit by reason of a physical 
disability shall be referred to a medical board 
with subsequent referral to the Central PEB. 



18-13. DISCIPLINE OR ADMINISTRATIVE 
INVOLUNTARY SEPARATION 
CASES 

(1) When a medical board report is con- 
sidered necessary and an administrative involun- 
tary separation or court-martial proceedings or 
investigative proceedings are pending, indicated, 
or have been completed, and in cases of uncom- 
pleted sentences of courts-martial involving con- 
finement where the disciplinary features of the 
case warrant resolution prior to or in connection 
with further disposition, the medical board re- 
port together with all pertinent facts relative to 
the disciplinary aspects of the case shall be sub- 
mitted to the Navy Department for such ad- 
ministrative action as is deemed warranted and 
no orders directing disposition or authorizing 
the appearance of the member before a PEB 
shall be issued by the convening authority. The 
collection of pertinent facts relating to the dis- 
ciplinary features of such cases is not the func- 
tion of the medical board but shall be accom- 
plished by the commanding officer of the com- 
mand to which the member was attached prior 
to hospitalization. If a member becomes subject 
to disciplinary action after the medical board 
report has been submitted to the Navy Depart- 
ment, BUPERS or MARCORPS, as appropriate, 
shall be notified by message. 

18-14. MENTAL COMPETENCY CASES 

( 1 ) In those cases where the member is 
suffering from psychiatric or personality dis- 
orders and where trial is pending, administrative 
involuntary separation is indicated or is being 
processed, an investigation has been or will be 
conducted pursuant to the provisions of chapter 
8 of the JAG Manual, or where it is anticipated 
that disciplinary action may be directed, the 
board shall state fully the nature of the alleged 
misconduct or disciplinary offenses, including 
the dates involved, and shall express its opinion 
as to: The individual's mental competency and 
responsibility for the acts charged; mental com- 
petency to stand trial; mental and physical fit- 
ness to undergo confinement; and ability to 
benefit from corrective punishment, if awarded. 
The board shall make separate and distinct find- 
ings as to each of the three following questions: 
(a) Was the accused at the time of the alleged 
offense so far free from mental defect, disease, 
derangement as to be able, concerning the 
particular acts charged, to distinguish right 
from wrong? (b) Was the accused at the time 
of the alleged offense so far free from mental 
defect, disease or derangement as to be able, 
concerning the particular acts charged, to adhere 



18-7 

Change 70 



18-15 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



18-15 



to the right (c) Does the accused possess suffi- 
cient mental capacity to understand the nature 
of the proceedings against him and intelligently 
to conduct or cooperate in his defense? In addi- 
tion, the board shall indicate whether in its 
opinion disciplinary action in ,the form of con- 
finement is (not) likely to have a deleterious 
effect on his health, and disciplinary action prob- 
ably would (not) be corrective and (or) lead to 
a better service adjustment. 

(2) In expressing an opinion regarding 
mental competency and responsibility, the board 
should consider whether the member was able 
to appreciate the nature and quality of his 
actions at the time of the alleged offense and 
whether he was able, concerning the particular 
acts charged, to distinguish right from wrong. It 
is recognized that in certain instances insuffi- 
cient information will be available for the board 
to arrive at an opinion in this matter, partic- 
ularly when a considerable period of time has 
elapsed since the alleged offenses. In such 
instances, it is proper for the board merely to 
state that it is not in possession of the necessary 
information upon which to base a considered 
opinion. However, the board should express an 
opinion whenever possible. This does not con- 
stitute final judgment in the case since it is only 
a professional opinion based on the information 
available, and if additional considerations per- 
tain, the findings may be modified. The opinions 
thus expressed are solely for guidance in ad- 
ministrative processing of such cases. 

(3) Opinions as to mental competency to 
stand trial ordinarily need not be made in the 
case of individuals who have already been tried 
and are serving sentence, unless significant in- 
formation is disclosed which was not available to 
the court-martial. In cases already tried and in 
which administrative involuntary separation 
action has not been initiated or is not con- 
templated, usually the only opinion desired is 
whether discharge from the sicklist for com- 
pletion of the awarded disciplinary action would 
be likely to have a deleterious effect on the 
individual's health. 

(4) Members who are considered not mentally 
competent and responsible for the particular act 
charged or not mentally competent at the time 
of appearance before a medical board, shall be 
recommended for disposition in the same manner 
as any similar case with no disciplinary action 
pending. However, such cases shall be forwarded 
to the Navy Department for review and appro- 
priate disposition. 

(5) Members who are considered mentally 
competent and responsible for the particular 
act alleged and mentally competent to stand 



trial, shall be recommended for return to duty 
for appropriate action unless they are physically 
incapacitated for further service. However, if it 
is considered that they present personality or 
behavior disorders which render them unsuitable 
for further useful service, they may be returned 
to duty for completion of their disciplinary 
action and if not discharged as a result of such 
action, they may be discharged by reason of 
their personality disorder. 

(6) In the case of any member involved in 
disciplinary problems, factors which might 
operate in mitigation or extenuation shall be 
fully described by the board in its report so 
that they may be given due consideration by 
reviewing authorities in the Navy Department. 
As a general rule, only psychoses and organic 
cerebral deterioration may absolve one of re- 
sponsibility for acts performed, whereas other 
disability or disease and the personality and 
behavior disorders may constitute mitigating 
or extenuating factors. 

18-15. PATIENTS WHO REFUSE MEDI- 
CAL, DENTAL OR SURGICAL 
TREATMENT 

(1) When a member refuses to submit to re- 
commended therapeutic measures for a remedial 
defect or condition which has interfered with 
his performance of duty and following pre- 
scribed therapy the member is expected to be 
fit for full duty, the following procedures shall 
apply: 

(a) After being counseled concerning the 
matter, any member of the naval service who re- 
fuses to submit to recommended medical, surg- 
ical, dental or diagnostic measures, other than 
routine treatment for minor or temporary dis- 
abilities, shall be transferred to a naval hospital 
for further evaluation and appearance before a 
medical board. (See art. 2-22 concerning com- 
pulsory medical or surgical treatment.) 

(b) The board shall study the case, inquire 
into the merits of the individual's refusal to 
submit to treatment, and report the facts with 
appropriate recommendations. 

(2) In surgical cases, the board's report shall 
contain answers to the following questions: 

(a) Is surgical treatment required to relieve 
the incapacity and restore the individual to a 
duty status, and may it be expected to do so? 

(b) Is the proposed surgery an established 
procedure that qualified and experienced sur- 
geons ordinarily would recommend and under- 
take? 

(c) Considering the risks ordinarily asso- 
ciated with surgical treatment, the patient's age 
and general physical condition, and his reasons 



18-8 

Change 73 



18-16 



CHAPTER 18. MEDICAL DISPOSITION 



18-17 



matter, any member of the naval service who re- 
fuses to submit to recommended medical, surg- 
ical, dental, or diagnostic measures, other than 
routine treatment for minor or temporary dis- 
abilities, shall be transferred to a naval hospital 
for further evaluation and appearance before a 
medical board. (See art. 2-22 concerning com- 
pulsory medical or surgical treatment.) 

(b) The board shall study the case, inquire 
into the merits of the individual's refusal to 
submit to treatment, and report the facts with 
appropriate recommendations. 

(2) In surgical cases, the board's report shall 
contain answers to the following questions: 

(a) Is surgical treatment required to relieve 
the incapacity and restore the individual to a 
duty status, and may it be expected to do so? 

(b) Is the proposed surgery an established 
procedure that qualified and experienced sur- 
geons ordinarily would recommend and under- 
take? 

(c) Considering the risks ordinarily asso- 
ciated with surgical treatment, the patient's age 
and general physical condition, and his reasons 
for refusing treatment, is the refusal reasonable 
or unreasonable (Fear of surgery or religious 
scruples may be considered, along with all the 
other evidence, for whatever weight may appear 
appropriate. ) 

(3) As a general rule, refusal of minor sur- 
gery should be considered unreasonable in the 
absence of substantial contraindications. Cases 
of major surgical operations may be reasonable 
or unreasonable, according to the circumstances. 
The age of the patient, previous unsuccessful 
operations, existing physical or mental contrain- 
dications, and any special risks, should all be 
taken into consideration. 

(4) As a matter of policy, surgery shall not 
be performed on a person over his protest if 
he is mentally competent. 

( 5 ) In medical, dental or diagnostic cases, the 
board should show the need and risk of the 
recommended procedure. 

(6) If a medical board decides that a diag- 
nostic, medical, dental or surgical procedure is 
indicated, these findings must be made known 
to the patient. The board's report shall show 
that the patient was afforded an opportunity to 
submit a written statement explaining the 
grounds for his refusal, and any statement sub- 
mitted shall be forwarded with the board's re- 
port. The patient shall be advised that even 
if his disability originally arose in line of duty, 
its continuance would be attributable to his 
unreasonable refusal to cooperate in its cor- 
rection; and that the continuance of the dis- 
ability might, therefore, result in the member's 
separation without benefits. 



(7) The patient shall be advised that section 
1207 of Title 10, U.S. Code, precludes dis- 
position of his case under chapter 61 of Title 
10, U.S. Code, if his disability is due to inten- 
tional misconduct, or willful neglect, or if it 
was incurred during a period of unauthorized 
absence. He shall be further advised that 
benefits from the Veterans' Administration will 
be dependent upon a finding that his disability 
is in line of duty and is not due to his own 
willful misconduct. He shall be further advised 
that the Social Security Act contains special 
provisions relating to benefits for "disabled" 
persons and certain provisions relating to per- 
sons disabled "in line of duty" during service in 
the Armed Forces. In many instances persons 
deemed to have "remediable" disorders have 
been held not "disabled" within the meaning 
of that term as used in the statute, and Federal 
courts have upheld that interpretation. One who 
is deemed unreasonably to have refused to under- 
go available surgical procedures may be deemed 
both "not disabled" and "not in the line of 
duty." 

(8) The board's report shall be forwarded 
direct to the Central PEB except in those cases 
when the convening authority desires that the 
case be referred for Departmental review. 

(9) As a matter of policy, a member who 
refuses medical, dental, or surgical treatment for 
an EPTE defect not aggravated by a period of 
active service but which Joes interfere with 
the performance of his duties should be 
processed in accordance with BUMEDINST 
1910.2 (series) rather than under the provisions 
of this article. In other words, the condition 
rather than the refusal of surgery should be the 
deciding factor for determining appropriate dis- 
position. 

18-16. Military Unsuitability Cases 

( 1 ) Subject to the provisions of BUMEDINST 
1910.2 series, certain designated activities may 
discharge by action upon a report of a medical 
board, by reason of unsuitability, members who 
suffer from certain designated conditions. These 
conditions are considered to constitute military 
unsuitability provided the defects are primary 
and not secondary to disease or injury. Attention 
is invited to current regulations in BUPERS 
Manual or MARCORSEPMAN which provide 
for the disposition of enlisted members via 
nonmedical channels by administrative discharge 
for unsuitability. 

18-17. EPTE Physical Defects 

( 1 ) Subject to the provisions of BUMEDINST 
1910.2 series, certain designated activities may 



26 Mar 75 



18-11 

Change 84 



18-18 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



18-20 



discharge by action upon a report of a medical board, 
members who are unfit by reason of physical disability 
which existed prior to enlistment (EPTE). In addition, 
in accordance with the BUMEDINST 1910.2 series 
guidelines, certain designated activities may discharge 
by action upon a report of a medical board, prior 
to completion of the prescribed recruit training 
syllabus or program, recruits who do not meet the 
physical standards for enlistment or induction, 
although such members are not considered unfit, (see 
art. 18-23.) 

(2) In the case of officers, see article 18-12 (5). 

18-18. Return to Duty Cases 

(1) When a medical board is considered by the 
convening authority or other higher authority to be 
necessary prior to returning a member to full duty, 
such a report will be prepared and disposed of in 
accordance with guidelines set forth in article 18-24. 

18-19. Limited Duty Cases 

(1) When it is determined that a member is physi- 
cally qualified to perform limited duty, but 
temporarily not physically qualified to perform full 
duty, he shall be reported upon by a medical board 
prior to return to duty. When the board recommends 
limited duty, the limitation imposed by the member's 
disability shall be set forth in the board's report. On 
the other hand, if the disability is of such a nature 
that recovery is not anticipated and it is not expected 
that the member will qualify physically for full duty 
after a reasonable period of convalescence, the mem- 
ber's case shall be referred to the Central PEB. 

(2) The minimum period of limited duty shall 
not be less than 6 months; however, this does not pre- 
clude the Medical Board from requiring the member 
to return for revaluation at specified intervals during 
the period of limited duty. A reevaluation medical 
board may be conducted at any time during the 6- 
months limited duty period that a change in status is 
warranted (i.e., return to full duty; referral of the 
case to the CPEB, etc.). Unless the 6-month period of 
limited duty is sooner resolved or a longer period of 
limited duty has been approved by departmental 
review, a medical board will be conducted upon com- 
pletion of the 6-months limited duty. When the con- 
vening authority is a director/commanding officer of a 
naval regional medical center, commanding officer of 
a naval hospital or U.S. naval hospital, Commandant 
of the Fourteenth Naval District, or the Commanding 
Officer of the Naval Submarine Medical Center, an 
initial period of limited duty of 6 months may be 
approved in the case of enlisted personnel without 
departmental approval. In all cases where the recom- 
mended period of limited duty exceeds 6 months, 
a second period of limited duty is recommended, the 
member submits a statement in rebuttal to the board's 



finding of recommendation, the case involves other 
than an enlisted member, or the convening authority 
is other than noted above, Departmental review and 
action is required. 

(3) Members previously classified as fit for limited 
duty only, who improve and are considered physically 
qualified for full duty, shall be reevaluated with a 
view to reclassification. 

(4) In all cases where an officer or enlisted mem- 
ber of the Navy or Marine Corps is returned to limited 
duty as a result of Departmental action on a medical 
board report, the member shall be reevaluated with 
subsequent appearance before another medical board. 
The board's report, in such cases, shall be forwarded 
to BUM ED (Code 3322) for action. 

(5) A member who is considered fit for full duty 
at any time subsequent to the assignment of a per- 
manent limited duty designator by the Chief of Naval 
Personnel in accordance with BUPERSMAN 1830120, 
shall be reevaluated by a Medical Board and the report 
thereof submitted for Departmental review. 

(6) BUPERS and MARCORPS maintain listings 
for officer personnel on limited duty for physical 
reasons and issue orders for reevaluation at appropriate 
times, where necessary. It shall be the responsibility 
of the enlisted member's commanding officer to insure 
that he is reevaluated at the designated time. 

18-20. Special Cases 

(1) Current regulations permit the acceptance 
into the Navy or Marine Corps of a physically dis- 
qualified individual provided (1) it is determined 
at the departmental level that he has demonstrated 
in the pursuit of his civilian occupation, profession, or 
avocation that he can perform satisfactory active serv- 
ice; and (2) a waiver of the physical standards is 
recommended by BUMED and granted by BUPERS 
or MARCORPS, as appropriate. On the other hand, 
it is possible that the member may subsequently 
demonstrate his inability to perform satisfactory 
service by reason of his previously waived defect. 
In such cases, the procedures set forth below shall be 
observed. 

(a) Appropriate evaluation is required with 
subsequent appearance before a medical board. The 
board's report shall include statements from the mem- 
ber's division officer, department head, or executive 
officer describing any functional impairment that 
might be attributed to the previously waived defect. 

(b) The medical board shall make appropriate 
recommendations regarding the member's fitness or 
unfitness to perform satisfactory active service. 

(c) The convening authority, in his endorse- 
ment on the board's report, shall indicate his con- 
currence or nonconcurrence with the board's findings 
and recommendations, and make such other comments 



18-12 

Change 81 



14 Feb 74 



18-16 



CHAPTER 18. MEDICAL DISPOSITION 



18-19 



for refusing treatment, is the refusal reasonable 
or unreasonable? (Fear of surgery or religious 
scruples may be considered, along with all the 
other evidence, for whatever weight may appear 
appropriate. ) 

(3) As a general rule, refusal of minor sur- 
gery should be considered unreasonable in the 
absence of substantial contraindications. Cases 
of major surgical operations may be reasonable 
or unreasonable, according to the circumstances. 
The age of the patient, previous unsuccessful 
operations, existing physical or mental contrain- 
dications, and any special risks, should all be 
taken into consideration. 

(4) As a matter of policy, surgery shall not 
be performed on a person over his protest if 
he is mentally competent. 

(5) In medical, dental or diagnostic cases, the 
board should show the need and risk of the 
recommended procedure. 

(6) If a medical board decides that a diag- 
nostic, medical, dental or surgical procedure is 
indicated, these findings must be made known 
to the patient. The board's report shall show 
that the patient was afforded an opportunity to 
submit a written statement explaining the 
grounds for his refusal, and any statement sub- 
mitted shall be forwarded with the board's re- 
port. The patient should be advised that even 
if his disability originally arose in line of duty, 
its continuance would be attributable to his 
unreasonable refusal to cooperate in its cor- 
rection; and that the continuance of the dis- 
ability might, therefore, result in the member's 
separation without benefits. 

(7) The patient should be advised that section 
1207 of Title 10, U.S. Code, precludes dis- 
position of his case under chapter 61 of Title 
10, U.S. Code, if his disability is due to inten- 
tional misconduct, or willful neglect, or if it 
was incurred during a period of unauthorized 
absence. He should be further advised that 
benefits from the Veterans' Administration will 
be dependent upon a finding that his disability 
is in line of duty and is not due to his own 
willful misconduct. He should be further advised 
that the Social Security Act contains special 
provisions relating to benefits for "disabled" 
persons, and certain provisions relating to per- 
sons disabled "in line of duty" during service in 
the Armed Forces. In many instances persons 
deemed to have "remediable" disorders have 
been held not "disabled" within the meaning 
of that term as used in the statute, and Federal 
courts have upheld that interpretation. One who 
is deemed unreasonably to have refused to under- 
go available surgical procedures may be deemed 
both "not disabled" and "not in the line of 
duty." 



(8) The board's report shall be forwarded 
direct to the Central PEB except in those cases 
where the convening authority desires that the 
case be referred for Departmental review. 

18-16. MILITARY UNSUITABILITY CASES 

(1) Subject to the provisions of BUMEDINST 
1910.2 series, certain designated activities may 
discharge by action upon a report of a medical 
board, by reason of unsuitability, members who 
suffer from certain designated conditions. These 
conditions are considered to constitute military 
unsuitability provided the defects are primary 
and not secondary to disease or injury. Attention 
is invited to current regulations in BUPERS 
Manual or MARCORSEPMAN which provide 
for the disposition of enlished members via 
nonmedical channels by administrative discharge 
for unsuitability. 

18-17. EPTE PHYSICAL DEFECTS 

( 1 ) Subject to the provisions of BUMEDINST 
1910.2 series, certain designated activities may 
discharge by action upon a report of a medical 
board, members who are unfit by reason of 
physical disability which existed prior to enlist- 
ment (EPTE). In addition, in accordance with 
the BUMEDINST 1910.2 series guidelines, 
certain designated activities may discharge by 
action upon a report of a medical board, prior 
to completion of the prescribed recruit train- 
ing syllabus or program, recruits who do not 
meet the physical standards for enlistment or in- 
duction, although such members are not con- 
sidered unfit. (See art. 18-23.) 

(2) In the case of officers, see article 18-12(5). 

18-18. RETURN TO DUTY CASES 

( 1 ) When a medical board is considered by 
the convening authority or other higher author- 
ity to be necessary prior to returning a member 
to full duty, such a report will be prepared and 
disposed of in accordance with guidelines set 
forth in article 18-24. 

18-19. LIMITED DUTY CASES 

(1) When it is determined that a member is 
physically qualified to perform limited duty, but 
temporarily not physically qualified to perform 
full duty, he shall be reported upon by a medical 
board prior to return to duty. When the board 
recommends limited duty, the limitation imposed 
by the member's disability shall be set forth in 
the hoard's report. On the other hand, if the dis- 
ability is of such a nature that recovery is not 
anticipated and it is not expected that the mem- 



18-9 

Change 70 



18-20 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



18-21 



ber will qualify physically for full duty after 
a reasonable period of convalescence, the mem- 
ber's case shall be referred to the Central PEB. 

(2) Periods of limited duty shall normally be 
for 6 months or less. When the convening 
authority is the commanding officer of a naval 
hospital, U.S. naval hospital, Commandant of 
the Fourteenth Naval District or the Com- 
manding Officer of the Naval Submarine Med- 
ical Center an initial period of limited duty 
of 6 months or less may be approved in the case 
of enlisted personnel without departmental 
approval. In all cases where the recommended 
period of limited duty exceeds 6 months, a 
second period of limited duty is recommended, 
the member submits a statement in rebuttal 
to the board's finding or recommendations, the 
case involves other than an enlisted member, or 
the convening authority is other than noted 
above, Departmental review and action is re- 
quired. 

(3) Members previously classified as fit for 
limited duty only, who improve and are con- 
sidered physically qualified for full duty, shall 
be reevaluated with a view to reclassification. 

(4) In all cases where an officer or enlisted 
member of the Navy or Marine Corps is returned 
to limited duty as a result of Departmental 
action on a medical board report, the member 
shall be reevaluated with subsequent appearance 
before another medical board. The board's re- 
port, in such cases, shall be forwarded to BUMED 
(Code 3322) for action. 

(5) BUPERS and MARCORPS maintain list- 
ings for officer personnel on limited duty for 
physical reasons and issue orders for reevaluation 
at appropriate times, where necessary. It shall 
be the responsibility of the enlisted member's 
commanding officer to insure that he is re- 
evaluated at the designated time. 

18-20. SPECIAL CASES 

( 1 ) Current regulations permit the acceptance 
into the Navy or Marine Corps of a physically 
disqualified individual provided ( 1 ) it is deter- 
mined at the departmental level that he has 
demonstrated in the pursuit of his civilian occu- 
pation, profession, or avocation that he can 
perform satisfactory active service; and (2) 
a waiver of the physical standards is recom- 
mended by BUMED and granted by BUPERS or 
MARCORPS, as appropriate. On the other hand, 
it is possible that the member may subsequently 
demonstrate his inability to perform satisfactory 
service by reason of his previously waived defect. 
In such cases, the procedures set forth below 
shall be observed. 



(a) Appropriate evaluation is required with 
subsequent appearance before a medical board. 
The board's report shall include statements 
from the member's division officer, department 
head, or executive officer describing any func- 
tional impairment that might be attributed to 
the previously waived defect. 

(b) The medical board shall make appro- 
priate recommendations regarding the member's 
fitness or unfitness to perform satisfactory active 
service. 

(c) The convening authority, in his en- 
dorsement on the board's report, shall indicate 
his concurrence or nonconcurrence with the 
board's findings and recommendations, and make 
such other comments as may be considered 
pertinent to the member's defect or ability to 
perform satisfactory service. 

(d) The board's report shall be forwarded 
to BUPERS or MARCORPS, as appropriate, via 
BUMED. 

18-21. BOARD PROCEDURE 

( 1 ) The board shall consider and report upon 
the case of a member who is referred to it by 
competent authority. It shall require and ex- 
amine such records in the case as are necessary 
to formulate a considered conclusion regarding 
the member's present state of health and the 
recommendations required. The board's report 
and recommendations shall be discussed with 
the member provided it is considered by com- 
petent medical authority that such discussion 
will not adversely affect his health. 

(2) Unless it is considered that the infor- 
mation contained in the board's report might 
have an adverse affect on the member's physical 
or mental health, 

(a) the member shall be allowed to read 
the board's report or be furnished a copy there- 
of; 

(b) significant findings and opinions and 
recommended disposition shall be brought to 
the member's attention; 

(c) he shall be afforded an opportunity to 
submit a statement in rebuttal to any portion of 
the board's report. If a member submits a state- 
ment in rebuttal, the board shall review same 
and make any change which is considered appro- 
priate or prepare a statement in surrebuttal. 

(3) The NAVMED Form 6100/2 statement 
concerning the findings and recommendations 
of the board shall be completed, referred to the 
member for signature, and witnessed. This form 
and statement in rebuttal, if applicable, shall 
accompany the board's report but shall not be 
incorporated into it, 



18-10 

Change 70 



18-22 CHAPTER 18. MEDICAL DISPOSITION 18-22 



18-22. BOARD PREPARATION 

( 1 ) The medical ' board report shall be sub- 
mitted to the convening authority on NAVMED 
6100/1 (Medical Board Report Cover Sheet). 
The SF 502 (Narrative Summary) may be used 
for the body of the board's report provided the 
SF 502 includes all pertinent data concerning the 
case; otherwise, the body of the report shall be 
prepared on plain white bond paper. 

(a) The cover sheet shall be completed in 
accordance with the guidelines set forth in article 
18-24. 

(b) The body of the report shall present, in 
narrative form, all pertinent data concerning 
each complaint, symptom, disease, injury or dis- 
ability presented by the member which causes 
or is alleged to cause impairment of health. 
The facts should be presented briefly and con- 
cisely. Emphasis must be placed on the detailed 
recording of each physical disability in such 
a manner that subsequent evaluation by adjudi- 
cative bodies can be made on the basis of the rec- 
ords. 

(c) The narrative section of the board's 
report should be no more and certainly no less 
than a well written narrative summary and 
should answer the following questions: 

(1) Why did the patient enter the hos- 
pital? 

(2) What physical findings (negative 
and positive) were found? 

(3) What were the results of pertinent 
laboratory and X-ray tests? 

(4) What medical or surgical treatment 
was rendered? 

(5) What was the current physical con- 
dition of the patient at the time the medical 
board report was written? 

(6) What is the prognosis and recom- 
mendation of the Board concerning the dis- 
position to be effected in the case? 

(7) What instructions were given to the 
patient, such as medication to be taken, physical 
restrictions, etc.? 

(8) Have all conditions and abnormal- 
ities been recorded? 

(2) Since the medical board is considered the 
heart of the Navy's disability evaluation system, 
incomplete, inaccurate, misleading, or delayed 
reports may result in an injustice to the mem- 
ber or the Government. The history of his ill- 
ness; objective findings on examinations; results 
of X-ray and laboratory tests; reports of con- 
sultations; and subjective conclusions with the 
reasons therefor, are pertinent evidence to sup- 
port findings and recommendations. The mere 



presence of a physical disability does not neces- 
sarily render the member unfit for duty. The 
board's report shall clearly reflect the member's 
functional impairment, if any. 

(a) Apparent contradictions in the records, 
such as disagreement with a report or consulta- 
tion, should be throughly explained. The con- 
dition of a patient following thereapy, his re- 
sponse thereto, the degree of severity of his 
disease or injury, and, when appropriate, their 
effect on his functional ability must be de- 
scribed in detail. 

(3) If a previous medical board has been pre- 
pared, it is not necessary to repeat the detailed 
information contained therein pertaining to past 
history. In such cases, attention may be invited 
to the previous report and the description of the 
present illness restricted to the interval history 
and currently pertinent data. 

(4) Any facts which are not a matter of rec- 
ord or of personal knowledge to a member of 
the board, but which are based on the member's 
own statement, should be recorded as "accord- 
ing to the member's own statement." Medical- 
social reports must be held in the strictest 
confidence, should not be shown to the member, 
and information derived therefrom shall not be 
entered in the board's report. Such data are 
obtained primarily for the benefit of the patient 
in diagnosis and treatment, and may be utilized 
for the purpose of further interrogation of the 
patient if pertinent. Any additional history so 
obtained from the patient or from other sources 
contacted as a result of "lead information" may 
be incorporated as a part of the history of the 
case. 

(5) In the following instances, the board's 
report shall contain a statement concerning the 
member's capability to manage his own affairs: 

(a) All psychoses. 

(b) Organic brain disorders when the 
board's report indicates impairment of judg- 
ment. 

(c) Psychoneuroses, severe, where possible 
impairment of judgment is indicated. 

(d) Any case in which a member ha» pre- 
viously been declared incapable of managing his 
own affairs. 

(e) All psychiatric cases of sufficient sever- 
ity to require further hospitalization. 

(6) Except where considered necessary, the 
information reported on the cover sheet need 
not be repeated in the body of the board's re- 
port. 

(7) Statistical coding of medical board re- 
ports shall be in accordance with the guidelines 
set forth in articles 18-23(11) and 18-27. 

18-11 

Change 70 



18-23 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



18-23 



18-23. REPORT ROUTING AND DISPO- 
SITION 

(1) Original and two copies of the medical 
board report on Coast Guard members to the 
Commandant of the U.S. Coast Guard via the 
commanding officer of the unit to which 
attached; or via the district Coast Guard officer 
of the district in which the medical treatment 
facility is located. Copy to Health Record. Copy 
to clinical record. 

(2) Original and two copies of the medical 
board report on Army members shall be referred 
to the local liaison officer, if available, or to the 
Adjutant General, Department of the Army, 
Washington, D.C Copy to Health Record. Copy 
to clinical record. 

(3) Original and two copies of the medical 
board reports on Air Force members shall be re- 
ferred to the local liaison officer, if available, or 
to the Deputy Chief of Staff, Personnel, Head- 
quarters, U.S. Air Force, Washington, D.C. Copy 
to Health Record. Copy to clinical record. 

(4) Original and two copies of the medical 
board report (with terminated Health Record) 
on Navy and Marine Corps members separated in 
compliance with the provisions of BUMED1NST 
1910.2 series to BUMED (Code 3322). Copy to 
service record. Copy to clinical record, if avail- 
able. 

(5) Original and two copies of the medical 
board report to Central PEB on those Navy and 
Marine Corps members referred to a PEB by the 
commanding officer of a naval hospital or U.S. 
naval hospital, the Commanding Officer of the 
Naval Submarine Medical Center, or the Com- 
mandant of the Fourteenth Naval District. Copy 
to clinical record. (See art. 18-24 (Item #21).) 

(6) Original and two copies of the medical 
board report to BUMED (Code 3322) on all 
other Navy and Marine Corps members referred 
to a PEB when the convening authority is other 
thaa,those listed in paragraph (5) above. Copy 
to Health Record. Copy to clinical record. 

(7) Three copies of the medical board report 
(one signed by board members and convening 
authority) to BUMED (Code 3322) on all Navy 
and Marine Corps officers returned to limited 
duty or full duty. Original to Health Record. 
Copy to clinical record. 

(8) Original to Health Record, copy to serv- 
ice record and copy to clinical record on all Navy 
and Marine Corps enlisted members returned to 



six months or less limited duty or full duty by 
the commanding officer of a naval hospital or 
U.S. naval hospital, the Commanding Officer of 
the Naval Submarine Medical Center, or the 
Commandant of the Fourteenth Naval District. 

(a) Three copies of the medical board re- 
port (one copy signed by board members and 
convening authority) to BUMED (Code 3322) 
on all cases involving limited duty in excess of 
six months. Original to Health Record. Copy to 
clinical record. 

(b) In all cases involving reevaluation, 
following in initial period of limited duty, and 
the convening authority approves" the board's 
recommendation for an additional period of 
limited duty, three copies of the medical board 
report (one copy signed by board members and 
convening authority) shall be forwarded to 
BUMED (Code 3322). Original to Health Rec- 
ord. Copy to clinical record. 

(9) Three copies of the medical board report 
(one copy signed by board members and con- 
vening authority) to BUMED (Code 3322) 
on all other Navy and Marine Corps enlisted 
members returned to limited duty or full duty 
when the convening authority is other than 
those listed in paragraph (8) above. Original to 
Health Record. Copy to clinical record. 

(10) Three copies of the medical board report 
(one copy signed by board members and con- 
vening authority) to BUMED (Code 3322) in 
all other Navy and Marine Corps cases where 
Departmental action is indicated. Original to 
Health Record. Copy to clinical record, if avail- 
able. 

(11) In all cases, except those referred to the 
Central Physical Evaluation Board, the first 
carbon copy of the medical board report shall be 
submitted for automatic data processing as set 
forth below. (For cases referred to the Central 
PEB the first carbon copy shall be destroyed.) 

(a) Subsequent to action by the convening 
authority and prior to submission to the assigned 
Naval Medical Regional Data Center (NMRDC) 
for automatic data processing, the activities 
listed in subparagraph (1) shalt accomplish 
statistical coding of the first carbon copy in the 
spaces provided in accordance with BUMED- 
INST 6100.5. 

(J) Activity assignments to NMRDC (s) 
are as follows: 



18-12 

Change 70 



18-24 



CHAPTER 18. MEDICAL DISPOSITION 



18-24 



Activity NMRDC 
Naval Hospitals. U.S. Naval Hospitals and Naval The Naval Medical Regional Data Center assigned by 

Submarine Medical Center section XV, enclosure ( 1 ) of BUMEDINST 6300.3 

Marine Corps Recruit Depot, Parris Island, S.C. NAVHOSP Beaufort, S.C. 

Marine Corps Base, Camp Lejeune, N.C. NAVHOSP Camp Lejeune, N.C, 

Marine Corns Base, Camp Pendleton, Calif. NAVHOSP Camp Pendleton, Calif. 

Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, 111. NAVHOSP Great Lakes, 111. 



Marine Corps Recruit Depot and Naval 

Training Center, San Diego, Calif. 
Naval Training Center, Orlando, Fla. 



NAVHOSP San Diego, Calif. 
.NAVHOSP Orlando, Fla. 



(b) All other activities authorized to con- 
duct medical boards shall forward the first 
carbon copy of the Medical Board Report Cover 
Sheet (statistical coding not required) to the 
Officer in Charge, Naval Medical Data Services 
Center, National Naval Medical Center, Bethes- 
da, Maryland 20014. 

(c) Submission schedules for the statisti- 
cally coded Medical Board Report Cover Sheets 
to the NMRDC for activities assigned in sub- 
paragraph (a) (1) above are contained in BU- 
MEDINST 6100.5. 

(d) Activities assigned to NAVMEDATA- 
SERVCEN Bethesda, Maryland, shall accumulate 
and forward the first carbon copies of the Med- 
ical Board Report Cover Sheets in batch lots 
monthly in time to reach the NAVMEDATA- 
SERVCEN by the 15th of the following month. 
Forward via air mail where appropriate. 

(12) Copy of the medical board report with 
copy of the preentry physical examinations shall 
be forwarded to Headquarters, Army Recruiting 
Command, Fort Monroe, Virginia 23351 on all 
EPTE separations with one year or less active 
service and the preentry physical examination 
was performed at an Armed Forces examing and 
entrance station. 



18-24. MEDICAL BOARD REPORT COVER 
SHEET (NAVMED 6100/1) 

item 1, FROM/TO /VIA, — 

FROM. — Enter the name and address of the 
medical facility where the medical board was 
held. 

TO. — Enter Chief of Naval Personnel, Com- 
mandant of Marine Corps, or the convening 
authority, as applicable. See article 18-23 re- 
garding Army, Air Force, and Coast Guard 
personnel. 

VIA. — Enter the name and location of the 
convening authority, other administrative com- 
mand (s) in the chain of command, and the 
Chief, BUMED, if applicable. 

Item 2, NAME. — Enter last name, first name, 
and middle initial of the member appearing 
before the Board. 



Item 3, DUTY STATION.— Enter the official 
name and address of the duty station (shore 
base or ship) to which the member was per- 
manently attached at the time the condition for 
which the board was held arose. Enter "NA" 
for other than Navy and Marine Corps members. 

Item 4, SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER. — 
Enter the member's nine-digit social security 
number. 

Item 5, SEX/RACE.— Enter "M" for male or 
"F" for female; and enter one of the following 
as applicable for race: Caucasian, Negroid, Mon- 
golian, American Indian, or Malayan. 

Item 6, DATE OF BIRTH.— Eater numeric 
date, month (numeric symbols not authorized), 
and calendar year of birth of member. 

Item 7, LENGTH OF SERVICE.— Enter length 
of service in years and months. All active duty 
service in all U.S. uniformed services shall be 
counted. Example: For less than 12 months active 
service, use 00 (NO) years and number of months 
completed. If less than 1 month active service, 
use 00 (NO) years and 00 (NO) months. For 12 
months active service use 01 (one) year and 
00 (NO) months. 

Item 8, GRADE/RATE, BRANCH, and 
DESIGNATOR/ MOS.— 

(1) Grade/Rate. — Enter the grade or rate 
abbreviation of the member. For Navy and 
Coast Guard enlisted personnel include the rate; 
i.e., a Hospital Corpsman, Second Class, enter 
HM2. 

(2) Branch — Enter branch of service; i.e., 
USN, USMC, USA, USAF, or USCG. 

(3) Designator /MOS. — This item must be 
completed for naval officers and all Marine Corps 
members as set forth below: 

(a) Navy Officer /Warrant Officer. — Enter 
the four digit designator in accordance with the 
Register of Commissioned and Warrant Officers 
of the Navy and Marine Corps and Reserve 
Officers on Active Duty, NAVPERS 15018. 

(b) Marine Corps Officer and Enlisted. — 
Enter the four digit Military Occupational 
Specialty (MOS) number in accordance with the 
Military Occupational Specialty Manual (Marine 
Corps Order P-1200.7). 

<c) Coast Guard, Army and Air Force 
members. — Leave blank. 



18-13 
Change 70 



18-24 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



18-24 



Item 9, CAUSE OF INJURY. — If the condition 
entered as item 18A (Primary Diagnosis) is not 
the result of an accident, violence, or poisoning, 
enter "Not applicable"; otherwise enter one of 
the- following: 

(1) Battle casualty. — (Self-explanatory.) 

(2) Motor vehicle." ( Includes automobile 
and motorcycle accidents.) 

(3) Falls. — (Includes falls either on the 
same or different levels on land or on ship.) 

(4) Athletics and sports. — (Includes cases 
involving accidents in organized recreation 
whether for training purposes or not.) 

(5) Assault by another. — (Includes cases 
involving injuries received as a result of fighting 
or attack by another person.) 

(6) Self-inflicted. — (Includes cases involv- 
ing both accidental and intentionally self- 
inflicted wounds.) 

(7) Other external cause. — (Includes cases 
involving accidents, violence, or poisoning with 
causes not classifiable above. ) 

Item 10, MILITARY THEATER OF OPERA- 
TION. — Enter the military theater of operation 
to identify the geographic origin of the disease 
or injury and indicate whether or not the con- 
dition for which the medical board was held 
was a result of hostile or nonhostile action. 

(1) Enter "NA" if not applicable. 

(2) Enter "VN-H" for Vietnam, hostile. 

(3) Enter "VN-NH" for Vietnam, non- 
hostile. 

Item 11, MEMBER'S STATUS.— Place an 
"X" in the appropriate box. The term recruit 
applies to Navy or Marine Corps personnel un- 
dergoing basic training. 

Item 12, DATE AND PLACE OF EN- 
TRANCE PHYSICAL.— Enter the name and 
location of the facility that conducted the en- 
trance physical examination if the member has 
less than 1 year of active service; otherwise 
leave blank. 

Item 13, ORIGIN OF CONDITION.— Place 
"X" in appropriate box. In determining proper 
entry, the following is provided for the infor- 
mation and guidance of the board. 

(1) Disease or injury noted prior to service, 
which clearly had its inception prior to service, 
will be considered to have been aggravated, 
when such disability underwent an increase in 
severity during the service, unless such increase 
in severity is clearly shown to have been due 
to the natural progress of the disease. 

(2) In the case of members with more than 
three years of continuous active duty, any in- 
crease in the severity of a preexisting disease or 
injury will be considered as evidence of service 
aggravation, provided that such increase in sever- 



ity was not due to the member's intentional mis- 
conduct or willful neglect or was not incurred 
during a period of unauthorized absence. 

(3) The usual effects of medical and surg- 
ical treatment in service, having the effect of 
ameliorating disease or other conditions incurred 
before entry into service, including postopera- 
tive scars and absence of poorly functioning 
parts or organs, do not constitute aggravation, 
unless the treatment was required to relieve dis- 
ability which had been aggravated by service. 

Item 14, ADMITTED TO SICKLIST.— 

(1) YES OR NO.— Place an "X" in the 
appropriate box to indicate whether or not the 
member was admitted to the sicklist for the 
condition for which the Medical Board was held. 

(2) DATE OF ADMISSION.— Enter numer- 
ic date, month (numeric symbols not author- 
ized ) and year the member was admitted to the 
sicklist for the condition for which the Medical 
Board was held. If not admitted enter "NA" for 
not applicable. 

(3) DATE OF DISPOSITION.— Enter 
numeric date, month (numeric symbols not 
authorized) and year the member was dis- 
charged from the sicklist. If not admitted enter 
"NA" or if admitted and not yet discharged 
by the time of action by the convening authority, 
enter date signed by convening authority. 

Item 15, DATE OF BOARD.— Enter numeric 
date, month (numeric symbols not authorized), 
and year the Medical Board met. Do not record 
the date the report was typed, signed, or for- 
warded. 

Item 16, INDICATED DISPOSITION.— Place 
"X" in appropriate box. 

(1) When the indicated disposition of the 
board is discharge from the service by reason of 
a physical disability, which the board considered 
as not incurred in or aggravated by service, the 
member shall be fully advised that under 10 
USC 1214 he is entitled, as a matter of right, to a 
full and fair hearing before a PEB, if he de- 
mands such hearing. Should the member, after 
being advised of his rights to a full and fair hear- 
ing, not desire such a hearing prior to discharge, 
he shall be required to certify in writing that 
he waives such rights using NAVMED 6100/3 
(Medical Board Certificate Relative to a PEB 
Hearing). 

(2) When the indicated disposition is dis- 
charge by reason of military unsuitability for 
service due to personality disorders and mental 
retardation, the member shall sign a NAVMED 
6100/2 (Medical Board Statement of Patient) 
which indicates that he has been informed of 
the board's findings and does or does not desire 
to submit a statement in rebuttal. The member's 



18-14 

Change 70 



18-24 



CHAPTER 18. MEDICAL DISPOSITION 



18-24 



signed NAVMED 6100/2 shall be forwarded in- 
stead of a NAVMED 6100/3 which has no appli- 
cation in the absence of a physical disability. 

Item 17, DOCUMENTS ATTACHED— Place 
an "X" in the appropriate box/boxes. 

Items 18A through 18D, DIAGNOSIS/DIAG- 
NOSES.- Instructions for recording — 

( 1 ) General. — Information on established 
diagnoses related to the medical board are needed 
not only for legal reasons but also for planning 
and evaluation purposes at the Bureau and de- 
partmental levels. The diagnostic nomenclature 
to be used in recording these diagnoses will be 
based on and consistent with the Current Med- 
ical Terminology (CMT) and Standard Nomen- 
clature of Diseases and Operations (SNDO), 
current editions. When recording the diagnosis, 
care should be taken to make it as complete and 
definite as is possible. Vague and general ex- 
pressions are to be avoided. In those instances 
where the specific descriptive title required does 
not appear in the CMT or SNDO, the condition 
should be described and recorded in language 
currently accepted as good professional usage. 

(2) Order of Diagnoses. — Space has been re- 
served for the recording of four diagnoses. The 
first diagnosis listed— PRIMARY DIAGNOSIS — 
should be the major diagnosis or condition for 
which the medical board was convened. In those 
cases where there is more than one diagnosis or 
condition to be recorded, the following rules 
apply. 

(a) If the diagnoses are unrelated, the 
primary diagnosis should be the most significant. 

(b) If there is a combination of related 
causes, the primary diagnosis should be the one 
which was determined to be the precipitating 
factor for the other diagnosis or diagnoses. 
When multiple diagnoses are included in a single 
entry, the physician should indicate the pri- 
mary diagnosis. For example, in the case of the 
diagnosis "schizophrenic reaction acute, un- 
differentiated type due to drug ingestion, LSD 
and Mescaline," the diagnosis "drug ingestion" 
will be considered as the primary diagnosis. 

(c) The second, third, and fourth diag- 
noses should be recorded in order of importance. 
Determination of the first four diagnoses to be 
recorded, in the event there are more than four, 
should be made by members of the board. 

Item 19, REMARKS.— May be used by the 
board when considered necessary. When the 
indicated disposition is limited duty, the board 
shall set forth the major physical limitations 
imposed by the member's condition and the 
length of time that the member should be re- 
tained in a limited duty status, i.e., "No heavy 
lifting or bending — 6 months." 



Item 20, BOARD MEMBERS AND SIGNA- 
TURES. — Type or stamp the name, grade, corps 
and branch of service of each member. Signatures 
of each member shall appear in the space pro- 
vided. Facsimile signature stamps shall not be 
used. The board shall then forward the report 
with the applicable NAVMED 6100/3 certificate 
or NAVMED 6100/2 statement signed by the 
member to the convening authority. 

Item 21, FIRST ENDORSEMENTS. — From : 
Convening Authority. — 

( 1 ) Where appearance before a PEB is the 
indicated disposition: 

(a) When the indicated disposition of 
the board is appearance before a PEB and the 
convening authority of the medical board con- 
curs and is the commanding officer of a naval 
hospital or U.S. naval hospital, the Commanding 
Officer of the Naval Submarine Medical Center, 
or the Commandant of the Fourteenth Naval 
District, he shall endorse and forward an original 
and two copies of the medical board report and 
other required documents to the Central PEB 
located in the Office of Naval Disability Evalua- 
tion, Washington, D.C. 20390. In this connection, 
a copy of the member's current Health Record, 
injury report or investigative report, when 
appropriate, and the following clinical record 
documents shall accompany the medical board 
report — a copy (photostatic, quick-copy, typed, 
etc.) of the history, physical examination, doc- 
tor's progress notes, all laboratory, X-ray and 
operative reports, and all consultations. In addi- 
tion, color photographs (2x2 color slides are 
acceptable) should be provided in those cases 
involving scarring with disfigurement, pigmenta- 
tion, or in cases of unusual deformities such as 
ankylosis of individual fingers. Orders shall not 
be issued for personal appearance before a PEB 
until, and unless, the Office of Naval Disability 
Evaluation (Central PEB) advises the appro- 
priate authority that the member has requested 
personal appearance before the board. Also, 
orders for personal appearance shall not be 
issued in the case of mentally incompetent mem- 
bers. The office of Naval Disability Evaluation 
refers all cases involving mentally incompetent 
members to a PEB empowered to conduct formal 
hearings for action by qualified counsel. Wheth- 
er such a hearing is deemed necessary is a de- 
cision of the qualified counsel after consultation 
with the member's legal representative. 

(b) When the convening authority of 
the medical board is other than the above and 
referral to a PEB is the recommended disposi- 
tion, the medical board report shall be forwarded 
to the Chief of Naval Personnel or the Com- 
mandant of the Marine Corps, as appropriate 
for action. 



18^15 

Change 70 



18-24 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



18-24 



(c) When the recommended disposition 
is appearance before a PEB and the convening 
authority of the medical board does not concur, 
the convening authority shall advise the member 
concerned of his nonconcurrence and afford the 
member an opportunity to submit a statement in 
rebuttal. The convening authority shall then 
forward the medical board report, the member's 
signed statement, and a full statement setting 
forth his reasons for nonconcurrence to the Chief 
of Naval Personnel or the Commandant of the 
Marine Corps, as appropriate, via the Chief, 
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, for determina- 
tion as to disposition to be effected. 

(d) Orders for a personal appearance 
before a PEB empowered to conduct a formal 
hearing shall be issued by the authority which 
referred a case to the Disability Evaluation Sys- 
tem upon notification from the Director, Office 
of Naval Disability Evaluation (Central PEB), 
that such appearance has been requested by the 
party or that a formal hearing is in the best 
interest of the party and the Government. Person- 
nel who are in a patient status shall be trans- 
ferred from hospital to hospital for personal 
appearance before a PEB in accordance with 
U.S. Navy Travel Instructions. Transportation 
through facilities of the Medical Air Evacuation 
System shall be utilized to the fullest extent 
possible. 

(e) If further hospitalization is indicated, 
the member shall be retained on the sicklist until 
recommended findings have been made by the 
Central PEB. If further hospitalization is not 
indicated, the member may be discharged from 
the sicklist and transferred to a nearby appro- 
priate administrative command to await counsel- 
ing. The member shall not be sent home await- 
ing orders, granted other than emergency leave, 
or transferred to another activity until the recom- 
mended findings of the Central PEB have been 
received and accepted by the member. In those 
cases where the member has been discharged 
from the sicklist and does not accept the recom- 
mended prima facie findings of the Central PEB, 
the member shall be transferred through medical 
channels to the appropriate hospital for a formal 
hearing. 

(f ) The convening authority of a medical 
board for good and sufficient reason, and with 
the consent of the member concerned, may with- 
draw any case he has referred to the Central PEB 
so long as the case is still before the Central 
PEB and recommended findings have not yet 
been made. If recommended findings have been 
made by the Central PEB and the convening 
authority considers that good and sufficient rea- 
sons exist for withdrawal of the case from the 



disability evaluation system, the convening 
authority may, with the consent of the member 
concerned, request the Chief of Naval Personnel 
or the Commandant of the Marine Corps, as 
appropriate, or the Chief, Bureau of Medicine 
and Surgery, to withdraw the case under the 
provisions of chapter 8 of the Disability Evalua- 
tion Manual. 

( 2 ) Where the indicated disposition of the 
medical board is other than appearance before a 
PEB: 

(a) The convening authority of the med- 
ical board shall include a statement in his for- 
warding endorsement indicating whether final 
action has been taken on the medical board re- 
port by authorized local action. If the report is 
submitted to the Navy Department for action, 
the convening authority shall state whether the 
member has been retained on the sicklist; or, if 
discharged from the sicklist, the station to which 
transferred to await Departmental action on the 
report. 

(b) In all cases where the indicated dis- 
position of the board is to return an officer of 
the Navy or Marine Corps to limited duty or full 
duty and the convening authority concurs, the 
report with the officer's signed statement shall 
be forwarded to BUMED (Code 3322). 

(c) In those cases where the indicated dis- 
position of the board is to return an enlisted 
Navy or Marine Corps member to six months or 
less of limited duty and the convening authority 
is the commanding officer of a naval or U.S. 
naval hospital, the Commanding Officer of the 
Naval Submarine Medical Center, or the Com- 
mandant of the Fourteenth Naval District, the 
convening authority may approve the board's 
report, without Departmental approval, pro- 
vided the following criteria are met: (1) it is 
the member's first period of limited duty for 
the current condition, (2) it is reasonably ex- 
pected that the member will be able to return 
to full unrestricted duty on a worldwide basis in 
his grade and MOS following the initial period 
of limited duty and (3) the member did not 
submit a statement in rebuttal to the board's 
findings or recommendation. The convening 
authority shall refer all board reports to BUMED 
(Code 3322) where the period of limited duty 
is for more than six months. Subsequent periods 
of limited duty must also be referred to BUMED 
(Code 3322) for Departmental action. In all 
other cases not meeting the above criteria or 
where the convening authority does not desire to 
approve the board's recommendation for limited 
duty, the board's report shall be referred to 
BUMED (Code 3322) for review and appro- 
priate disposition. 



18-16 

Change 70 



18-25 



CHAPTER 18. MEDICAL DISPOSITION 



18-26 



(d) In those cases where the indicated 
disposition of the board is to return an enlisted 
Navy or Marine Corps member to full duty and 
the convening authority is the commanding 
officer of a naval or U.S. naval hospital, the Com- 
manding Officer of the Naval Submarine Medical 
Center, or the Commandant of the Fourteenth 
Naval District, the convening authority may 
approve the board's report, without Depart- 
mental approval, provided the following criteria 
are met: ( 1 ) the board's report does not recom- 
mend any geographical or physical limitations 
that would preclude worldwide sea or shore 
assignment in his grade and MOS, assignment 
to a combat zone, or the requirement for follow- 
up treatments or evaluations that could not be 
accomplished by other than a naval hospital 
and (2) the member did not submit a state- 
ment in rebuttal to the board's findings or 
recommendation. In those cases not meeting the 
above criteria or when the convening authority 
does not desire to approve the board's report for 
return to full duty, the board's report shall be 
referred to BUMED (Code 3322) for review and 
appropriate disposition. 

(e) In those medical board reports sub- 
mitted for Departmental action and a previous 
medical board report is referred to in the current 
board's report, provide a copy of the previous 
medical board report in order that reviewing 
authorities can have access to all available data. 

(f ) In those cases where the member has 
refused medical, dental or surgical treatment for 
a condition or defect which has interferred with 
his performance of duty (see art. 18-15), the 
board's report shall be forwarded directly to the 
Central PEB except where the convening author- 
ity desires that the case be referred for Depart- 
mental review. 

(g) In all cases, except those activities 
authorized to take action in accordance with the 
special instructions published in BUMEDINST 
1910.2 series, where the indicated disposition is 
release from active duty, discharge, or that a re- 
vocable commission be revoked by reason of 
unfitness or unsuitability, the board's report 
together with the applicable NAVMED 6100/3 
certificate or the member's NAVMED 6100/2 
statement shall be forwarded to BUMED (Code 
3322). Where applicable and when appropriate, 
the member shall be transferred to the nearest 
separation activity in the contiguous United 
States to await Departmental review of his case. 

(h) The convening authority of the med- 
ical board shall include in his endorsement, his 
concurrence or nonconcurrence in the board's 
report, and such other comment as is considered 
warranted about any part of the report, partic- 



ularly when he does not concur in the opinions or 
recommendations of the board. The convening 
authority of the medical board appropriately 
may discuss with the board and advise or recom- 
mend changes in opinions or recommendations 
if such are contrary to law or to sound medical 
judgment, but it is not appropriate to direct 
that the board arrive at specific findings or 
recommendations . 

(i) When the indicated disposition is re- 
turn to limited duty or full duty and the con- 
vening authority of the medical board does not 
concur, the convening authority shall advise the 
member concerned of his nonconcurrence and 
his reasons therefor and afford the member an 
opportunity to submit a statement in rebuttal. 
The convening authority shall then forward the 
board's report, the member's signed statement, 
and a full statement setting forth his reasons for 
nonconcurrence to BUMED (Code 3322) for 
determination as to disposition to be effected. 

(j) In all cases, except those referred to 
a PEB, the medical board report shall be com- 
pleted and forwarded for machine processing as 
set forth in article 18-23 ( 11 ) . 

18-25. REQUEST FOR MEDICAL REC- 
ORDS 

( 1 ) When the indicated disposition of tlie 
medical board is referral to a PEB and the con- 
vening authority concurs and is the commanding 
officer of a naval hospital or U.S. naval hospital, 
the Commanding Officer of the Naval Submarine 
Medical Center, or the Commandant of the Four- 
teenth Naval District, he shall advise BUMED 
(Code 3342), and request that the member's 
medical records be forwarded to the Central 
PEB located in the Office of Naval Disability 
Evaluation. In all other cases, where the in- 
dicated disposition is referral to a PEB, the 
Central PEB shall take such action as may be 
necessary to obtain the medical records. 

18-26. REQUESTS FOR STATEMENT OF 
SERVICE 

( 1 ) The command responsible for making the 
determination that a member's case be referred to 
a PEB (generally the convening authority of 
the medical board, BUPERS, or MARCORPS) 
shall initiate a request to BUPERS or MAR- 
CORPS, as appropriate, that a statement of serv- 
ice for the member concerned be provided to 
the Central PEB. Requests addressed to BUPERS 
shall be sent to Pers-E. Requests addressed to 
MARCORPS shall be sent to Code DM. All re- 
quests, should be by message, when appropriate, 



18-17 

Change 70 



18-27 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



18-29 



and should include the member's military service 
number and social security number full name, 
grade or rate and Navy Enlisted Classification 
code (NEC) or Military Occupation Specialty 
(MOS), when appropriate. 

18-27, AUTOMATIC DATA PROCESSING 
PROCEDURES 

( 1 ) The content of this article does not apply 
to cases that are referred to the Central PEB for 
action, 

(2) Statistical coding of the first carbon copy 
of the Medical Board Report Cover Sheet shall 
be the responsibility of the activity where the 
medical board was held, with exception of those 
activities forwarding the first carbon copy to 
Naval Medical Data Services Center, National 
Naval Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland. Cod- 
ing in these cases will be the responsibility of 
the Coding Branch, Statistical Division, at the 
NAVMEDATASERCEN. Coding shall be in 
accordance with instructions set forth in BU- 
MEDINST 6100.5 (series). 

( 3 ) Machine processing procedures following 
statistical coding shall be in accordance with 
guidelines set forth in the Naval Medical Data 
Services Handbook (NAVMED P-5069), Chap- 
ter 1 4. 

(4) Report Control Symbol MED 6100-2 has 
been assigned to this reporting requirement, and 



has been approved by the Chief of Naval Opera- 
tions. 

18-28. HEALTH RECORD ENTRY 

(1) The original of the Medical Board Re- 
port shall be filed in the member's Health Rec- 
ord. When the Medical Board Report is for- 
warded for Departmental review and appro- 
priate disposition, a report of the Departmental 
action shall be entered in the member's Health 
Record on the SF 600. 

18-29. DISPOSITION TABLES 

{ 1 ) The following tables are provided for 
the assistance and guidance of field activities re- 
garding the disposition to be made of medical 
board reports on active duty Navy and Marine 
Corps members following the convening author- 
ity's action. See article 18-23 for disposition of 
medical board reports for other Armed Forces 
personnel. 

(2) These tables set forth the disposition to 
be effected on routine noncontested cases. Appli- 
cable articles in this chapter and the special in- 
structions in BUMEDINST 1910.2 series should 
be referred to for guidance in handling the 
exceptions. In all cases where there is doubt as 
to the disposition to be effected, referral to the 
Navy Department is appropriate. 



18-18 

Change 70 



18-29 



CHAPTER 18. MEDICAL DISPOSITION 



18-29 



Table 1 



CONVENING AUTHORITY— CO ALL NAVAL HOSPITALS; CO NAVSUBMEDCEN; AND COM 14 



Medical Board 
Recommendation 



Convening 

Authority 
Concurs 



Disposition of Medical 
Board Report 



Refer to Central PEB (Off/Enl) Yes 

Refer to Central PEB (Off/Enl) ....J No 



Return to Limited Duty ( Enl ) 
(1st 6 mo. or less period). 

Return to Limited Duty ( Enl ) 
( 2nd and subsequent periods ) . 

Return to Limited Duty ( Enl ) 
(more than 6 mos.). 

Return to Limited Duty (Enl) ... 



Yes 

Yes 

Yes or No 
..No 



Return to Limited Duty (Off) Yes or No 



Return to Full Duty (Enl) 
Return to Full Duty (Enl) 

Return to Full Duty (Off) 



..Yes 

..No 



Discharge EPTE Physical Disability 
did not waive rights (Off/Enl). 

Discharge EPTE Physical Disability 
waived rights (Enl). 

Discharge EPTE Physical Disability 
waived rights (Off). 

Discharge Enlisted in Error (Enl) 

Discharge Enlisted in Error (Enl) 



..Yes or No 

Yes 

Yes 



...Fwd to Central PEB, ONDE. 
-Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 
...File in mbr's H.R. 1 

. Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 
....Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 
... Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 
...Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 
.....File in mbr's H.R. 1 
„.Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 
Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 
Fwd to Central PEB, ONDE. 



Yes or No 



Yes 
..No 



Discharge Unsuitable for Service (Enl) Yes 



Discharge Unsuitable for Service (Enl) No 

Discharge Unsuitable for Service (Off) Yes or No 



.Fwd to BUMED (3342) with closed HR 
after endorsement by separation activity in 
accordance with BUMEDINST 1910.2 series. 

..Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 
via BUMED (3322). 

..Fwd to BUMED (3342) with closed HR. 

..Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 
via BUMED (3322). 
Fwd to BUMED (3342) with closed HR 
after endorsement by separation activity in 
accordance with BUMEDINST 1910.2 
series. 

Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 
via BUMED (3322). 
..Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 
via BUMED (3322). 



1 Submit availability report to BUPERS or MARCORPS. 



18-19 

Change 70 



18-29 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



18-29 



Table 2 



CONVENING AUTHORITY— 


■ALL 


OTHER ACTIVITIES (less Naval Hospitals, COM 14 and NAVSUBMEDCEN) 


Medical Board 




Convening 
Authority 


Disposition of Medical 


Recommendation 




Concur! 


Board Report 



Refer to Central PEB (Off/Enl) 

Return to Limited Duty (Off/Enl) 

(Any period)." 
Return to Full Duty (Off/Enl) 



Discharge EPTE Physical 

Disability — waived rights (Enl). 



Discharge EPTE Physical Disability- — 
did not waive rights (Off/Enl). 

Discharge EPTE Physical Disability- 
waived rights (Enl). 

Discharge EPTE Physical Disability- 
waived rights (Off). 

Discharge enlisted in Error (Enl) 



- Yes or 
Yes or 
. Yes or 

Yes .... 



No 



No 



Yes or 

No . .. 
Yes or 

Yes .... 



No 



Discharge enlisted in Error (Enl) No .... 

Discharge Unsuitable for Service (Enl) Yes .... 

Discharge Unsuitable for Service (Enl) No .... 

Discharge Unsuitable for Service (Off) Yes or 



1 Provided convening authority is one of the 
action, otherwise forward to BUPERS or 



Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 

Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 

No Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 

Fwd to BUMED (3342) with 1 closed HR 

after endorsement by separation activity in 
accordance with BUMEDINST 1910.2 
series. 

Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 

- Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 

Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 

Fwd to BUMED (3342) with 1 closed HR 

after endorsement by separation activity in 
accordance with BUMEDINST 1910.2 series. 
- -Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 
via BUMED (3322). 

Fwd to BUMED (3342) with 1 closed HR 

after endorsement by separation activity in 
accordance with BUMEDINST 1910.2 
series. 

Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 
via BUMED (3322). 

- -Fwd to BUPERS or MARCORPS 

via BUMED (3322). 



No 



No 



activities authorized by BUMEDINST 1910.2 series to take local 
MARCORPS via BUMED (3322). 



18-20 
Change 70 



n 



r 



f 




< 



J 



Chapter 19 

FLEET MARINE FORCE 



Sections 



Articles 

I. Departmental Responsibilities 19- 1 thru 19-2 

II. Support 19-10 thru 19-11 

III. Staff Medical Officers 19-20 thru 19-23 

IV. FMF Medical Organization 19-30 thru 19-34 

V. Medical Augmentation of Amphibious Operations 19-40 



Section I. DEPARTMENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES 



U.S. Marine Corps 

Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 

19-1. U.S. Marine Corps 

( 1 ) The Commandant. — 

(a) The Commandant of the Marine Corps 
is directly responsible to the Chief of Naval Op- 
erations for the organization, training, and readi- 
ness of those elements of the operating forces of 
the Marine Corps assigned to the Operating 
Forces of the Navy. The Commandant is respon- 
sible for planning and determining Marine Corps 
needs. He plans, forecasts, and determines Marine 
Corps requirements for equipment, material, per- 
sonnel, and supporting services. In meeting these 
responsibilities the required medical personnel, 
equipment, and supplies are allocated through 
coordination with BUMED. 

(b) Medical duties and facilities available 
within the Marine Corps organization are de- 
tailed in FMFM 4-5, Medical and Dental Sup- 
port, U.S. Marine Corps. Additional information 
on the relationships between the Marine Corps 
and the Navy are provided in the U.S. Navy 
Regulations, Navy Department General Order 
No. 5, and the Marine Corps Manual. 

(2) The Medical Officer, U.S. Marine Corps. — 



Article 

19-1 

19-2 

(a) Mission.— The Medical Officer, U.S. Ma- 
rine Corps, advises the Commandant and staff 
agencies on all medical service matters. 

(b) Functions. — 

(1) In coordination with the appropriate 
staff agencies, determines requirements for, and 
makes recmmendations relative to, medical sup- 
port assigned to the Marine Corps. 

(2) Initiates action to obtain medical per- 
sonnel and material to meet Marine Corps needs. 

(3) Assists staff agencies in the formula- 
tion of landing force and field medical doctrines, 
procedures, and programs. 

(4) As BUMED Code 17, Marine Corps 
Headquarters Liaison Officer, maintains liaison 
between the Commandant of the Marine Corps/ 
Chief BUMED on all matters relating to the 
medical support of the Marine Corps. 

19-2. Bureau of Medicine and Surgery 

(1) The Fleet and Marine Corps Medical Sup- 
port Division administers and coordinates all of 
the BUMED aspects relating to fleet and Marine 
Corps medical support. 



19-1 
Change 71 



( 



o 



i 



19-10 CHAPTER 19. FLEET MARINE FORCE 

Section II. SUPPORT 



Medical Support 

Dental Support 

19-10. Medical Support 

(1) Medical support to the Fleet Marine Force 
(FMF) must satisfy three responsibilities: 

(a) The first responsibility is to conserve the 
combat power of the command by a continuous 
and dynamic preventive medicine program and 
by early return to duty of patients no longer 
requiring medical care. Because of diversity in 
climates, terrain, disease vectors present, and 
many other factors in areas of potential Marine 
deployment, individual and unit preventive med- 
icine measures are necessary at all command eche- 
lons. Supervision and technical direction of pre- 
ventive medicine measures are functions of medi- 
cal personnel. 

(b) The second responsibility is to provide 
the best possible day-to-day care for the sick and 
injured. This encompasses essential diagnosis, 
evaluation or triage, initial medical treatment, 
and evacuation by means available to medical 
facilities appropriately situated and equipped for 
definitive patient care. The chain and methods of 
evacuation are normally as shown in figure 1 (see 
chap. XII, Handbook of the Hospital Corps, 
USN, NAVMED-P-5004, for additional casualty 
flow charts). However, concepts of casualty evac- 



19-11 



Article 

19-10 

19-11 

uation are subject to change with individual situ- 
ations; helicopters frequently bypass the aid sta- 
tion and collecting and clearing companies, 
flying directly to the designated casualty receiv- 
ing ships or to rear-area hospital installations. 

(c) The third responsibility is medical plan- 
ning in support of operations and encompasses 
the determination of, and formulation of plans to 
supply, the expected medical needs (equipment, 
personnel, training, and supporting services) of 
the FMF. 

(2) Operation of medical support in the FMF 
is a command function. Commanders are pro- 
vided medical personnel and equipment to meet 
this responsibility. When organic means are inad- 
equate for a particular situation, additional medi- 
cal support must be requested from the next 
higher echelon. Medical support is planned to 
conform with tactical plans and policies of the 
commander. 

19-11, Dental Support 

(1) Reference should be made to chapter 6, 
sections VII and XII, for information on dental 
support to the Marine Corps. 



19-3 
Chang* 71 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



FRONT LINE 



HELICOPTER, UTTER BEARERS, WALKING 



AID STATION 



AID STATION 



AMBULANCE. AMPHIBIOUS VEHICLE, HEUCOPTER 



*™UANCE. AMPHIBIOUS 



CLEARING STATION 

SHORE 
EVACUATION STATION 

CASUALTY RECEIVING 
SHIPS 



hsucoptW 



CLEARING STATION : 



AMBULANCE, < 

U LANCE, AMPHIBIOUS VEHICLE, LANDING CRAFT, HELICOPTER ■ 

*«CRArr 



SHORE 
EVACUATION STATION 

CASUALTY RECEIVING 
SHIPS 

REAR AREA HOSPITAL 



SHORE 
EVACUATION STATION 



AMPHIBIOUS VEHICLE, LANDINO CRAFT, HELICOPTER 



CASUALTY RECEIVING 
SHIPS 



FORCE HOSPITAL 



AMBULANCE, HEUCOPTER, AMPHIBIOUS VEHICLE, U~~ CRAFT ■ 
<*«*LTV AECEIVIN* , H ,p e . Amcn ^ 



CASUALTY RECEIVING 
SHIPS 

OUT OF 
OBJECTIVE AREA 



Figure 1.— Normal chain and methods of coiuolty evacuation 



19-1* 

Change 71 



19-20 



CHAPTER 19. FLEET MARINE FORCE 



X9-23 



Section III. Staff Medical Officers 



Force Surgeon, FMF 

Division Surgeon, FMF 

Wing Medical Officer 

Force Troops, FMF 

19-20. Force Surgeon, FMF 

(1) The force surgeon, FMF, advises the force 
commander on all medical subjects, supervises 
training of medical personnel and medical units, 
and prepares force medical plans. He also coordi- 
nates the medical service of the landing force 
with that of the amphibious task force, both in 
planning and during operations. 

19-21. Division Surgeon, FMF 

(1) The division surgeon advises and repre- 
sents the division commander in all division med- 
ical service matters. He is a special staff officer 
and has no command function. 

(2) He shall: 

(a) Supervise all division medical activities 
and instruct medical personnel. 

(b) Prepare division medical plans and or- 
ders. 

(c) Recommend to the . division commander 
on medical training and employment of all per- 
sonnel to promote the medical welfare of the 
command. 



Article 

19-20 

19-21 

19-22 

- 19-23 

(d) Advise and recommend on preventive 
medicine, environmental sanitation, and vector 
control measures, and on the care, treatment, and 
evacuation of the sick and wounded. 

<e) Ensure that records are kept and reports 
made. 

{f ) Assign and replace medical personnel. 

(g) Monitor the medical aspects of research 
and development. 

19-22. Wing Medical Officer 

(1) The wing medical officer is a special staff 
officer. He is a flight surgeon and, in addition to 
duties comparable with those of the division sur- 
geon, has cognizance over aeromedical matters 
within the wing. 

19-23. Force Troops, FMF 

(1) The medical officer, force troops, is a spe- 
cial staff officer and his duties are comparable 
with those of the division surgeon. 



19-5 

Change 71 



( 



- 



c 



19-30 



CHAPTER 19. FLEET MARINE FORCE 



19-30 



Section IV. FMF MEDICAL ORGANIZATION 



Medical Battalion 

Group Medical Section 

Squadron Medical Section 

Separate Surgical Company 

Hospital Company (100-Bed Field Hospital) 

19-30. Medical Battalion 

(1) General. — The medical battalion of a Ma- 
rine division consists of a headquarters and serv- 
ice company (H&S) and four identical collecting 
and clearing companies. Its organization and 
equipment allow flexibility of employment to 
meet the varied and specialized conditions of an 
amphibious operation. Normally, one collecting 
and clearing company supports each regimental 
landing team, and the fourth collecting and 
clearing company and H&S company are com- 
bined to form a division hospital for support of 
division troops and to give depth to medical sup- 
port. 

(2) Headquarters and Service Company. — The 
H&S company is composed of the battalion and 
company headquarters, division preventive medi- 
cine section, motor transport section, medical rec- 
ords section, and two shock and surgical teams. 
The company is organized and equipped to per- 
form administrative and service functions for the 
battalion. 

(a) The battalion and company headquar- 
ters contain all the personnel necessary for the 
administration of the company and the battalion. 
The battalion headquarters includes the battalion 
commander, battalion executive officer, a medical 
administrative officer (Medical Service Corps), 
the division psychiatrist, an ophthalmologist, 
three Marine officers (the assistant to the battal- 
ion commander with additional duties as NBCD 
officer (S-2), battalion supply officer (S-4), and 
battalion motor transport officer, and the neces- 
sary Navy and Marine enlisted personnel for cler- 
ical and service duties. The battalion commander 
is responsible to the division commander for the 
training, administration, and operation of the 
battalion. He has additional duties as assistant 
division surgeon. In the latter capacity, he assists 
in preparation of medical plans and estimates 
and performs other duties assigned by the divi- 
sion surgeon. The executive officer assists the bat- 
talion commander in the performance of his du- 
ties and is the battalion plans and training 
officer. He also coordinates the evacuation of cas- 
ualties, and supervises preparation of casualty 
and evacuation reports by the division medical 
records section. 



Article 

19-30 

19-31 

19-3? 

19-33 

19-34 

(b) Division preventive medicine section 
personnel are trained in epidemiology of com- 
municable disease, sanitation, preventive medi- 
cine techniques, and vector control measures. 
They are available to provide technical assistance, 
medical intelligence, and advice to units of the 
division or wing. They conduct inspections and 
supervise environmental sanitation, vector con- 
trol, and communicable and infectious disease 
prevention and control. The preventive medicine 
officer under the division surgeon directs the 
activities of this section. He makes recommenda- 
tions to the division surgeon regarding measures 
to safeguard the command against diseases 
common to an area or to conditions of poor sani- 
tation and vector control. 

(c) The medical records section consolidates 
information essential for the preparation of com- 
plete and accurate medical reports. This section 
contains enlisted clerical personnel from the bat- 
talion and company headquarters. The medical 
administrative officer is a Medical Service Corps 
officer who is an administrative specialist. He has 
direct supervision of the medical records section 
personnel. 

(d) The two shock and surgical teams, each 
consisting of one general surgeon and one anes- 
thesiologist, are used by the battalion commander 
to reinforce the collecting and clearing compa- 
nies, as required, in response to casualty overload. 

(3) Collecting and Clearing Company. — A col- 
lecting and clearing company consists of a com- 
pany headquarters, two clearing platoons, and a 
collecting platoon. It is composed of 7 medical 
officers (1 internist, 2 general surgeons, 2 or- 
thopedic surgeons, and 2 anesthesiologists), 1 
Medical Service Corps officer, 58 hospital corps- 
men, and 20 marines. The collecting and clearing 
company provides general treatment and holding 
facilities for patients who will be discharged to 
duty within the evacuation policy established for 
the beachhead. It is designed to support a regi- 
mental landing team. 

(a) Clearing Platoon. — Each clearing pla- 
toon includes one general surgeon, one or- 
thopedic surgeon, and one anesthesiologist, and 
enlisted medical technicians for ward and surgi- 
cal duties. It is organized and equipped to estab- 
lish and temporarily operate a 30-bed clearing 



19-7 
Change 71 



19-31 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



19-34 



station. The clearing station receives casualties 
from units supported and clears them in accord- 
ance with the evacuation policy and condition of 
each casualty to the landing force or amphibious 
task force medical facilities. Personnel are pre- 
pared to perform emergency lifesaving surgery. 
The two clearing platoons, operating together 
with company headquarters, are designed for sus- 
tained independent medical action and can oper- 
ate a 60-bed clearing station for an extended pe- 
riod. The attached marine personnel are trained 
in litter bearing and other casualty handling 
techniques. 

(b) Collecting Platoon, — The collecting pla- 
toon is composed entirely of enlisted medical per- 
sonnel. When the company operates as a unit, it 
is under the immediate direction of the com- 
mander of the collecting and clearing company. 
During the assault phase of amphibious opera- 
tions, it may be attached to the regiment which 
is supported by the collecting and clearing com- 
pany. When attached to another unit, it operates 
under the medical officer of the unit it supports. 
Personnel of the platoon collect casualties from 
the forward aid stations, and where appropriate, 
transfer them to shore or landing zone evacua- 
tion stations or to clearing stations. When the 
collecting and clearing companies are established 
ashore and after appropriate treatment has been 
carried out, patients will be transferred either to 
the beach or to a designated air facility, for fur- 
ther evacuation rearward. Once the collecting 
and clearing company is established ashore, the 
collecting platoon reverts to its parent medical 
company. Ambulances from the service section of 
the company headquarters operate with the col- 
lecting platoon. 

(c) Guerilla type warfare and ample heli- 
copter support may result in the collecting and 
clearing companies functioning as a division hos- 
pital farther to the rear of the actual combat and 
patrol areas. 

19-31. Group Medical Section 

(1) The group medical section is attached to 
the Marine airbase squadron. Sufficient personnel 
are authorized to operate a 20-bed medical-surgi- 
cal facility. Each Marine wing support group has 
adequate medical personnel in its headquarters 
and maintenance squadron to care for group per- 
sonnel plus personnel of Marine aviation units 
operating from the airbase which are not author- 
ized medical sections. There are no specialists 
assigned to a wing in peacetime. Therefore, to 
make an average wing combat ready, eight spe- 
cialists (four general surgeons and four anesthe- 
siologists) are required. Personnel requiring ex- 



tensive surgery or hospitalization must be evacu- 
ated to supporting force units, division units, or 
■facilities afloat. 

19-32. Squadron Medical Section 

(1) Squadron medical sections are authorized 
for separate tactical squadrons such as VMA 
(Attack, Jet Aircraft), HMR (Helicopter), 
VMGR (Transport). These are small, usually 
consisting of one flight surgeon and three to four 
hospital corpsmen, and are capable of conducting 
routine sickcall as well as aviation medical func- 
tions. 

19-33. Separate Surgical Company 

(1) The separate surgical company is an FMF 
unit which may be attached to a large force for 
amphibious operations. It is relatively immobile 
and designed for operation in an advanced base 
either as a single unit, or with less capability, as 
two separate units. It consists of a headquarters 
platoon, a hospital platoon, and a service platoon. 
It has the staff and equipment to operate a 400- 
bed hospital. Included in this staff are 21 medical 
officers, 2 dental officers, 3 Medical Service Corps 
officers, 2 chaplains, 148 hospital corpsmen, 4 
dental technicians, 2 Marine Corps officers, and 
80 enlisted marines. 

(2) In the early stages of an amphibious oper- 
ation, portions of this company may be organized 
into six teams for duty on casualty receiving 
ships. 

(3) When the tactical situation permits, the 
company establishes a hospital, but not as a nor- 
mal echelon in the chain of evacuation. This hos- 
pital provides highly specialized surgical facili- 
ties including maxillofacial and oral surgeons. 
Casualties requiring such facilities are routed to 
it from collecting and clearing companies, or 
from the force hospital company. Upon dis- 
charge, patients reenter the normal chain of evac- 
uation. 

(4) Elements of the company may also be at- 
tached to a division when the division operates 
independently. 

19-34. Hospital Company (100-Bed Field Hos- 
pital) 

(1) The hospital company consists of a com- 
pany headquarters and a hospital platoon. The 
company includes seven medical officers; i.e., two 
general surgeons, one orthopedic surgeon, one 
anesthesiologist, one internist, and two general 
practitioners. In addition, there are 1 Medical 
Service Corps officer, 60 hospital corpsmen, and 



19-8 

Change 71 



19-40 



CHAPTER 19. FLEET MARINE FORCE 



19-40 



31 enlisted marines. This hospital company pro- 
vides additional hospitalization facilities ashore 
for casualties who are not evacuated to amphibi- 
ous task force medical facilities afloat. This is 

Section V. MEDICAL AUGMENTA 

19-40. Augmentation Personnel and Materiel 

(1) BUMED has assigned certain naval hospi- 
tals the responsibility for sponsorship of surgical 
teams, surgical support teams, FMF surgical pla- 
toon cadres, and other special teams. BUME- 



necessary when the tactical situation or other 
conditions prevent evacuation to amphibious task 
forces facilities or when additional hospitaliza- 
tion is required for casualty overflow. 

N OF AMPHIBIOUS OPERATIONS 

DINST 6440.1 series prescribes the function, 
composition, activation, deployment, and mate- 
rial support of -hese teams; and outlines the pro- 
cedures governing their organization, administra- 
tion, and training. 



19-9 

Change 71 



( 



o 

I 



r 



r 



Chapter 20 

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 



Article 

Policy 20- 1 

Departmental Responsibilities 20- 2 

Scope 20- 3 

Career Opportunities 20— 4 

Activities and Facilities 20- 5 

Program Management 20— 6 

Navy Laboratory Funds (Independent Research) 20- 7 

Use of Volunteers in Medical or Other Hazardous Experiments 20- 8 

Experimental Animals 20- 9 

Trials of Commercial Items, Specialties, and Pharmaceutical Products 20-10 

Guest Scientist Program 20-11 



20-1. Policy 

(1) The fundamental policy of BUMED is to 
encourage and support research and development 
in medical, dental, nursing, and allied sciences 
directed toward the solution of problems affect- 
ing the health, safety, seWfion, and efficiency 
of the personnel of the Department of the Navy 
and other branches of the Department of De- 
fense. 

20-2. Departmental Responsibilities 

(1) General. — By directive of the Secretary of 
the Navy the Assistant Secretary of the Navy 
for Research and Development (ASN(R&D)) 
will exercise responsibility for the Department- 
wide policy supervision of all research, develop- 
ment, engineering, test, and evaluation efforts 
within the Department of the Navy, including 
management of the appropriation "RDT&E." 
ASN(R&D) requires support and assistance from 
his principal advisors; the Deputy Chief of Naval 
Operations (Development), the Deputy Chief of 
Staff (R&D) Marine Corps, the Chief of Naval 
Development, the Chief of Naval Research, the 
Assistant Chief BUMED for Research and Mili- 
tary Medical Specialties, and the Project Manager 
of the SECNAV Designated Projects. The frame- 
work for programming, planning and implemen- 
tation of the RDT&E effort will be based on 
DOD policies and procedures as interpreted and 



promulgated by the Secretary of the Navy or 
ASN (R&D). The specific responsibilities shall 
be implemented by full coordination, as appro- 
priate among the principal parties to arrive at 
negotiated conclusions so that the final RDT&E 
program will be"f ully responsive to the total needs 
of the Department of the Navy. (SECNAVINST 
5430.67 series.) 

(2) BUMED. — Under the Chief, BUMED, and 
the Assistant Chief for Research and Military 
Medical Specialties, the management and co- 
ordination of the research and development pro- 
grams of the Medical Department of the Navy 
shall be the responsibility of the Director of the 
Research Division. 

(3) Research Division. — The direction of 
BUMED command research and development 
activities shall be centralized in the Research 
Division of BUMED. The direction of activities 
that emphasize professional or military specialties 
(dental, submarine, and aerospace medicine) 
shall be coordinated with appropriate divisions 
in BUMED. 

20-3. Scope 

(1) Medical Department research and develop- 
ment programs shall be organized to effectively 
support Navy, Marine Corps, and Medical De- 
partment missions and shall include the broadest 
aspects of medical, dental, nursing, and allied 



20-1 
Change 36 



20-3 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



20-5 



sciences problems related to military personnel 
performance in submarine, shipboard, aviation, 
astronautical, field, and amphibious environ- 
ments. 

(2) Research, development, testing, and evalua- 
tion shall be in support of pertinent Naval Re- 
search Requirements (NRR's) as promulgated by 
the Chief of Naval Research (ONRINST 3910.2 
series); pertinent Exploratory Development Re- 
quirements (EDR's) as promulgated by the Chief 
of Naval Development (NAVMATINST 3910.4 
series); and in response to Advanced Develop- 
ment Objectives (ADO's) and Specific Opera- 
tional Requirements (SOR's) as promulgated by 
the Chief of Naval Operations and the Com- 
mandant of the Marine Corps. A broad program 
of research shall be maintained in basic sciences 
related to military medicine, dentistry, nursing, 
and human effectiveness. Major emphasis will be 
placed on exploring the application of advances 
in the medical and allied sciences to the prob- 
lems of military medical care, personnel effec- 
tiveness, and disease prevention and control. 

(3) Naval hospitals and other naval medical 
activities are encouraged to conduct clinical re- 
search, including studies of diseases and injuries, 
statistical records of series of cases, appropriate 
therapeutic trials, and other phases of clinical in- 
vestigation. The research projects and the thera- 
peutic trials must be authorized by and reported 
to the Research Division, BUMED. Research pro- 
posals shall be submitted in accordance with 
BUMEDINST 3900.3 series (NOTAL). 

20-4. Career Opportunities 

(1) Research is an important function of the 
Medical Department and excellent facilities are 
available for research in the basic biological sci- 
ences, clinical medicine, experimental medicine 
and surgery, dentistry, preventive and tropical 
medicine, aviation and astronautical medicine, 
submarine medicine, field and amphibious medi- 
cine, neuropsychiatry and psychology, clinical 
and basic radiobiology, and the preventive medi- 
cine aspects of chemical, biological, and nuclear 
warfare. The research program is carried on in 
hospitals and laboratories in this country and 
overseas. Assignments of personnel are made to 
triservice laboratories and to units of the other 
armed services. Active participation in research 
by medical department officers is essential for 
effective prosecution of the research programs. 

(2) The Bureau will make every effort to place 
approved applicants seeking careers in research 
in appropriate research activities for on-the-job 
training and to further their advancement by 
postgraduate training in civilian institutions. 



(3) Interested Medical Corps, Dental Corps, 
Medical Service Corps and Nurse Corps person- 
nel with special aptitude, training, experience, 
or inclination for research should apply to 
BUMED for duty in research, stating their spe- 
cial qualifications and fields of interest. 

20-5. Activities and Facilities 

(1) General. — BUMED maintains laboratories 
and facilities as necessary to meet medical re- 
search and development requirements and to 
promote progressive programs. This includes 
BUMED command research and development 
activities, laboratories in other BUMED activi- 
ties, and medical laboratories in cooperation with 
the Office of Naval Research, the Naval Material 
Command, and the Marine Corps. 

(2) Personnel Utilization. — Commanding offi- 
cers of BUMED command research and develop- 
ment activities shall insure that officers of the 
medical department assigned research duties are 
utilized maximally in accordance with their pro- 
fessional qualifications and with a minimum 
responsibility for routine administrative func- 
tions. Maximal assignment of administrative 
duties shall be accorded to supportive personnel. 

(3) Technical Director, — Commanding officers 
of BUMED command research and development 
activities whose personnel allowance structure 
contains a civilian technical director shall insure 
that the technical director actively participates 
in the planning, conduct, and staffing of the tech- 
nical program of the activity in accordance with 
SECNAVINST 3900.13 series (NOTAL). The re- 
sponsibilities of the technical director shall be 
defined in writing, 

(4) Hospital Chief of Research. — Command- 
ing officers of naval hospitals shall designate a 
chief of research in accordance with article 
11-28(2). 

(5) Promotion. — Commanding officers of re- 
search activities shall exploit all avenues of 
enhancing the attractiveness of research employ- 
ment in an effort to produce a creative atmos- 
phere and conditions conducive to conscientious 
scientific productivity. Employee development 
programs shall be effected and the professional- 
grade personnel shall be encouraged to partici- 
pate in the activities of professional societies. 
Policy for attendance at and participation in 
meetings of non-Eederal societies and organiza- 
tions is set forth in SECNAVINST 4651.8 series 
for military and in NCPI 410.7 for civilian per- 
sonnel. Authority for approval to attend such 
meetings is hereby delegated to commanding 
officers and officers in charge of BUMED research 
development facilities. It is required that a copy 



20-2 

Change 36 



20-5 



CHAPTER 20. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 



20-6 



of each approved NAVEXOS 12000/2 for confer- 
ence travel be forwarded to BUMED. 

20-6. Program Management 

(1) Structure. — The technical and administra- 
tive management of the Medical Research and 
Development Program is accomplished within 
the organizational structure of the Navy Plan- 
ning System and the DOD Programming System. 
Under these systems RDT&E levels of effort are 
categorized under DOD Program VI, Research 
and Development, by category, program element, 
project, task area, and work unit. DOD Program 
VI is divided into six broad categories: that is, 
1 — Research, 2 — Exploratory Development, 3 — 
Advanced Development, 4 — Engineering De- 
velopment, 5 — Management and Support, and 6 
— Operations System Development. 

(2) Categories. — BUMED-sponsored programs 
may be conducted under the following categories 
for purposes of program planning and budget- 
ing: 

Category 1, Research, includes all effort 
directed toward increased knowledge of natural 
phenomena and environment, and the solution of 
problems in the physical, medical, behavioral, 
and social sciences. It includes all basic research 
and, in addition, that applied research directed 
toward the expansion of knowledge in various 
scientific areas. It does not include efforts directed 
to prove the feasibility of solutions of problems 
of immediate military importance or time- 
oriented investigation and development. 

Category 2, Exploratory Development, in- 
cludes all effort directed toward the solution of 
specific military problems, short of major de- 
velopment projects. This type of effort may vary 
from fairly fundamental applied research to 
quite sophisticated breadboard studies, investiga- 
tions, and minor development efforts. The 
dominant characteristic of this category of effort 
is that it is pointed toward specific military 
problem areas with the view toward developing 
and evaluating the feasibility and practicability 
of proposed solutions and determining their 
parameters. 

Category 3, Advanced Development, in- 
cludes efforts which have moved from explora- 
tory development into development of equip- 
ment, materials, or procedures for experimental 
or operational evaluation. These efforts will be 
conducted to meet a requirement for develop- 
mental projects which are not assured as to mili- 
tary usefulness, technical feasibility, or financial 
acceptability for operational implementation. 
They will be characterized as budget line-item 



projects and program control will be exercised 
on the project-manager concept. 

Category 4, Engineering Development, in- 
cludes those development programs being engi- 
neered for service use but which have not yet 
been approved by OSD for procurement or 
operation. This area is characterized by major 
line-item projects and program control will be 
exercised by review of individual projects. 

Category 5, Management and Support, pro- 
vides facilities and installation support for 
BUMED command research and development ac- 
tivities, and managerial and planning support at 
the Departmental level. Facilities and installation 
support provides funds for the indirect costs of 
research and development and other costs of the 
operation of the laboratory not directly related 
to a specific research project. This includes costs 
for operation and maintenance, administrative 
support, general purpose scientific equipment 
and instrumentation and laboratory rearrange- 
ment. 

(3) Projects and task areas for medical re- 
search and development will be established by 
BUMED within the framework of naval research 
requirements and exploratory development re- 
quirements. In addition, advanced development 
projects will be established by BUMED in meet- 
ing Advanced Development Objectives promul- 
gated by the Chief of Naval Operations. Project 
and task area numbers and titles under BUMED- 
sponsored programs are listed in BUMEDINST 
3900.3 series (NOTAL). 

(4) Work units under the projects and task 
areas will be assigned to activities directly by 
BUMED, or will be assigned as approved re- 
search and development proposals submitted by 
the activities. 

(a) Proposals for research and development 
shall be submitted to BUMED on new studies 
contemplated by medical department facilities. 
Included would be studies in cooperation with 
other DOD components, other governmental 
agencies, civilian institutions, and industry. 

(b) Proposals shall be submitted on the Re- 
search and Technology Resume, DD Form 1498, 
in accordance with BUMEDINST 39003 series 
(NOTAL). 

(c) The selection and approval of research 
and development proposals will be based on 
program requirements, the initiative and com- 
petence of the proposed investigators, the avail- 
ability of facilities, and the special opportuni- 
ties offered by the location and environment of 
particular facilities. 



20-3 
Change 36 



20-6 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



20-6 



(5) Reporting Requirements. — BUMED re- 
quires maangement and technical/scientific re- 
ports on all research and development work units 
assigned to or approved to be conducted at medi- 
cal department facilities. 

(a) Management data categories shall be re- 
ported in accordance with BUMEDINST 3900.3 
series (NOTAL). 

(b) T echnical/ Scientific Reports. — 

(1) Interim and final Scientific Reports 
(Report Symbol MED-3930-1) are required by 
BUMED on all work units conducted under cate- 
gories 1, 2, or 3. Interim reports are required 
upon the accomplishment of any significant 
achievement or breakthrough regarding the 
problem under investigation. Final reports shall 
be submitted at the earliest practicable time after 
completion or termination (cancellation or sus- 
pension) of a work unit. Interim and final re- 
ports shall be of a professional type in the gen- 
eral format and style of reporting that is used 
for scientific journals. Reprints of articles ac- 
cepted by professional journals may be submitted 
as interim and final reports. In this case, complete 
work unit identification shall be provided in a 
cover sheet to the reprint unless identification 
data is included as an acknowledgement in the 
reprint. 

(2) A DD Form 1473, Document Control 
Data — R&D, shall be completed and included 
as the last page of each copy of all technical/ 
scientific reports, including those submitted in 
reprint form. Instructions for preparation are 
on the DD Form 1473. Stocks of DD Form 1473 
may be requisitioned from local supply points in 
accordance with the Navy Stock List of Forms 
and Publications, NAVSANDA Publication No. 
2002. 

(3) Distribution of Technical/ Scientific 
Reports. — 

(a) Three copies of each interim and 
final report shall be submitted to BUMED (Code 
71). 

(b) A minimum of 30 copies shall be 
submitted to the Defense Documentation Center 
(DDC), Cameron Station, Bldg. 5, 5010 Duke 
Street, Alexandria, Virginia 22314, subject to the 
provisions of the current SECNAV Instructions 
in the 3900.24 and .3900.29 (NOTAL) series and 
accompanied by a DDC Form 50. All copies of 
reports submitted shall include an appropriate 
distribution statement in accordance with 
NAVMATINST 4000.17 series (NOTAL). Re- 
ports submitted to DDC in reprint form shall 
include the statement, "Reproduction in whole or 
in part is permitted for any purpose of the 



United States Government" in addition to the 
distribution statement. Authority to reproduce 
published articles must be obtained from the 
publisher of the journal that published the arti- 
cle, and should be obtained when the article is 
submitted for publication. In requesting this au- 
thority, it should be pointed out that reproduc- 
tion by the Government will not affect the re- 
quirement for reprints for initial distribution, 
but will be used for governmental distribution 
as required after initial reprint stocks are 
depleted. 

(c) Activities conducting research and devel* 
opment shall submit recommended official distribution 
lists to BUMED (Code 71) for approval prior to 1 Jan- 
uary each year. Distribution of unclassified reports 
to the official distribution list may be made simulta- 
neously with submissions to BUMED and DDC. This 
distribution list shall be prepared in accordance with 
the guidance provided in BUMED Instruction 3900.4 
series. 

(d) Technical/scientific reports shall be 
classified in accordance with OPNAVINST 
5510.1 series, Department of the Navy Security 
Manual for Classified Information. A recom- 
mended distribution list for each classified re- 
port shall be submitted to BUMED (Code 71) for 
review and approval prior to distribution. 

(4) Public Dissemination. — BUMED, in 
recognizing the great importance of disseminating 
the information gained from medical research, 
development, and testing, heartily encourages not 
only the wide distribution of reports via official 
channels to other interested Government activi- 
ties, but also presentation of appropriate reports 
through public media such as lecture, discussion, 
or publication. To insure uniform compliance 
with established Navy policy and security regula- 
tions, all R&D technical/scientific reports and 
speeches, including the content of organized pub- 
lic discussions, planned for public dissemination, 
shall be cleared by the commanding officer of the 
facility at which the work is, or has been, con- 
ducted. Commanding officers shall be guided by 
article 1252 of NAVREGS and OPNAVINST 5510.115 
(series) in reviewing material for public disclosure. 
If a clearance determination cannot be made at the 
command level, the material may be submitted to 
BUMED for review and decision. In addition, the dis- 
claimer statement of article 1252.3 of NAVREGS shall 
be included in each article submitted for publication 
and shall be signed by the author. The disclaimer 
statement also applies to speeches and public discus- 
sions, in which case the individual shall inform his 
listeners of his unofficial status. Military authors are 
reminded of the requirement of article 1252.3 of 
NAVREGS to submit one copy of each published art- 
icle to SECNAV. 



20-4 

Change 59 



20-7 



CHAPTER 20, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 



20-9 



20-7. Navy Laboratory Fund*, (Independent 
Research) 

(1) Objectives. — The principal objectives of 
these programs are to enable laboratories to en- 
hance their Competence; to permit their growth in 
scientific stature; to attract highly competent in- 
vestigators; to initiate challenging work; and ul- 
timate!)- to make new ideas and fresh approaches 
pay off in terms of their regular programs. 

(2) Fi/nc/s. — Subject to the current availability 
of funds, BUMED will provide major research 
and development command activities with funds 
to conduct independent research. The funds will 
be furnished to provide flexibility for the investi- 
gation of new ideas generated during the year for 
which there is no provision for funding in the 
formal program. The Navy Laboratory Funds 
will be in addition to those provided for ap- 
proved or assigned work units. However, since 
they are primarily to augment and exploit techni- 
cal competence, they shall not be used to make up 
deficits in directed parts of the regular approved 
program, or to take the place of a previously re- 
jected regular research proposal, or normally to 
support or sponsor contract research. They shall 
be used for work which clearly has Navy relev- 
ance. 

(3) Controls. — Provided that administrative 
policy requirements herein indicated are ob- 
served, prior BUMED approval is not required 
for studies undertaken with these funds. An in- 
vestigator ma}' propose work on a task of an in- 
novative nature, to be established as a form of 
pilot study, subject to approval by the command- 
ing officer who should establish an advisory labo- 
ratory committee on Independent Research for 
initial review and recommended action. With the 
assistance of the chairman of such a committee 
and/or of the technical director, the commanding 
officer of the laboratory will allocate funds to be 
used for such studies. These studies will normally 
have a 2-year limitation, after which they will be 
considered completed or terminated. They may be 
extended upon recommendation of the command- 
ing officer and BUMED approval. Studies show- 
ing promise shall be incorporated into the regu- 
lar research or development program at any time 
by submission as a proposal in accordance with 
article 20-6(4). 

(4) Reports. — In accordance with require- 
ments governing reports on al! projects, whatever 
may be the source of funding, activities provided 
Navy Laboratory Funds shall submit for each in- 
dividual work unit, immediately upon its incep- 
tion, an initial informative report ("New") on 
DD Form 1498. Subsequently, a progress report, 
also on DD Form 1498, shall be made to reach 
BUMED (Code 71) no later than 30 July each 



year, The reporting period shall be for the imme- 
diate past fiscal year for which funds were re- 
ceived, and its contents shall be the same required 
for all such report forms. 

20-8. Use of Volunteers in Medical or Other 
Hazardous Experiments 

(1) Authority.— SECNAVINST 3900.39 (se- 
ries) prescribes Navy policies and procedures 
governing the use of volunteer subjects in 
RDT&E projects. The instruction shall be fol- 
lowed when it is necessary to utilize volunteers in 
hazardous experiments. 

(2) Definition.— -The SECNAVINST 3900.39 
states that hazardous conditions or materials are 
those which present risk of privation, discomfort, 
distress, pain, physical or mental injury, or death 
greater than the hazards inherent in training or 
work within accepted occupational parameters. 

(3) Investigational Drugs. — The SECNAV- 
INST 3900.39 applies to the use of investigational 
drugs under an approved RDT&E project or task 
in a volunteer population of patients in which the 
experimental drug testing has no relationship to 
the cause of their being on the sicklist, BUMED- 
INST 6710.49 (series) must also be followed in the 
utilization of investigational drugs in RDT&E 
projects, 

(4) Record. — For each instance a statement 
shail be entered in the individual's medical record 
indicating the work-unit number and title, and a 
notation of the physical and/or psychological 
effect, or lack of same, resulting from the investi- 
gation, 

20-9. Experimental Animals 

(1) DoD Instruction 3216.1 of 7 August 1967 
establishes the policy governing the procurement, 
transportation, use, and care of laboratory ani- 
mals involved in the research, development, test, 
and evaluation programs of DoD Components, 
and certain public information aspects pertaining 
thereto. Pertinent portions are quoted below for 
compliance: 

IV. BACKGROUND AND POLICY 

A. Pursuant to PL 89-544 (reference (e)), the De- 
partment of Agriculture has published Regulations and 
Standards on Laboratory Animal Welfare (reference 
(d)). These regulations and standards require licensing 
of dealers, registration of research facilities, maintenance 
of records, identification of dogs and cats, and com- 
pliance by dealers and research facilities, including 
laboratory animal facilities of the United States, with 
the minimum standards for the humane handling, care, 
treatment, and transportation of various categories of 
animals. 

B. It is the fundamental policy of the Department of 
Defense that animals intended for use in resarch are 
provided humane care and treatment. 

C. The following DoD policies on the procurement, 
transportation, use, and care of laboratory animals are 
consistent with the references (c), (d) and/or (e): 



20-5 
Change 61 



20-9 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



20-10 



1. In all research and development programs per- 
formed or sponsored by Department of Defense Com- 
ponents involving the use of laboratory animals in the 
United States, both the standards for the humane handl- 
ing, care, treatment, and transportation of such animals 
established by the Secretary of Agriculture in reference 
(d) and the standards set forth in reference (c) shall 
be observed. In case of conflict between the standards 
in reference (c) and <d), the higher standard shall be 
used. 

2. Dogs and cats used in research and development 
programs performed or sponsored by DoD Components 
shall be purchased or otherwise acquired from a person 
holding a valid dealer's license issued by the Secretary 
of Agriculture pursuant to reference (d), except as 
exempted by PL H9-U4 (reference (e)>. 

D. Registration and Inspection. Department of De- 
fense Components are not required to register with the 
Secretary of Agriculture or to permit inspection of 
animals or records by the Dspartment of Agriculture. 

E. Foreign Country Research. Research performed or 
sponsored in foreign countries involving laboratory 
animals shall b? conducted in accordance with existing 
regulations and standards of the host country. To the 
extent the local situation permits, DoD research activities 
will comply with the standards of Paragraph IV-C-1 
above. 

F. Public Information. 

1. The timely release of information about in- 
vestigations using laboratory animals tends to improve 
public understanding and acceptance. The results help 
to solve military problems and contribute to improved 
human health and welfare of man and his domestic 
animals, 

2. The release of information about experiments 
involving animals prior to the actual accomplishment 
of the experiment should be the exception rather than 
the rule. 

3- Material proposed for release to both the sci- 
entific community and the public will contain full in- 
formation relevant to humane procedures utilized and 
other evidence of excellent animal care by reference 
to such items as the observance of the principlts enun- 
ciated in the "Guide for Laboratory Animal Facilities 
and Care," (reference (c)), the use of anesthesia and 
oth=r measures. 

4. Security review of material for public informa- 
tion will be in accordance with DoD Directive 52^0.9 
(reference (b)). 

In paragraph IVF4, the "reference (b)" listing is 
to a DoD Directive 5230.9 (NOTAL); the appli- 
cable Navy directives being OPNAVINST 5510.1 
series and CHINFOINST 5720.25 (NOTAL) se- 
ries. 

(2) Technical/scientific reports on studies in 
which experimental animals were used shall con- 
tain the following statement: "The animals used 
in this study were handled in accordance with the 
'Principles of Laboratory Animal Care* estab- 
lished by the Committee on. the Guide for Labo- 
ratory Animal Resources, National Academy of 
Sciences-National Research Council." In addition, 
reports of such nature originating from naval re- 
search activities whose animal care facilities are 
fully accredited by the American Association for 
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care 
(AAALAC) shall also contain the following 



statement; "The animal care facilities are fully 
accredited by the American Association for 
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care." 

(3) By SECNAVINST 3900.38 series 
(NOTAL), responsibility for coordination of 
matters relating to the use of laboratory animals 
by the Naval Establishment and the responsibility 
for providing commands with technical assistance 
as required is assigned to BUMED. This assist- 
ance is available and will be provided on request. 

20-10. Trials of Commercial Items, Specialties, 
and Pharmaceutical Products 

(1) Authority to conduct clinical, laboratory, 
or field trials at naval activities of drugs, materi- 
als, or devices covered by the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act may be approved by BUMED 
provided scientific and administrative criteria and 
reporting requirements of the Navy and the FDA 
are met, and subject to the approval of the use of 
human volunteers by the Secretary of the Navy. 
To meet BUMED criteria the following condi- 
tions are specified: 

(a) The method of diagnostic tests or of 
treatment must be fully explained. 

(b) There must be no secrecy about the 
process of manufacture or chemical composition 
of the agent. 

(c) Diagnosis must have been made by a 
competent doctor of medicine or dentistry and 
verified by complete clinical and laboratory cri- 
teria. 

(d) Complete records of patients or experi- 
mental subjects made under qualified medical or 
dental supervision must be submitted, 

(e (Results must be based on well-controlled 
scientific methods of investigation rather than on 
individual case reports. 

(f) If methods of treatment are proposed, 
the supervised clinical records indicated above 
must show that no other definitive treatment was 
used. 

(g) Materials for treatment, diagnosis, or 
other biological testing must be provided in ade- 
quate quantities without cost to BUMED. Devices 
must be complete in all details and ready for op- 
eration, 

(h) The proposer must agree that, whenever 
BUMED deems it advisable, the request and the 
complete data may be submitted to the National 
Research Council for advice. (BUMED is not 
committed to compliance with the advice so pro- 
vided.) 

(i) Any definitive action on the part of 
BUMED will depend on the availability of suita- 
ble personnel, the provision of adequate facilities, 
and the operational requirements of the Navy. 

(j) All reports shall become the property of 
BUMED, which assumes no obligation to or for 
any commercial firm. 



20-6 

Change 61 



20-11 



CHAPTER 20. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 



20-11 



20-11. Guest Scientist Program 

(1) Navy medical research and development 
activities have developed effective working rela- 
tionships with educational institutions through 
exchange of information, use of services of fac- 
ulty members recognized as outstanding in their 
field to give lectures, and participation by Navy- 
employed scientists in the teaching program of 
universities on a part-time basis. There is an ex- 
pressed need and opportunity for futher develop- 
ment of these relationships through a program 
for the acceptance of guest scientists to partici- 
pate with Navy investigators on research prob- 
lems of mutual interest. There are two general 
categories or levels of scientists that may be 
accepted as guests under this program: 

fa) Faculty or staff members of educational 
institutions or scientific foundations may be 
accepted as guests to participate in research pro- 
jects which are of mutual interest and are ap- 
proved or assigned as part of the current research 
program. 

(b) Graduate students of unusual ability and 
promise may be provided opportunity for ad- 
vanced training in the biological sciences by par- 
ticipating as guests in research work units which 
are in alignment with their course of study and, 
at the same time, of benefit to the Navy. 

(2) A guest scientist is a faculty or staff mem- 
ber sponsored by an educational institution or 
private scientific foundation accepted to collabo- 
rate on research problems of mutual interest, or 
an investigator under training at the predoctorate 
or postdoctorate level under a fellowship. The as- 
signment of the graduate student to a Navy medi- 
cal research activity will be for the purpose of 
participation in research projects as a part of his 
training in the biological sciences. The research 
activity will provide for the use of facilities, sup- 
i.' : es, r^d equipment required by his participa- 
tion in the project. An agreement will be estab- 
lished in writing between the research activity 
and the sponsor stating the conditions and _ re- 
quirements of the assignment of the guest scien- 
tist. The terms and conditions shall also be agreed 
to by the individual guest scientist in writing. As 
a minimum, the following conditions will apply: 

(a) The guest scientist: 



(1) May be accepted only to participate 
in projects approved or assigned in accordance 
with article 20-6(4). 

(2) Shall be responsible to the head of 
the activity and, in the case of students, shall be 
under the guidance of a member of the regular 
staff of the activity. 

(3) Is not an employee of the activity 
and receives no pay from appropriated funds. A 
student may be receiving financial aid under a 
fellowship (etc.) through his sponsor. Nonstu- 
dent guests will normally be receiving salary 
from their employing institution. 

(4) Shall observe any attendance re- 
quirements and comply with rules of conduct 
prescribed by the activity, 

(5) To provide against conflict of inter- 
est, shall not accept a consultant position with an- 
other organization during the period of assign- 
ment to the activity without the approval of the 
head cf the activity. 

(6) Shall be subject to security investi- 
gations and clearance requirements equal to that 
for employees. (Refer to OPNAVINST 5510.1 se- 
ries, Department of the Navy Security Manual 
for Classified Information, and NCPI 732.) 

(b) Publication of research findings in the 
case of guest scientists shall be subject generally 
to the same regulations applied to employees. In 
case of students, utilization of reports for theses 
will be provided for in the agreement between 
the research activity and the sponsor. 

(c) The rights of the Government and guest 
scientists in inventions made as a result of partici- 
pation in the work of the medical research activ- 
ity shall be determined by the Office of Naval Re- 
search following the principles and basic regula- 
tions of the Government's patent policy with re- 
spect to inventions made by employees. (Refer to 
SECNAV1NST 5870.3 series and Code of Federal 
Regulations (37 CFR Part 300).) 

(d) The research activity will assume the 
same responsibility for the guest scientist as for 
other visitors. 

(e) The commanding officer of the research 
activity will reserve the right to ask the sponsor 
to recall the guest scientist for failure to observe 
the terms of the agreement. 



20-7 
Change 61 



( 



( 



Chapter 20 

MEDICAL AND DENTAL TREATMENT 
OTHER THAN NAVAL 



Sect 



ions 



Articles 



I. Treatment and Hospitalization Other Than Naval _ 

II. Services of Specialists 

III. Special Dental Treatment 



20- 1 through 20-8 

20- 9 through 20-11 

20 12 through 20-16 



Section I. TREATMENT AND HOSPITALIZATION OTHER THAN NAVAL 

Article 

General Summary 20 1 

Limitation on Emergency Dental Treatment 20 2 

Personnel on Liberty or Leave 20-5 

Inactive Retired Members 20-6 

Reports Required in Cases of Emergency Medical or Dental Treatment or Hospitalization 20-7 

Preparation of Claims 20 8 



20-1. General Summary 

(1) Members on active duty in the Navy or 
Marine Corps are eligible for emergency or neces- 
sary medical or dental treatment at Government 
expense by any Federal activity, other than naval, 
having a medical service (Army, Air Force, Public 
Health Service, and Veterans" Administration) under 
the following conditions: 

(a) When on duty at a place where appropriate 
facilities or personnel of the Medical Department of 
the Navy are not available, upon the order of the 
commanding officer or senior officer present or, in 
the absence of a superior officer, upon their own 
application to the Federal activity concerned. 

(b) When on authorized liberty or leave in an 
emergency which does not permit return to the duty 
station or application to another naval activity hav- 
ing facilities for the necessary treatment. 

(2) Personnel on active duty in the Navy or Ma- 
rine Corps are eligible for emergency or necessary 
medical or dental treatment and hospitalization at 
Government expense in other than Federal hospitals 
under the following conditions: 

(a) When on duty at a place where there is no 
Federal medical or dental facility, upon the order 
of the commanding officer or senior officer present 
or, in the absence of a superior officer, upon their own 
application to a civilian physician, dentist, or 
hospital. 

(b) When on authorized liberty or leave they 
become ill or are injured and the emergency does 
not permit application to a Federal medical or den- 
tal facility. Under such circumstances approval of 
their commanding officer should be obtained or, if 
this is impracticable, prompt report should be made 
to the commanding officer in order to permit investi- 
gation and suitable arrangements for transfer of the 



patient to a Federal institution or other appropriate 
action. 

(3) The accounts of officers receiving treatment 
in Veterans' Administration hospitals or in civilian 
hospitals at Department of the Navy expense will 
be checked for subsistence. When officers are hos- 
pitalized in an Army, Air Force, or TJ. S. Public 
Health Service medical facility the charge for sub- 
sistence will be collected by the facility. 

20-2. Limitation on Emergency Dental 
Treatment 

(1) The expense of emergency dental treatment 
by other than a naval dental officer shall be allowed 
under the conditions specified in article 20-1 only to 
relieve pain or abort infection and upon the ap- 
proval of a naval medical officer, if one is available. 
Emergency treatment shall not include the furnish- 
ing of prosthetic appliances including crowns or in- 
lays, or the use of gold or other precious metals for 
fillings. (See arts. 20-14 and 20-15.) 

Note. — There are no articles 20-3 and 20-4. 

20-5. Personnel on Liberty or Leave 

(1) Personnel who require emergency medical or 
dental treatment while on authorized liberty or 
leave shall apply, if practicable, to the nearest naval 
activity in the vicinity; if emergency treatment is 
not available application should then be made to 
any other Federal agency having medical services. 
When Federal facilities are not available, the indi- 
vidual concerned or someone on his behalf should, 
if practicable, contact his commanding officer by 
telephone or telegraph reporting the emergency 
condition and requesting permission to obtain 
civilian medical or dental aid. Commanding officers 
may authorize such necessary emergency treatment 



20-1 
Change 6 



20-5 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, TT. S. NAVY 



20-8 



as the circumstances seem to warrant, and should 
give appropriate instructions regarding submission 
of reports and bills and disposition of the patient 
upon completion of treatment (arts. 20-7 and 20-8) . 

(2) When the urgency of the situation does not 
permit obtaining treatment from Federal facilities 
or authority to obtain treatment from other sources, 
necessary emergency treatment may be obtained 
from civilian sources by or on behalf of the indi- 
vidual concerned, and reasonable expenses therefor 
may be allowed as a charge against the Navy; pro- 
vided that, within a reasonable time, report is made 
to his commanding officer so as to permit investi- 
gation and suitable arrangements for transfer to a 
Federal institution or other appropriate action. 

(3) Expenses for the employment of consultants 
or specialists shall not be allowed except when au- 
thorized in advance by the Bureau or, in extraor- 
dinary cases, when subsequently approved by the 
Bureau upon receipt of prompt report and satis- 
factory explanation as to the necessity and urgency 
of their employment. 

(4) Civilian medical or dental treatment of per- 
sonnel absent without leave is not authorized unless 
and until the individual comes under military or 
naval control. 

(5) The expense of elective medical or dental 
treatment may be allowed under no circumstances. 
Civilian dental treatment, other than emergency 
measures to relieve pain or abort infection, is not 
authorized (arts. 20-2, 20-13, 20-14, and 20-15) 

20-6. Inactive Retired Members 

(1) Inactive-duty members and former members 
of the Navy or the Marine Corps, or the reserve 
components thereof, entitled to retired, retirement 
or retainer pay or equivalent pay as a result of their 
service, except inactive-duty members and former 
members of the reserve components of the Navy or 
the Marine Corps entitled to retired or retirement 
pay under Sections 1331 through 1337 of Title 10 of 
the U. S. Code who have served less than 8 years 
on active duty, may be, upon request, furnished 
required medical and dental care and adjuncts 
thereto in any medical facility of a uniformed serv- 
ice to the same extent as provided active duty mem- 
bers. Such care shall be subject to mission 
requirements and the availability of space, facili- 
ties, and capabilities of the medical staff or dental 
staff as determined by the local medical or dental 
authorities. 

20-7. Reports Required in Cases of Emer- 
gency Medical or Dental Treatment 
or Hospitalization 

(1) Report on Navmed-U shall be promptly for- 
warded in duplicate to the Bureau in each case of 
any sickness or injury of personnel on active duty 



in the Navy or Marine Corps in which treatment is 
received from other than the medical or dental de- 
partments of the Navy. It is required in all cases 
in which medical, dental, or hospital treatment is 
furnished by civilian physicians or dentists, civil 
hospitals, or Government hospitals other than naval 
to Navy or Marine Corps personnel under circum- 
stances that eventually may be used as the basis of 
a claim against the Navy Department. This report 
should be prepared by a naval medical or dental of- 
ficer when practicable, and in the absence of such 
officers, by the senior officer present or by the indi- 
vidual concerned as soon as he is able. 

(2) Commanding officers are responsible for 
bringing the foregoing to the atention of all per- 
sonnel of the command who go on liberty or leave 
or who perform detached duty. 

(3) When printed Navmed-U Forms are not avail- 
able, a typewritten report shall be made in duplicate 
giving the following information: 

Name and rank or rating; date and place of birth; 
station to which attached; diagnosis; prognosis; status 
(leave, etc.). If on liberty or leave state exact period for 
which granted and the hours and dates of departure and 
return to station; circumstances; disposition; give dates 
on or between which services were rendered. By whom 
were the services rendered? When authority is given in 
writing a certified copy of same shall be attached. When 
authority is given verbally a certificate of the officer 
granting same shall be attached and shall show when 
and under what circumstances the services were author- 
ized. Were the services of a naval medical or dental 
officer, or a naval hospital or dispensary available? 

(4) A supply of Navmed-U's may be obtained from 
the Navy Supply System. 

20—8. Preparation of Claims 

Q) All claims for expenses incurred for medi- 
cines, medical or dental attendance, or hospitaliza- 
tion not obtained from the Medical Department of 
the Navy shall be forwarded to the Bureau for ad- 
judication. If approved by the Bureau, such claims 
will be forwarded to the Navy Regional Accounts 
Office, Washington 25, D. C. for payment. Payment 
of such claims may be made direct to the physician, 
dentist, or hospital, etc., rendering services or fur- 
nishing supplies, or reimbursement made to the 
individual receiving services or supplies if the cost 
thereof has been defrayed by him. (Refer to 
art. 20-8 (4) .) 

(2) Bills for treatment in Government hospitals 
other than Navy should be submitted to the Bureau 
for payment in accordance with existing regulations 
of the department or agency concerned. 

(3) Unpaid bills for civilian medical or dental 
treatment or hospitalization of naval personnel 
should be forwarded to the Bureau for action. They 
should be prepared in duplicate, itemized to show 
the dates on or between which services were ren- 
dered or supplies furnished, and the nature of and 



20-2 

Change € 



20-5 



CHAPTER 20. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 



20-6 



of each approved NAVEXOS 12000/2 for confer- 
ence travel be forwarded to BUMED. 

20-6. Program Management 

(1) Structure. — The technical and administra- 
tive management of the Medical Research and 
Development Program is accomplished within 
the organizational structure of the Navy Plan- 
ning System and the DOD Programming System. 
Under these systems RDT&E levels of effort are 
categorized under DOD Program VI, Research 
and Development, by category, program element, 
project, task area, and work unit. DOD Program 
VI is divided into six broad categories: that is, 
1 — Research, 2 — Exploratory Development, 3 — 
Advanced Development, 4 — Engineering De- 
velopment, 5 — Management and Support, and 6 
— Operations System Development. 

(2) Categories. — BUMED-sponsored programs 
may be conducted under the following categories 
for purposes of program planning and budget- 
ing: 

Category 1, Research, includes all effort 
directed toward increased knowledge of natural 
phenomena and environment, and the solution of 
problems in the physical, medical, behavioral, 
and social sciences. It includes all basic research 
and, in addition, that applied research directed 
toward the expansion of knowledge in various 
scientific areas. It does not include efforts directed 
to prove the feasibility of solutions of problems 
of immediate military importance or time- 
oriented investigation and development. 

Category 2, Exploratory Development, in- 
cludes all effort directed toward the solution of 
specific military problems, short of major de- 
velopment projects. This type of effort may vary 
from fairly fundamental applied research to 
quite sophisticated breadboard studies, investiga- 
tions, and minor development efforts. The 
dominant characteristic of this category of effort 
is that it is pointed toward specific military 
problem areas with the view toward developing 
and evaluating the feasibility and practicability 
of proposed solutions and determining their 
parameters. 

Category 3, Advanced Development, in- 
cludes efforts which have moved from explora- 
tory development into development of equip- 
ment, materials, or procedures for experimental 
or operational evaluation. These efforts will be 
conducted to meet a requirement for develop- 
mental projects which are not assured as to mili- 
tary usefulness, technical feasibility, or financial 
acceptability for operational implementation. 
They will be characterized as budget line-item 



projects and program control will be exercised 
on the project-manager concept. 

Category 4, Engineering Development, in- 
cludes those development programs being engi- 
neered for service use but which have not yet 
been approved by OSD for procurement or 
operation. This area is characterized by major 
line-item projects and program control will be 
exercised by review of individual projects. 

Category 5, Management and Support, pro- 
vides facilities and installation support for 
BUMED command research and development ac- 
tivities, and managerial and planning support at 
the Departmental level. Facilities and installation 
support provides funds for the indirect costs of 
research and development and other costs of the 
operation of the laboratory not directly related 
to a specific research project. This includes costs 
for operation and maintenance, administrative 
support, general purpose scientific equipment 
and instrumentation and laboratory rearrange- 
ment. 

(3) Projects and task areas for medical re- 
search and development will be established by 
BUMED within the framework of naval research 
requirements and exploratory development re- 
quirements. In addition, advanced development 
projects will be established by BUMED in meet- 
ing Advanced Development Objectives promul- 
gated by the Chief of Naval Operations. Project 
and task area numbers and titles under BUMED- 
sponsored programs are listed in BUMEDINST 
3900.3 series (NOTAL). 

(4) Work units under the projects and task 
areas will be assigned to activities directly by 
BUMED, or will be assigned as approved re- 
search and development proposals submitted by 
the activities. 

(a) Proposals for research and development 
shall be submitted to BUMED on new studies 
contemplated by medical department facilities. 
Included would be studies in cooperation with 
other DOD components, other governmental 
agencies, civilian institutions, and industry. 

(b) Proposals shall be submitted on the Re- 
search and Technology Resume, DD Form 1498, 
in accordance with BUMEDINST 3900.3 series 
(NOTAL). 

(c) The selection and approval of research 
and development proposals will be based on 
program requirements, the initiative and com- 
petence of the proposed investigators, the avail- 
ability of facilities, and the special opportuni- 
ties offered by the location and environment of 
particular facilities. 



20-3 
Change 36 



20-6 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



20-6 



(5) Reporting Requirements, — BUMED re- 
quires maangement and technical/scientific re- 
ports on all research and development work units 
assigned to or approved to be conducted at medi- 
cal department facilities. 

(a) Management data categories shall be re- 
ported in accordance with BUMED1NST 3900.3 
series (NOTAL). 

(b) Technical/ Scientific Reports. — 

(1) Interim and final Scientific Reports 
(Report Symbol MED-3930-1) are required by 
BUMED on all work units conducted under cate- 
gories 1, 2, or 3. Interim reports are required 
upon the accomplishment of any significant 
achievement or breakthrough regarding the 
problem under investigation. Final reports shall 
be submitted at the earliest practicable time after 
completion or termination (cancellation or sus- 
pension) of a work unit. Interim and final re- 
ports shall be of a professional type in the gen- 
eral format and style of reporting that is used 
for scientific journals. Reprints of articles ac- 
cepted by professional journals may be submitted 
as interim and final reports. In this case, complete 
work unit identification shall be provided in a 
cover sheet to the reprint unless identification 
data is included as an acknowledgement in the 
reprint. 

(2) A DD Form 1473, Document Control 
Data — R&D, shall be completed and included 
as the last page of each copy of all technical/ 
scientific reports, including those submitted in 
reprint form. Instructions for preparation are 
on the DD Form 1473. Stocks of DD Form 1473 
may be requisitioned from local supply points in 
accordance with the Navy Stock List of Forms 
and Publications, NAVSANDA Publication No. 
2002. 

(3) Distribution of Technical/ Scientific 
Reports. — 

(a) Three copies of each interim and 
final report shall be submitted to BUMED (Code 
71). 

(b) A minimum of 30 copies shall be 
submitted to the Defense Documentation Center 
(DDC), Cameron Station, Bldg. 5, 5010 Duke 
Street, Alexandria, Virginia 22314, subject to the 
provisions of the current SECNAV Instructions 
in the 3900.24 and 3900.29 (NOTAL) series and 
accompanied by a DDC Form 50. All copies of 
reports submitted shall include an appropriate 
distribution statement in accordance with 
NAVMATINST 4000.17 series (NOTAL). Re- 
ports submitted to DDC in reprint form shall 
include the statement, "Reproduction in whole or 
in part is permitted for any purpose of the 



United States Government" in addition to the 
distribution statement. Authority to reproduce 
published articles must be obtained from the 
publisher of the journal that published the arti- 
cle, and should be obtained when the article is 
submitted for publication. In requesting this au- 
thority, it should be pointed out that reproduc- 
tion by the Government will not affect the re- 
quirement for reprints for initial distribution, 
but will be used for governmental distribution 
as required after initial reprint stocks are 
depleted. 

(c) Activities conducting research and 
development shall submit recommended official 
distribution lists to BUMED (Code 71) for ap- 
proval prior to 1 January each year. Distribution 
of unclassified reports to the official distribution 
list may be made simultaneously with submis- 
sions to BUMED and DDC. This distribution list 
shall be prepared in accordance with the guid- 
ance provided in BUMED Instruction 3900.4 
series. 



(d) Technical/scientific reports shall be 
classified in accordance with OPNAVINST 
5510.1 series, Department of the Navy Security 
Manual for Classified Information. A recom- 
mended distribution list for each classified re- 
port shall be submitted to BUMED (Code 71) for 
review and approval prior to distribution. 

(4) Public Dissemination. — BUMED, in 
recognizing the great importance of disseminating 
the information gained from medical research, 
development, and testing, heartily encourages not 
only the wide distribution of reports via official 
channels to other interested Government activi- 
ties, but also presentation of appropriate reports 
through public media such as lecture, discussion, 
or publication. To insure uniform compliance 
with established Navy policy and security regula- 
tions, all R&D technical/scientific reports and 
speeches, including the content of organized pub- 
lic discussions, planned for public dissemination, 
shall be cleared by the commanding officer of the 
facility at which the work is, or has been, con- 
ducted. Commanding officers shall be guided by 
article 1252 of NAVREGS in reviewing material 
for public disclosure. If a clearance determina- 
tion cannot be made at the command level, the 
material may be submitted to BUMED for re- 
view and decision. In addition, the disclaimer 
statement of article 1252.3 of NAVREGS shall 
be included in each article submitted for publica- 
tion and shall be signed by the author. The dis- 
claimer statement also applies to speeches and 
public discussions, in which case the individual 



20-4 

Change 



r 




Chapter 21 



CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES, ALCOHOL, 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, AND OTHER 
DANGEROUS DRUGS AND CHEMICALS 



Sections 



Articles 

L Controlled Substances, Alcohol, and Alcoholic Beverages . 21- 1 through 21- 8 

II. Controlled Drugs, Dangerous Drugs, and Poisons . * . . , . . , 21-20 through 21-27 

III. Forms, Records, and Reports . . , 21-40 through 21-48 

IV, Authorized Exceptions to Control Procedures 21-50 and 21-51 

V. Dispensing Drugs .,,«,,,,. 21-60 



Section I. CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES, ALCOHOL, AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 



Article 



General 21-1 

Precribing 21-2 

Custody 21-5 

Security 21-4 

Loss 21-5 

Deterioration 21-6 

Control by the Pharmacy 21-7 

Control by the Nursing Service 21-8 



21-1. General 

(1) "Controlled substances" as used herein are 
those drugs scheduled in the Comprehensive Drug 
Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970, alcohol 
and alcoholic beverages, and any other drugs which 
in the opinion of the local command require security 
measures similar to control procedures promulgated 
by the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), 
Department of Justice, for controlled substances. 
Schedules of controlled substances are established 
by Section 202, Part 308 of the Act. Products may 
migrate between schedules, and new products may 



be added. These changes will be promulgated by the 
Navy Medical Materiel Support Command in the 
Medical/Dental Materiel Bulletin. 

(2) "Controlled drugs" shall include all controlled 
substances, plus any additional drug products des- 
ignated for control by an appropriate military au- 
thority at the command level or in higher echelons of 
the chain of command. 

21-2. Prescribing 

(1) Officers of the Medical and Dental Corps, 
Medical Service Corps (Podiatrists), civilian physi- 



10 Feb 75 



21-1 

Change 83 



21-3 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U. S, NAVY 



21-3 



cians employed by the Navy, independent-duty hos- 
pital corpsmen authorized in section IV, and others 
authorized to write prescriptions, shall use the DOD 
Prescription, DD Form 1289, and Polyprescription, 
NAVMED 6710/6, when writing official prescrip- 
tions. 

(2) An officer of the Medical Corps, Dental Corps, 
or Medical Service Corps (Podiatrist), when pre- 
scribing in his official capacity any of the drugs 
coming within the scope of the Controlled Substance 
Act, is exempt from registration under provisions of 
Section 301. 25 of the Act. He shall use his Corps and 
Social Security Number (SSN) in lieu of the registra- 
tion number normally required on prescriptions. 
This exemption does not apply when the officer 
renders professional treatment outside his official 
duties. In such event he is required to register and in 
all other respects comply with the provisions of the 
law and regulations governing private practice. 

(3) An officer, or civilian physician employed by 
the Navy, who has been designated by a command as 
requiring authorization to purchase or procure from 
official sources controlled substances or prepara- 
tions for official use shall be so designated on the 
command's registration filed with the Registration 
Branch, Drug Enforcement Administration, De- 
partment of Justice, Washington, D.C. 20537. Only 
individuals so designated may sign the Official Order 
Form for Controlled Substances. Government ac- 
tivities are exempt from payment of a fee for registra- 
tion, but not from registration. Command registra- 
tion is for 1 year, but individuals designated may be 
changed by letter signed by the commanding officer. 

(4) Prescriptions written for controlled sub- 
stances, alcohol, and alcoholic beverages, shall be 
limited to one item to a prescription and on DD 
Form 1289- 

(5) Except in an emergency situation, alcoholic 
beverages shall not be prescribed for outpatient use. 

(6) Prescriptions by attending civilian practition- 
ers, other than those employed by the Navy, for 
authorized personnel and their dependents, may be 
filled upon approval of a representative designated 
by the commanding officer or the senior medical 
officer. Such prescriptions shall meet the state regu- 
lations of the locale, the prescribed item is in stock, 
the prescribed quantity is within limitations estab- 
lished by the command, and the prescriber is in the 
local area (limits designated by the commanding 
officer). 

(7) A qualified nurse practitioner and physician 
assistant may write prescriptions when authorized 
in writing to do so by the commanding officer. They 
shall prescribe those drugs and quantities approved 
by the pharmacy and therapeutic committee and 
commanding officer. A nurse practitioner and 
physician assistant shall not prescribe controlled 
substances listed in schedules I thru V. Mentors for 
these prescribing individuals shall review their pre- 
scriptions, at frequent intervals, to assure rational 
prescribing. 



(8) Normally, prescriptions for alcoholic bever- 
ages or solutions, habit-forming drugs, and poison- 
ous drugs to be used in the dental department shall 
be signed by a dental officer. 

21-3. Custody 

(1) Inventories of controlled substances, alcohols 
and alcoholic beverages carried in the Navy Stock 
Account, located at wholesale stock points, Navy 
retail stock points, and mobile logistic support ships 
are not within the scope of this article. Procedures 
for the handling of stocks of these special materiels 
at such activities are promulgated by the Naval Sup- 
ply Systems Command manuals and directives. All 
quantities of controlled substances, alcohol and al- 
coholic beverages issued to use shall be managed in 
accordance with this chapter and current instruc- 
tions as applicable. 

(2) Custodial responsibility for controlled sub- 
stances, alcohol, alcoholic beverages, and dangerous 
drugs shall be vested in a commissioned officer. 

(3) No officer of the Medical Department of the 
Navy shall take or receive into his custody on board 
ship or in any Navy or Marine Corps establishment 
any alcoholic beverages or intoxicating or controlled 
substances except as may be authorized (a) for 
medicinal purposes (b) for the retention as evidence 
in disciplinary cases, or (e) by Navy Regulations. 
Working stocks of these substances may be issued 
from time to time for dispensing purposes to the 
officer or enlisted person in charge of the pharmacy. 
Such person shall be required to keep an accurate 
record of receipts and expenditures and to keep 
these substances under lock when not in use. Except 
as provided above, an officer shall not permit any of 
these substances under his custody to be placed in 
the possession of any person in quantities other than 
the amounts required for immediate consumption 
by patients, or for use in emergency, such as combat. 
All drugs shall be dispensed under the supervision of 
Medical Department representatives at activities 
where there are no officers of the Medical Depart- 
ment. 

(4) Officers of the Medical Department are au- 
thorized to issue alcoholic beverages and controlled 
substances, for medicinal purposes only, to com- 
manding officers of ships and to pilots of aircraft to 
which no Medical Corps officer is attached. 

(5) An officer of the Medical Department, or if 
such officer is unavailable, then an officer desig- 
nated by the commanding officer, shall keep in a 
separate compartment, under lock, all unissued con- 
trolled substances, alcohol, alcoholic beverages, and 
substances classified as dangerous, poisonous or 
otherwise controlled in accordance with the provi- 
sions of articles 21-21(1), (2), and (3). The keys shall 
always be in the custody of an officer. Personnel of 
the Medical Department shall assure that all such 
substances under their charge are properly labeled. 



21-2 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



21-4 



CHAPTER 21. DANGEROUS DRUGS 



21-4 



(6) The executive officer, or other designated of- 
ficer, shall arrange for the care and safe custody of all 
keys and require strict compliance with instructions 
concerning the receipt, custody, and issue of con- 
trolled substances, alcohol, alcoholic beverages con- 
tained in the law, U.S. Navy Regulations, and this 
manual. 

(7) Custodians or their designated assistants shall 
retain the keys to the place of storage while on duty. 
When relieved, they shall deliver the keys to their 
reliefer to a responsible person designated by local 
instructions. A copy of the combination of a safe, if 
used, shall be sealed in an envelope and deposited 
with the commanding officer or an officer desig- 
nated by him. 

(8) An officer of the Medical Department, or if 
such an officer is not available, the senior Medical 
Department representative, shall take charge of the 
medical storeroom and keep the key in his own 
custody or in the custody of his representative. 
However, the medical officer, if one is assigned, or 
such other officer or petty officer designated by the 
commanding officer, shall be responsible for the 
security of the contents of the medical stores shall be 
kept therein. Controlled substances, alcohol, and 
alcoholic beverages shall be kept in separate lockers, 
and the keys to these lockers shall always be in the 
custody of an officer. 

(9) Custody requirements of the pharmacy service 
and nursing service are discussed in articles 2 1-7 and 
21-8. 



21-4. Security 

(1) Controlled substances, alcohol, and alcoholic 
beverages require special handling and accounting 
to provide adequate protection against drug abuse, 
carelessness, theft, and misappropriation. Accord- 
ingly, the following measures, in addition to those 
prescribed elsewhere in this chapter, shall be en- 
forced in all activities except stock points of the 
medical and dental supply system. (The security 
measures for handling this materiel at medical and 
dental stock points are included in the NAVSUP 
manual and current directives.) 

(a) Monthly, or more frequently if circum- 
stances warrant, the person having direct or dele- 
gated custody of controlled drugs, alcohol, and al- 
coholic beverages in store and unissued, or issued to 
the pharmacy for dispensing or manufacturing use, 
shall assure by physical inventory that all quantities 
received and expended have been properly ac- 
counted for. 

(b) Monthly, or more frequently if neces- 
sary surprise inventory of these substances shall be 
made by the Controlled Medicinals Inventory Board 
appointed in writing by the commanding officer. 
The Controlled Medicinals Inventory Board shall be 
composed of three members, at least two of whom 
shall be officers. Senior enlisted personnel in pay 



10 Feb 75 



grades E-8 or E-9 may serve as the third member at 
the discretion of the commanding officer. The senior 
officer assigned to the Board shall be designated as 
the senior member. One officer of the Board shall be 
an officer of the Medical, Dental, Medical Service, or 
Nurse Corps. No member of the Board may be re- 
sponsible for, directly or by delegated authority, the 
substances being inventoried. In small ships or small 
stations where limited staffing precludes the as- 
signment of two officers, one Medical Department 
representative and one commissioned officer (other 
than a Medical Deprtment officer) may constitute 
the Board provided that no person charged, directly 
or by delegated authority, with the custody of the 
substances being inventoried, shall serve as senior 
member of the Board. All prescribed accounting 
records and prescriptions for these substances for 
the prescribed period shall be checked for com- 
pliance with regulations, particularly as to dating, 
proper preparation, and required, signature. The 
Board shall ensure that the records inspected consti- 
tute a complete audit trail, and that they reflect all 
transactions which have occurred during the ac- 
counting period. Pharmacy stock and perpetual in- 
ventory records, requisitions, receipt, and issue 
documentation shall be audited. As an absolute 
minimum, these controls shall be included: 

(1) Responsibility for requisitioning, re- 
ceipt and maintenance of records shall be assigned 
different persons. At ships and stations staffed by 
independent-duty hospital corpsmen, the executive 
officer or his officer designee shall be the custodian 
of controlled drugs. The custodian shall countersign 
all prescriptions, requisitions, and receipt docu- 
ments for controlled drugs. 

(2) The Board must ensure that docu- 
ments reviewed constitute all documents pertinent 
to the accounting period. Supply department records 
should be checked as required to verify that all docu- 
ments are accounted for. 

(3) The supply department is to provide di- 
rectly to the senior member of the Board a copy of all 
issue documents for controlled substances, alcohol, 
alcoholic beverages and other dangerous drugs. Rec- 
ords entries for the accounting period shall be com- 
pared with these source documents. 

(4) Monthly the Commanding Officer, 
Navy Medical Materiel Support Command, will ad- 
dress to each activity which procures controlled sub- 
stances from the Defense Supply Agency, a listing of 
each requisition, item identification and quantity 
issued. (If either item identification or quantity ap- 
pear inappropriate for the requisitioning activity, 
Navy Medical Materiel Support Command will in- 
itiate an inquiry.) The Board shall use this listing to 
validate record postings. 

(5) The Board shall use Report Control 
Symbol MED 67 10/4 (Issues of Controlled Drug Sub- 
stances from Stores Ships) when applicable to vali- 
date the remainder of controlled substances requisi- 
tions whSch are or should be posted to the records. 

21-3 

Change 83 



21-5 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



21-7 



21-5. Loss 

(1) losses, thefts, or irreconcilable differences 
between physical inventory findings of controlled 
substances and their inventory records shall be re- 
ported immediately to BUMED through official 
channels. Simultaneously, a copy of the report shall 
be supplied to the nearest field representative of 
Naval Investigation Service. If loss occurs through 
breakage or other accident, an affidavit by the per- 
son having custodial responsibility stating the kinds 
and quantities lost and the circumstances shall be 
included in the report. If the substances are stolen, 
lost, or destroyed in transit, the consignee shall file 
the report with a sworn statement of facts. 

(2) Where such loss or irreconcilable differences 
occur in the case of alcohol or alcoholic beverages, 
the Controlled Medicinals Inventory Board shall 
make known such discrepancies in their report to 
the commanding officer. Losses through breakage, 
or by other accident, or if stolen, lost, or destroyed in 
transit, shall be handled as above for controlled 
substances. 

21-6. Deterioration 

(1) Controlled substances, alcohol, and alcoholic 
beverages which have deteriorated and are not usa- 
ble, are of questionable purity or potency, or have 
had their identity compromised, shall be the subject 
of a report to the commanding officer. If destruction 
is indicated and directed by the commanding officer, 
destruction shall be accomplished in the presence of 
a member(s) of the Controlled Medicinals Inventory 
Board. A certification shall include the complete 
nomenclature and quantity of those substances de- 
stroyed, together with the method used to accomplish 
destruction. After certification is completed, 
having been signed by the officer(s) witnessing de- 
struction and approved by the commanding officer, 
the certification shall be retained in the files as au- 
thority for dropping the items from the appropriate 
record. 

21-7. Control by the Pharmacy 

(1) The pharmacy shall serve as the source from 
which wards, clinics, or other departments of a 
facility shall normally obtain controlled substances, 
alcohol and alcoholic beverages for use in connection 
with the treatment of patients. Authorized out- 
patient prescriptions must be filled by the phar- 
macy. Alcohols may be issued directly to the labora- 
tory or similar unit providing such stocks are 
included in the monthly audit conducted by the 
Board. 

(2) Controlled substances, alcohol, and alcoholic 
beverages shall be dispensed on receipt of a prescrip- 
tion in accordance with articles 21-2 and 21-41. 

(a) Ward and clinic orders for capsules 
and tablets for oral use, and single-dose ampules 



shall be normally dispensed in units as determined 
by past usage rates. 

(b) Multiple-dose vials shall be dispensed as 
single units. 

(c) Controlled substances shall be dis- 
pensed in a counter-type dispenser whenever prac- 
ticable. 

(3) Telephoned or oral prescriptions for con- 
trolled drugs, alcohol, and alcoholic beverages, ex- 
cept in an emergency, shall not be filled. Emergency 
prescriptions shall be reduced to writing by the pre- 
scriber within 72 hours. 

(4) Prescriptions for controlled substances, al- 
cohol and alcoholic beverages shall not be refilled. 

(5) Prescriptions for controlled substances, al- 
cohol and alcoholic beverages at the time of filling 
shall be dated, numbered, and signed by the com- 
pounder, with his legal signature across the front of 
the prescription. The reverse side of the prescrition 
shall include the wording "received by" in addition 
to the date, address, and signature of the recipient of 
the drug item. 

(6) Signature Card Index. — The pharmacy shall 
maintain a signature card file bearing the legal signa- 
ture of all staff medical, dental officers, military 
podiatrists and civilian physicians employed at the 
activity, and those local civilian prescribers coopera- 
tive in signing a card, to detect or obviate the filling 
of unauthorized or illegal prescriptions. 

(7) A label shall be prepared for each prescription 
issued to individuals. All prescriptions shall be 
labeled with the following minimum information, 
unless the prescriber directs otherwise: name of 
medical facility where prescription is filled, date 
filled (in case of refill, the date of last refill or date of 
original fill plus date of refill(s), name of patient, 
directions, name of medication, strength of medica- 
tion, total amount issued on this prescription, e.g., 
number of tablets, mi's of liquid, grams of powder, 
prescriber's name, prescription number and expira- 
tion date, if applicable. 

(8) Inventories and records of all controlled sub- 
stances listed in schedules I and II of the Com- 
prehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act 
of 1970, shall be maintained separately from all other 
records of the pharmacy, and prescriptions for such 
substances shall be maintained in a separate pre- 
scription file. 

(9) Inventories and records of controlled sub- 
stances listed in schedules III, IV and V shall be 
maintained either separately from all other records 
of the pharmacy or in such form that the information 
required is readily retrievable from ordinary busi- 
ness records of the pharmacy, and prescriptions for 
such substances shall be maintained either in sepa- 
rate prescription files for controlled substances 
listed in schedules III, IV and V only or in such form 
that they are readily retrievable from the other pre- 
scription records of the pharmacy. These prescrip- 
tions will be deemed readily retrievable if, at the 
time they are initially filed, the face of the prescrip- 



21-4 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



21-8 



CHAPTER 21. DANGEROUS DRUGS 



21-8 



tion is stamped in red ink in the lower right corner 
with the letter "C" no less than 1-inch high and filed 
whether in the prescription file for controlled sub- 
stances listed in schedules I and II or in the usual 
consecutively numbered prescription file for non- 
controlled substances. 

(10) For the most part alcohol and alcoholic be- 
verages are managed the same as controlled sub- 
stances. Prescriptions for these substances shall be 
given a separate serial file number preceded by 
"A" and shall be filed separately from all other pre- 
scriptions. 

(11) The pharmacy shall prepare a separate 
NAVMED 6710/1, Narcotic and Controlled Drug 
Account Record, and NAVMED 6710/5, Perpetual 
Inventory of Narcotics, Alcohol and Controlled 
Drugs, in accordance with articles 21-43 and 21-44. 

(12) NAVMED 6710/4, Narcotic and Controlled 
Drug Inventory — 24 Hour, prepared by the nursing 
service, shall be initialed by the pharmacy officer or 
his designated representative, indicating receipt of 
the appropriate completed NAVMED 6710/1, Nar- 
cotic and Controlled Drug Account Record. 

(13) Prescriptions for controlled substances used 
in bulk compounding of pharmaceuticals shall be 
signed by a medical officer designated by the com- 
manding officer. Normally the designee will be the 
director/chief of professional services. 

(14) When drugs or medicines are prescribed or 
issued, the last person removing them from a dis- 
tinctive or distinctively marked container is respon- 
sible for their proper distribution and identification. 

(15) When items are dispensed in other than the 
original immediate containers with intact, legible 
labels, the pharmacy shall record on the prescription 
form when filled the name of the manufacturer, lot 
or control number, or other appropriate codes when 
properly recorded and cross referenced to assure 
prompt, positive identification of the drug. Label 
immediate containers for ward issues, clinics, and 
dental offices to include name of manufacturer, lot 
or control number, or appropriate codes to facilitate 
positive identification of the drug, and if a controlled 
item, such identity established by DEA schedule 
number, special serial number, or other appropriate 
identification. 



21-8. Control by the Nursing Service 

(1) To provide effective and adequate controlled 
substances protection, the nursing service shall be 
responsible for the following measures of control: 
(a) The professional (commissioned officer 



of the Nurse Corps or civilian graduate) nurse to 
whom controlled substances are issued is responsi- 
ble for the custody and security of these items in 
accordance with this article and other directives that 
may be issued. 

(b) No professional nurse, charged with 
the custodial responsibility for these substances, 
shall permit any such substances to be placed in the 
possession of other personnel in quantities greater 
than the amount required for immediate consump- 
tion by the patients. 

(c) The professional nurse to whom such 
items are issued shall maintain a locked container, 
cabinet, or compartment of an approved nature in 
which all such substances shall be kept. 

(d) The charge nurse is responsible for the 
keys to the security container as prescribed by the 
commanding officer of a hostpital/regional medical 
center or the medical officer of a naval station, ship, 
or other activity. The keys shall remain at all times in 
the custody of the nurse responsible and, when 
properly relieved, she shall transfer the keys to the 
relieving professional nurse, 

(2) Each ward, clinic, or other activity drawing 
controlled substances from the pharmacy shall 
maintain a looseleaf notebook (art. 21-46), contain- 
ing the Narcotic and Controlled Drug Inventory — 24 
Hour (NAVMED 67 10/4) and the Narcotic and Con- 
trolled Drug Account Record (NAVMED 67 10/1), in 
accordance with articles 21-42, 21-43, and 21-46. 

(3) Controlled substances shall be ordered from 
the pharmacy on DD Form 1289 signed by an au- 
thorized official in accordance with 21-2(3). The 
prescription form shall be completed in accordance 
with articles 21-2 and 21-41. 

(4) The delivery of controlled substances from the 
pharmacy to the various charge nurses should be 
made by pharmacy only. 

(5) Upon receipt of these substances from the 
pharmacy, the charge nurse shall check the amount 
of the drug, and compare the serial numbers on the 
NAVMED 6710/1 and the prescription. If a discrep- 
ancy exists, and cannot be resolved, a report shall 
be made immediately through the nursing super- 
visor to the chief of nursing service. 

(6) The NAVMED 6710/1 is to be signed in the 
appropriate space and the reverse side of the DD 
Form 1289 is to be dated and signed (see arts. 21-41 
and 21-43). 

(7) Regulations governing the automatic stop 
order for controlled substances are set forth in article 
21-21(4). 

NOTE— There are no articles 21-9 through 21-19. 



10 Feb 75 



21-5 

Change 83 



( 



21-20 



CHAPTER 21. DANGEROUS DRUGS 



21-24 



Section II. CONTROLLED DRUGS, DANGEROUS DRUGS, AND POISONS 

Article 

21-20 

General 21.21 

Controlled Drugs 

Prevention of Overstocking and Outdating of Medicines 21-22 

Use of Antibiotics by Hospital Corps Personnel on Independent Duty 21 " 2 ' 

Distinctive Colors and Shapes for Poisons 21-2 

Antidotes and Antidote Lockers ■ 

. . 21-26 

Caustic Acids ■ ■ • - • ■ > - 

21-27 

Methyl Alcohol 



21-20. General 

(1) Controlled drugs are any drugs which in the 
opinion of the local command require security 
measures similar to controlled substances proce- 
dures. 

(2) Poisonous drugs, chemicals and similar sub- 
stances are classified as dangerous drugs. 

(3) Poisons are usually considered to be chemical 
substances that exert an injurious action in the ma- 
jority of individuals with whom they come in con- 
tact. These substances, including those in (2) above, 
normally do not require the control procedures of 
fully controlled drugs, but do require special cus- 
tody and security measures to prevent accidental 
poisoning. 

21-21. Controlled Drugs 

(1) Drugs selected by the individual commands to 
be classified as "controlled drugs" shall be kept 
under lock and key at all times when not in use. Keys 
to the place provided for the security of these con- 
trolled items shall be retained by the designated 
custodians of these drugs. 

(2) Drugs of a powerful or dangerous nature 
which may be mistaken for other drugs because of 
their appearance shall be kept in containers of dis- 
tinctive color, size, or shape and/or distinctively 
labeled and in a special section wherever drugs are 
stored. 

(3) Local command procedures for the security, 
custody, receipt, expenditure and accounting of 
these substances shall be based on articles 21-1 
through 21-8 and 21-40 through 21-48. 

(4) All drug orders for narcotics, sedatives, hyp- 
notics, anticoagulants, and antibiotics shall be au- 
tomatically discontinued after 48 hours unless (a) the 
order indicates an exact number of doses to be ad- 
ministered, (b) an exact period of time for the medi- 
cation is specified, or (c) the attending physician or 
dentist reorders the medication. The above shall be 
strictly adhered to in order to comply with the re- 
quirements of the Joint Commission of Accredita- 
tion of Hospitals. 



21-22. Prevention of Overstocking and Outdating 
of Medicines 

(1) Periodic checks shall be made, at least 
monthly, of all ward and clinic medicine cabinets to 
reduce the overstocking of medicines, particularly 
costly items, antibiotics and biologicals, to assure 
that such items are not outdated, and to expedite the 
return of unneeded items to the pharmacy for redis- 
tribution or appropriate disposition. The records 
presently maintained covering the issue, receipt, 
and disposition of such items are considered ade- 
quate to record such actions. 

21-23. Use of Antibiotics by Hospital Corps Per- 
sonnel on Independent Duty 

(1) Except under emergency conditions, when 
communication with a medical officer is impossible 
or impractical, Hospital Corps personnel on inde- 
pendent duty should not prescribe or administer 
chlortetracycline, oxytetracycline, tetracylcine, 
penicillin (except oral), streptomycin, or erythromy- 
cin without a specific order or directive of a medical 
or dental officer for each case to be treated. 

(2) If possible, a history of sensitivity to the 
selected antibiotic should, in all cases, be ascer- 
tained prior to administration of the medicament. 
Close surveillance, to discern adverse reaction to the 
administered antibiotic, shall be maintained over 
such patients. 

(3) Chloramphenicol should not, under any cir- 
cumstances, be prescribed or administered without 
a specific order or directive of a medical or dental 
officer for each case to be treated. 

21-24. Distinctive Colors and Shapes of Poisons 

(1) In addition to the general provisions con- 
tained in article 21-21(2), the following specific 
safeguards shall be enforced: 

(a) All solutions of phenol shall be tinted 
pink (fuchsin), and solutions of bichloride of mer- 
cury shall be tinted blue (methylene blue). This re- 
quirement shall not apply to compounded medicines 



10 Feb 75 



21-7 

Change 83 



21-25 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



21-27 



prescribed for individuals and appropriately labeled 
as such, in which phenol or bichloride of mercury is 
one of the ingredients. 

(b) All dangerous poisons are to be indi- 
cated by appropriate poison labels. 

(2) Instructions concerning the care, custody, 
and use of poison containers shall be rigidly 
adhered to. 

21-25. Antidotes and Antidote Lockers 

(1) All persons in the Medical Department shall 
be duly warned regarding the danger of poisons and 
use of antidotes. 

(2) A separate poison antidote locker marked 
ANTIDOTE LOCKER shall be located prominently 
in every emergency treatment room. If necessary, 
more than one locker may be used. (In small ships 
that have only one independent duty hospital 
corpsman aboard, the locker should be located im- 
mediately outside the emergency treatment room for 
ready accessibility when the corpsman is absent ) 
Lockers for shore activities shall approximate the 
dimension 34" X 21-1/2" X 15-1/2" and for ships 
21-1/2" X 32" X 13-1/2". The locker shall be se- 
cured with a seal. Whenever the seal is broken, the 
contents shall be inventoried, the used antidotes 
replaced, and the locker reseated. An inventory list 
for each shelf shall be on the inside of the door 
together with a copy of NAVMED P-5095, Poisons, 
Overdoses, and Antidotes, and the address and tele- 
phone number of the local poison control center 
where applicable. The locker shall contain at least 
the antidotes listed in NAVMED P-5095, and only 
the supplies and instruments required for treatment 
of poisoning or overdoses. All personnel included in 
emergency room treatments shall be thoroughly 
familiar with the contents of the locker and their 



use. The books, Poisoning by von Oettinger, Clinical 
Toxicology of Commercial Products byGIeason, Gosse- 
lin and Hodge, and Handbook of Poisons by Robert H. 
Driesbach, M. D. , are recommended as reference 
material and should be outside the locker for easy 
reference. 

21-26. Caustic Acids 

(1) Caustic acids such as glacial acetic, sulfric, 
nunc, concentrated hydrochloric, or oxalic acids 
shall not be issued to wards "or outpatients. 

(2) Acids of this type are to be stored in separate 
lockers clearly marked as to contents. 

21-27. Methyl Alcohol [For use by medical 
activities ] 

(1) The custodian of controlled substances is 
charged with the responsibility for receipt, custody, 
and issue of all methyl alcohol (methanol, wood 
alcohol) and shall assure himself by physical inven- 
tory that all quantities received and expended are 
properly accounted for. 

(2) Methyl alcohol shall be issued by the supply 
division in the same manner as other alcohols and 
controlled substances. A prominent label shall be 
affixed to all permanent or temporary containers of 
methyl alcohol, or products containing methyl al- 
cohol, as follows: Poison-Inflammable; Contains 
Methyl Alcohol (Methanol, Wood Alcohol); Do Not 
Take Internally; Do Not Breathe Excessive Vapors; 
Avoid Excessive Skin Contact. 

(3) Methyl alcohol shall not be stored, used, or 
dispensed by the pharmacy. 



NOTE — There are nn articles 2I-2K through 2l-.*9. 



21-8 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



21-40 CHAPTER 21. DANGEROUS DRUGS 21" 43 

Section III. FORMS, RECORDS, AND REPORTS 

Article 

General 21 40 

DOD Prescription (DD Form 1289) 21-41 

Narcotic and Controlled Drug Inventory— 24 Hour (NAVMED 6710/4) 21-42 

Narcotic and Controlled Drug Account Record (NAVMED 6710/1) ■■■ 21-43 

Perpetual Inventory of Narcotics, Alcohol and Controlled Drugs (NAVMED 6710/5) 21-44 

Controlled Drug Inventory Report 21-45 

Controlled Drug Book 2 1-46 

Availability of Forms 21-47 

Disposition of Controlled Substances Records 



21-40. General 

(1) Records shall be maintained by medical and 
dental facilities that will provide information of re- 
ceipts, expenditures, and balances on hand of con- 
trolled substances, alcohol, alcoholic beverages, and 
controlled drugs. Supplementary records maintained 
on these substances in store must agree with the 
specified accounting records. (Automatic data pro- 
cessing equipment may be used for control proce- 
dures if the system provides substantially the same 
results. ) 

21-41. DOD Prescription (DD Form 1289) 

(1) In addition to the provisions of articles 21-2 
and 21-7 concerning the DD 1289, the following 
address of the person writing requirements shall be 
strictly adhered to. 

(a) The complete address of the person for 
whom the prescription is written is mandatory when 
controlled substances are prescribed. 

(b) Each controlled substances prescrip- 
tion shall bear the legible, legal signature, title, 
corps, and SSN of the prescribing medical or dental 
officer, or podiatrist, or independent- duty hospital 
corpsman as authorized in article 21-50. 

(c) On all prescriptions for children 12 years 
of age and under, the age shall be specified. 

(d) Erasures or interlineations on prescrip- 
tions for controlled substances are prohibited. 

(e) The use of brand names of drugs and 
medical stores in prescription writing shall be 
avoided. Generic names shall be used whenever 
possible. 

(f) Orders for all drugs shall be limited to 
one item or compound to each prescription form (DD 
1289). Polyprescription , NAVMED 6710/6, is to be 
used for multiple prescriptions other than controlled 
substances. 

(g) Ward and clinic orders for controlled 
substances shall be written for appropriate amounts 
dependent upon usage rate. 

(h) The quantity of drugs that may be pre- 
scribed for outpatient use shall be governed by local 
command policy. 



(i) In submission, the prescriber's name 
must be typed or preprinted in the structure block of 
the prescription, in addition to the manual signa- 
ture, to expedite identification. 

21-42. Narcotic and Controlled Drug Inven- 
tory— 24 Hour (NAVMED 6710/4) 

(1) The inventory shall be signed by the ward 
charge nurse on each watch after she has checked the 
drugs prior to being relieved. Where feasible and 
practicable, it is also strongly recommended that the 
drugs be checked concurrently by the nurse report- 
ing for duty and by the nurse to be relieved. Any 
discrepancies noted shall be reported immediately to 
the nursing supervisor. The record is usable for 2 
weeks, 1-week period on each side. The night nurse 
shall initiate the record. 

(2) The serial numbers of new NAVMED 67 10/1's 
received from the pharmacy during each watch shall 
be entered. The serial numbers of completed 
NAVMED 6710/l's returned to the pharmacy shall 
be entered and the pharmacist or his representative 
shall acknowledge receipt by placing his initials in 
the appropriate column. 

(3) Supervisor's Audit. — At the time specified in 
local instructions, the nursing supervisor shall audit 
the ward controlled substances supplies. After the 
audit the nursing supervisor shall date and sign the 
NAVMED 6710/4 (fig. 1 at end of chapter). 

21-43. Narcotic and Controlled Drug Account 
Record (NAVMED 6710/1) 

(1) Upon receipt of a properly completed and 
signed prescription, a separate Narcotic and Con- 
trolled Drug Account Record shall be prepared by 
the pharmacy for each controlled substance in 
schedules I, II, III, and any such drug which in the 
opinion of the commanding officer requires such 
control procedures. 

(2) Each controlled substance issued to the wards 
or clinics shall be accompanied by a NAVMED 
6710/1, bearing a serial number. These forms are 
filed behind dividers tabbed appropriately to denote 
each controlled substance. 



JO Feb 75 



21-9 

Change 83 



21-44 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



21-46 



(3) All entries shall be made in black ink. Errors 
shall be corrected by drawing a single straight line 
through the erroneous entry together with the signa- 
ture of the person making the correction. The cor- 
rect entry shall be recorded on the following line, if 
necessary. 

(4) If a new issue is received before the old issue is 
completely expended, the new NAVMED 6710/1 
shall be inserted in back of the record presently 
being used. The serial number of the new NAVMED 
6710/1 shall be entered in the Narcotic and Con- 
trolled Drug Inventory, NAVMED 6710/4. 

(5) The heading for each NAVMED 6710/1 shall 
be completed at the time of issue. The body shall be 
used for recording expenditures and balances only. 

(6) Each time a drug is expended, complete in- 
formation shall be recorded: date, time, patient, 
doctor's name, by whom given, amount expended' 
and balance on hand (NAVMED 6710/1, fig. 2 at end 
of chapter). 

(a) All amounts shall be recorded in 
Arabic numerals. Where the unit of measure is a 
milliliter (ml) and the amount used is less than a ml, 
it shall be recorded as a decimal; e.g. , 0. 5 ml, rather 
than as a fraction. 

(b) When a fraction of the amount is ex- 
pended to the patient, it shall be placed in paren- 
theses before the amount recorded in the expended 
column; e.g., an entry of (0.010)1 on the morphine 
sulfate 0.016 gm record indicates that one ml was 
expended and that 0.010 gm was administered. 

(c) If a single dose of a controlled sub- 
stance is accidently damaged or contaminated dur- 
ing preparation for administration, or is refused by 
the patient after preparation, the dose shall be de- 
stroyed and a brief statement of the circumstances 
shall be entered on the NAVMED 6710/1. 

(d) If multiple doses of a controlled sub- 
stance are damaged or contaminated, the supervisor 
shall record the disposition of the drug, including 
the date, amount of the drug, brief statement of 
disposition, and the new balance. Both the super- 
visor and the witnessing nurse shall sign the 
NAVMED 6710/1. 

(e) Deteriorated drugs shall be handled as 
described in article 21-6. 

(7) The completed NAVMED 6710/1, along with 
the counter-type dispenser, shall be returned to the 
pharmacy. The pharmacy officer or his designated 
assistant shall enter on the NAVMED 6710/5 the 
date the form was returned to the pharmacy. This 
information shall be entered on the appropriate line 
bearing the same serial number (prescription 
number) as the NAVMED 6710/1. 

(8) Monthly the pharmacy shall verify all 
NAVMED 6710/1's still outstanding 30 days from 
date of issue. 



21-44. Perpetual Inventory of Narcotics, Alcohol 
and Controlled Drugs (NAVMED 6710/5) 

(1) A separate NAVMED 6710/5 shall be prepared 
for each controlled substance. All blanks and col- 
umns except as noted below are self-explanatory 
(fig. 3 at end of chapter). 

(a) Name of Drug. —Enter generic name of 
drug or proprietary name as appropriate, for exam- 
ple, "Codeine Sulfate. " 

(b) Strength. — Express as gm, mg. 

(c) Unit.— Enter tablet or ampule as the 
case may be; in the case of liquids or powders enter 
ml or gm as appropriate. 

(d) Prescription or Requisition Number. 

Enter appropriate prescription number or requisi- 
tion (voucher) number. In the case of issues returned 
to the pharmacy, enter the source. 

(e) Recipient. — Enter "pharmacy" in the 
case of receipts. Enter ward number, name of clinic 
or patient as appropriate, in the case of expendi- 
tures. 

(f) NAVMED 6710/1 Returned. —The 
date the NAVMED 6710/1 is returned to the phar- 
macy shall be entered on the appropriate line bearing 
the same serial number or prescription number. 

(2) On request of the senior member of the Con- 
trolled Medicinals Inventory Board, the Chief of the 
pharmacy service, or his designated assistant, shall 
total the Quantity Received column and the Quantity 
Expended column for inspection by the board. 

(3) Upon completion of inspection, one member 
of the board shall initial the receipts and expendi- 
tures columns. 

21-45. Controlled Drug Inventory Report 

(1) The Controlled Drug Inventory Report shall 
be prepared monthly, more frequently if necessary, 
by the pharmacy service after inventory for submis- 
sion by the Controlled Medicinals Inventory Board. 
This report shall list each item in stock, together 
with its strength and unit of issue. The report shall 
show the Amount Remaining Last Report, Quantity 
Received, Quantity Expended, and Balance on 
Hand. 

(2) The Controlled Drug Inventory Report shall 
be submitted for approval to the commanding of- 
ficer by the Controlled Medicinals Inventory Board, 
stating that the inventory was conducted in accord- 
ance with this chapter and existing local instructions. 
In addition this report shall state the findings of the 
board and any recommendations. 

21-46. Controlled Drug Book 

(I) Each ward, clinic, or other activity drawing 
controlled substances from the pharmacy shall 
maintain a looseleaf notebook containing the Narco- 



21-10 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



21-47 



CHAPTER 21. DANGEROUS DRUGS 



21-48 



tic and Controlled Drug Inventory (NAVMED 
6710/4) in the First section, and individual Narcotic 
and Controlled Account Records (NAVMED 6710/1) 
in the latter sections. (See art. 21-44(2).) 

(2) The nursing supervisor shall remove all filled 
NAVMED 6710/4's over 3 months old from the Nar- 
cotic and Controlled Drug Book, and transfer them 
to the hospital archives for disposition in accordance 
with SECNAVINST 5212.5 series. 

21-47. Availability of Forms 

( 1) Forms cited herein are available from the cog- 
nizance "I" forms and publications supply distribu- 
tion points. 



21-48. Disposition of Controlled Substances 
Records 

(1) All controlled substances prescriptions and 
records shall be disposed of in accordance with 
SECNAVINST 5212,5 series. 



NOTE — There is no article 21-49. 



10 Feb 75 



21-11 

Change 83 



( 




21-50 



CHAPTER 21. DANGEROUS DRUGS 



21-51 



Section IV. AUTHORIZED EXCEPTIONS TO CONTROL PROCEDURES 



Hospital Corpsmen "n Independent Duty 

Operational or Emergency Situations 

21-50. Hospital Corpsmen on Independent Duty 

(1) General. — Hospital corpsmen assigned to 
medical department duties in small vessels, shore 
stations, Fleet Marine Force, and mobile field units, 
to which no medical officer is attached perform all 
the duties required of the medical department. 
These duties include medical department adminis- 
tration and, to the extent for which qualified, the 
professional duties prescribed for medical officers of 
ships and stations. To make controlled substances 
available to hospital corpsmen assigned to duty in- 
dependent of a medical officer, fleet, force or type 
commanders, commanding officers of other appro- 
priate authority may authorize deviation from the 
control procedures established in this chapter, but 
NOT from the general intent concerning receipt, 
custody, and issue of the items. This deviation in no 
way relieves a command of the responsibility for 
controlled material. 

(2) Deviations, — Directives issued by fleet, force 
or type commanders, commanding officers, or other 
appropriate authority, may authorize the following 
deviations from the controls established in this chap- 
ter: 

(a) The senior hospital corpsman at an 
activity no having a medical officer may be au- 
thorized to deviate from the control procedures 
established by this chapter, but not the intent regard- 
ing receipt, custody and issue of controlled sub- 



Artick- 

21-50 
21-51 



stances, alcohol, alcoholic beverages, and other 
dangerous and controlled drugs. 

(b) The senior hospital corpsman may pre- 
scribe and administer only those controlled sub- 
stances listed in the Authorized Medical Allowance 
List (AMAL) for the activity to which he is assigned 
(revision or augmentation of controlled substances 
in AMAL's of activities without medical or dental 
officers may be made only by type commanders, 
medical officers or their higher authority). DD Form 
1289 shall be prepared and filed in accordance with 
this chapter except that prescriptions not signed by a 
medical officer, dental officer, podiatrist, or civilian 
physician employed by the Armed Forces shall be 
countersigned by the commanding officer of his 
duly appointed officer representative (see art. 21-4). 

21-51. Operational or Emergency Situations 

(1) Special instructions should be issued by ap- 
propriate authority relative to the receipt, custody, 
and issue of controlled substances, alcohol, alcoholic 
beverages, and dangerous and controlled drugs or 
first aid kits containing these substances, which, in 
the best interest of the Navy, may require deviation 
from the controls established in this chapter due to 
operational and/or emergency situations. 



NOTE — There art- mi artides 21-52 [hmugh 21-59- 



10 Feb 75 



21-13 

Change 83 



( 



( 



o 



21-52 



CHAPTER 21. DANGEROUS DRUGS 



21-52 



Section V. DISPENSING DRUGS 



21-52. Utilization of Graduate Licensed Pharma- 
cists 

(1) Policy. — The Secretary of Defense has 
prescribed the following policy regarding the 
use of graduate licensed pharmacists in military 
pharmacies: 

( 1 ) Except as provided in paragraph 2 below, one 
or more graduate licensed pharmacists shall be assigned 
to duty at all large military pharmacies at fixed in- 
stallations where the range and variety of drugs dis- 
pensed are complex and require a high degree of 
professional competence. This applies to all large in- 
stallations in the U.S., and to those installations outside 
of the U.S. where a major proportion of the workload 
involves the filling of prescriptions for civilian person- 
nel. At ail such installations, drugs shall be dispensed 
only by graduate licensed pharmacists. 

( 2 ) At other installations where the use of a full- 
time graduate licensed pharmacist would not be justi- 
fied, pharmacies may be operated ( 1 ) by part-time basis 
officers who are graduate licensed pharmacists but who 
are assigned other primary duties; (2) by part-time 
civilian graduate licensed pharmacists; or ( 3 ) by dis- 
pensing physicians. 

(3) Pharmacy technicians may continue to be used 
to operate facilities other than the type referred to in 
paragraph 1 above. They may also continue to be used 
in pharmacies of the type referred to in paragraph 1 
above, provided they function under the direct super- 
vision of graduate licensed pharmacists or dispensing 
physicians. 

(4) In general, positions for graduate licensed phar- 
macists in pharmacies outside the U.S. should be filled 



with commissioned military pharmacists. Within the 
U.S., a sufficient number of pharmacy positions should 
be filled by commissioned military pharmacists to pro- 
vide a rotation base for the military pharmacists re- 
quired overseas. The remaining positions in the U.S. 
should be filled by civilian pharmacists. 

(2) Scope. — The foregoing policy applies to 
all shore activities at which drugs are dispensed; 
however, only those medical and dental facilities 
which fill more than 5,000 drug prescriptions per 
quarter are considered to fall within the category 
of "large military pharmacies at fixed installa- 
tions" as cited in paragraph (1) of the DoD 
policy statement. 

(3) Employment of Civilian Pharmacists. — 
Activities not having an allowance for military 
pharmacy officers but which require the services 
of graduate licensed pharmacists, and those ac- 
tivities which have an allowance for pharmacy 
officers but require additional pharmacists to 
comply with the policy of the Secretary of De- 
fense, shall request necessary funds and ceiling 
for the employment of civilian pharmacists from 
the cognizant support office, bureau, or command. 
Upon receipt of funds and ceiling, each activity 
shall take appropriate action, pursuant to Civilian 
Manpower Management Instructions, to employ 
required qualified civilian graduate licensed 
registered pharmacists. 



21-10a 
Change 53 



r 

.X 




CHAPTER 21. DANGEROUS DRUGS 



NARCOTIC AND CONTROLLED DRUG INVENTORY - 2M HOUR 
NAYMED 1397 (4-tO) 

(To b. with MVMED 1391 ji-ilO) 



period COVEHIKS flaeimid Jit'i) 



DATE 


HOUR 


SIGNATURE OF NURSE 
(I certify that 1 have counted and 
found correct all narcotics and 
controlled drugs listed on NAVKED 
1398 for this tetd). 


SERIAL NUMBERS OF NARCOTIC AND 
CONTROLLED DRUG ACCOUNT RECORDS 


RECEIVED FROM 
PHARMACY 


RETURNED TO AND RECEIVED 
BY PHARMACY 


PHARMACIST 
INITIALS 


/ 


n'skt o6e><=> 




















EVENING 












NIGHT AWs 






" — 
























3 


NIGHT . 

Ofooo 












£ y * 




f/oio£~0 
















NIEHT „ , 








' 













EVENING ? jr 










6" 


NIGHT 










CAY 










EVENING 










L 


N IfiHT 










DAT 










EVEN 1 NG 










7 


NIGHT 










DAY 










EVEN 1 NG 











SVP EHVISOX'S AUDIT . 



Date 3 J/u^_Jt_V?i6, Tip. 
I certify that I /iave audited the records of narcotic and conti/lltd drugs for this -ward. 

FOUND CORRECT | \ ERRORS NOTED DATE CORRECTED 



Figure 1 



21- 11 
Chonge 15 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



KARCOTIC AMD CONTROLLED DRUG ACCOUNT RECORD 
HAVMED 1398 (*-») 



(To bt mid with NAYItED 13S7) 



TO BE FILLED IN 8T PHARMACY 



I3UEU , f 



DRUG llf*M4. tlriHgtli of tiil*ri/'ee.. <«L <r Aypo J. r»i* J ' 

7kh o.&/£> 



("J 



HECE I VE D 



DATE ISSUE [j 



T|OH SERIAL M=>. 



AMOUNT ISSUED 



DATE 


HOUR 


PAT IE NT 
{La.it nan and initial ) 


ORDERED BY 
factor'* Nw) 


GIVEN BY 
[^uni'i .5 1 g/ia 1 if r< J 


AMOUNT 
EXPENDED 


BALANCE 
ON HAND 


/ Jone. 


//Oe> 


y>J ~ JJ m ■ - 






/ 





/ 










/ 


/IT 


/ 










I 


— '-4 — 


( 




&a^L~^ 


it t A 1*1 ■ ■ 




1 

1 


1 to 


5. done 


O£"oo 








1 




,SL 


(%oo 










i4 


<A 
















Qf&o 








/ 














/ 


// 












'o/oj / 




A 














z 


/6?3o 




- <zt*" 












A 






t-d"W-v. 












v y\c a 




















3 (/Hit 










1 


1 


v5 


0030_ 













Figure 2 



PERPETUAL INVENTORY OF NARCOTICS, ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED DRUGS 



ACTIVITY 






NAME OF DRUG 


STRENGTH 


unit ;n) 




U. S. Naval 


Hospital 


morphine: sulfate 


0.016 Gm 


Tablet 




Portsmouth, 


Virginia 









DATE 


RX OR REQ. NO. 


RECIPIENT 


NAVMED-1398 
RETURNED 


QUANT 1 TY 
RECE IVED 


0UANT ITY 
EXPENDED 


BALANCE ON HAND 


ENTERED 
BY 


7-1-59 


12345 


Pharmacy 




100 




100 




7-2-59 


N-234 


Iminpain, G 






20 


80 




7-4-59 


N-246 


Ward 2A 


9-2-59 




20 


60 




7-31-59 


TOTALS 






100 


40 







Figure 3 



21-12 
Change 15 



21-60 



CHAPTER 21. DANGEROUS DRUGS 



21-60 



Section V. DISPENSING DRUGS 



21-60. Utilization of Graduate Licensed Pharma- 
cists 

(1) Policy. — The Secretary of Defense has pre- 
scribed the following policy regarding the use of 
graduate licensed pharmacists in military phar- 
macies: 

(1) Except as provided in paragraph 2 below, one or 
more graduate licensed pharmacists shall be assigned to 
duty at all large military pharmacies at fixed installations 
where the range and variety of durgs depensed are com- 
plex and require a high degree of professional competence. 
This applies to all large installations in the U.S., and to 
those installations outside of the U.S. where a major pro- 
portion of the workload involves the filling of pre- 
scriptions for civilian personnel. At all such instal- 
lations, drugs shall be dispensed only by graduate 
licensed pharmacists. 

(2) At other installations where the use of a fulltime 
graduate licensed pharmacist would not be justified, 
pharmacies may be operated (1) by part-time basis officers 
who are graduate licensed pharmacists but who are as- 
signed other primary duties; (2) by part-time civilian 
graduate licensed pharmacists; or (3) by dispensing physi- 
cians. 

(3) Pharmacy technicians may continue to be used to 
operate facilities other than the type referred to in paragraph 
1 above. They may also continue to be used in phar- 
macies of the type referred to in paragraph 1 above, pro- 
vided they function under the direct supervision of 
graduate licensed pharmacists or dispensing physicians. 



(4) In general, positions for graduate licensed pharma- 
cists in pharmacies outside the U.S. should be filled with 
commissioned military pharmacists. Within the U.S., a 
sufficient number of pharmacy positions should be filled 
by commissioned military pharmacists to provide a rota- 
tion base for the military pharmacists required overseas. 
The remaining positions in the U.S. should be filled by- 
civilian pharmacists. 

(2) Scope. — The foregoing policy applies to all 
shore activities at which drugs are dispensed; how- 
ever, only those medical and dental facilities which 
fill more than 5,000 drug prescriptions per quarter 
are considered to fall within the category of "large 
military pharmacies at fixed installations" as cited in 
paragraph (1) of the DOD policy statement. 

(3) Employment of Civilian Pharma- 
cists. — Activities not having an allowance for 
military pharmacy officers but which require the 
services of graduate licensed pharmacists, and those 
activities which have an allowance for pharmacy 
officers but require additional pharmacists to com- 
ply with the policy of the Secretary of Defense, shall 
request necessary funds and ceiling for the employ- 
ment of civilian pharmacists from the cognizant 
support office, bureau, or command. Upon receipt 
of funds and ceiling, each activity shall take appro- 
priate action, pursuant to Civilian Manpower Man- 
agement Instructions, to employ required qualified 
civilian graduate licensed registered pharmacists. 



10 Feb 75 



21-15 

Change 83 



CHAPTER 21. DANGEROUS DRUGS 



NARCOTIC AND CONTROLLED DRUG INVENTORY - 24 HOUR 
NAVMED C710/4 (4-72) 



(To be used with NA VMED 6 71 0/1/ 



ward" 



PERIOD COVERING rtnclu»ive ttelesj 



HOUR 



SIGNATURE OF NURSE 

fj certify that I have counted and found correct 
all narcotics and controlled drugs listed 
on NA VMED 6710/1 for this ward.) 



SERIAL NUMBERS OF NARCOTIC AND 
CONTROLLED DRUG ACCOUNT RECORDS 



RECEIVED 

FROM 
PHARMACY 



RETURNED TO 
AND RECEIVED 
BY PHARMACY 



PHARMA- 
CIST 
INITIALS 



NIGHT 



/ 



/5ce> 



a 2Zoo 



A 



NIGHT fit QQ 



tf/rrrf 



0£OQ 



B^eM tic 



evening2_3^ 




EVENING 



SUPER VISOR 'S A UDIT 

Date •J- 



Time- 



I certify that I have audited the records of narcotic and controlled drugs for thiifvard. 

U£| FOUND CORRECT P] E RRORS NOTED DATE CORRECTED 



arure anff Rank) 

AoU A/c, rjKJ 



FIGURE 1 



21-16 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 




Figure 2 



PERPETUAL INVENTORY OF NARCOTICS. ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED DRUGS 
NAVMED 6710/1 (4-72) S/N ot 05- ZZ6-71 00 



ACTIVITY 


uame or mus 


STSencTH 


UNIT 


NAVAL REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 








SOME WHERE, U.S.A. 


MORPHINE SULFATE 


0.016 gm 


(H) Tablet 



DATE 
Year 


RX OR REQ. NO. 


RECIPIENT 


NAVMED 
67 10/1 
RETURNED 


QUANTITY 

BECE | VED 


QUANTITY 
EXPENDED 


BALANCE ON HAND 


Enterod 

Bv 


7-1-74 


12345 


Pharmacy 




100 




100 




7-2-74 


N-234 


Iminpain, G. 






20 


80 




7-3-74 


N-246 


Ward 2A 


9-2-74 




20 


60 




















7-31-74 


TOTALS 






100 


40 






^^^^^^ 































FIGURE 3 



10 Feb 75 



21-17 

Change 83 



m 



r 



r 



Chapter 22 

PREVENTIVE MEDICINE 



Sections 



Article! 

I. General ■— — 22- 1 throu * h 3 

H. Sanitation and Industrial Hygiene M ~ * throH « h 22- 8 

III. Sanitary Standards for Living Spaces " - 7 throu «* 22-11 

IV. Lighting, Heating, and Ventilation — — — 22-12 

V. Food and Water Supply 22-13 tlaaa « h 22-11 

VI. Garbage, Refuse, and Sewage Disposal 22-15 throu * h 22-18 

VII. Communicable Disease Control * hrou « h 22-20 

VIII. Immunization aM1 throu « h 22-s,A 

IX. Insect, Pest, and Rodent Control 22-31 throu»h 22-32 

X. Quarantine Procedures 22-33 throneh 22-29 

XI. Field Sanitation 22-40 thron|th a ~ il 

XII. Radiation Health 22-42 a > taa * h 22-48 

i — 



Section I. GENERAL 



Article 

Scope 221 

Responsibility 22-3 

Procedures 22-1 



22-1. Scope 

(1) The field of preventive medicine extends 
into activities, under the cognizance of other 
bureaus, offices, and commands of the Navy 
Department, where there are conditions which 
affect the health of the personnel of the Navy. 
Instructions are issued from time to time by 
BUMED, commanders in chief, and commanding 
officers concerning certain provisions of preven- 
tive medicine affecting administrative and mili- 
tary functions. 

22-2. Responsibility 

( 1 ) The medical officer is responsible for estab- 
lishing health standards and for recommending to 
the commanding officer the application of such 



measures as may be necessary to maintain the 
health of the command. 

22-3. Procedures 

(1) The medical officer shall adhere to any 
procedures inaugurated by a superior authority. 
When no instructions have been issued by proper 
superior authority, the medical officer shall pro- 
pose for adoption by his commanding officer such 
measures as are necessary to fulfill his responsi- 
bility. Requests for special technical advice, sur- 
veys, or investigations may be forwarded via 
appropriate channels. Whenever conditions or 
circumstances arise which are unusual or require 
special attention, a special report shall be sub- 
mitted to BUMED. 



22-1 
Change 51 



22-4 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 
Section II. SANITATION AND INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE 



22-7 



Sanitation 

Swimming Sites 

Industrial Hygiene 

22-4. Sanitation 

1. The district medical officer, the medical 
officer, and other officers assigned as assistants in 
sanitation shall be responsible for the following: 

(a) Inspection, investigation, recommenda- 
tion, and supervision of all matters pertaining to 
sanitation, including the sanitary aspects of food 
and food handling, water, sewage and waste dis- 
posal, housing, and other elements of the environ- 
ment affecting health, and keeping the command- 
ing officer informed in these matters. 

(b) Indoctrination of the personnel of the 
ship, station, or activity in the latest advances in 
sanitary science and preventive medicine, includ- 
ing accident prevention and industrial health. 

(c) Cooperation with civilian personnel and 
governmental agencies associated with health 
problems that may affect naval personnel on or 
in the vicinity of the command. 

(d) Recommendations relative to the need 
for supplying trained sanitation officers to sta- 
tions in the vicinity. 

(e) Keeping records of inspection and re- 
inspection, investigations, and recommendations. 

(f ) Preparing local reports. 

22—5. Swimming Sites 

(1) Recommendations. — The medical officer 
or Medical Department representative shall make 
appropriate recommendations to the command- 
ing officer concerning the sanitary maintenance 
to be observed in and around swimming sites, and 



Article 
22-4 
22-5 
22-6 



he shall further recommend that swimming be 
prohibited in contaminated waters. He shall make 
reference to the Manual of Naval Preventive 
Medicine, Chapter 4, Swimming Pools and 
Bathing Places, NAVMED P-5010-4, for estab- 
lishing swimming site standards. 

22-6. Industrial Hygiene 

( 1 ) Medical officers and other officers assigned 
as assistants in industrial hygiene shall have the 
responsibility for the planning and conducting of 
an effective industrial health program which shall 
include the following: 

(a) Study the occupational health problem 
of the ship, station, or activity. 

(b) Conduct surveys of potential health 
hazards in specific activities and processes. 

(c) Collect field and laboratory samples per- 
taining to occupational health exposures. 

(d) Make laboratory analysis on samples 
taken in the field and on any material sub- 
mitted with reference to causation of occupational 
disease, 

(e) Prepare reports of findings, recommen- 
dations, and conclusions evaluating the hazards 
of observed occupational health conditions. 

( f ) Maintain records and files of studies and 
examinations. 

(2) Industrial hygiene services for operational 
units for the recognition, evaluation, and con- 
trol of hazards in the work environment are 
available by contacting the cognizant preventive 
medicine unit. 



Section III. SANITARY STANDARDS FOR LIVING SPACES 

Article 

Barracks 22 ~ 7 

Berthing Spaces and Sanitary Facilities Afloat 22 ~ 8 

Hospitals 9 

Confinement Facilities Afloat 2J " I<) 

Confinement Facilities Ashore 2!_u 



22-7. Barracks 

(1) The medical officer shall make routine 
inspections of barracks in order to maintain Navy 
standards of sanitation. 

(2) The following are recommended mini- 
mum health/ habitability criteria per enlisted man 
in all barracks: 



72 square feet of floor space per man. 
500 cubic feet of room space per man. 
6 feet minimum distance between heads of sleeping 
men. 

When situations occur that may require deviation 
from the above criteria, advice should be re- 
quested (by message, if appropriate) from Chief, 
BUMED (Code 72). 



22-2 

Change 51 



22-8 



PREVENTIVE MEDICINE 



22-12 



(3) The minimum proportions of plumbing 
fixtures to the number of men to be accommo- 
dated are as follows: 

Water closets 1 for every 20 men. 

Urinals 1 fixture for every 

25 men. 

Lavatories 1 basin or wash sink 

for every 5 men. 
Showers 1 for every 25 men. 

For detailed information concerning the requisite 
number of sanitary fixtures, reference shall be 
made to the appropriate design manual of the 
Navy Facilities Engineering Command. 

22-8. Berthing Spaces and Sanitary Faculties 
Afloat 

(1) The medical officer, or Medical Depart- 
ment representative, shall make routine inspec- 
tions of the sanitary condition of berthing spaces, 
toilets, lavatories, and bathing facilities. Berthing 
spaces shall be clean, sufficiently ventilated, and 
well illuminated. Head-to-foot sleeping arrange- 
ments of occupants of adjacent beds are recom- 
mended to reduce the potential of air-borne dis- 
ease transmission. Excellent standards of habit- 
ability contribute immeasurably to the health and 
well-being of the crew. 

(2) Water closets, urinals, lavatories, and 
showers shall at all times be in functional condi- 
tion. Shower curtains, bulkheads, and decks shall 
be free of mildew, odor, and soap accumulations. 
Sewage backflow through deck drains constitutes 
an extremely unsanitary condition and shall be 
reported for immediate correction. 

(3) Details of living space sanitation are con- 
tained in the Manual of Naval Preventive Medi- 
cine, Chapter 2, Sanitation of Living Spaces and 
Related Service Facilities, NAVMED P-5010-2. 

22-9. Hospitals 

( 1 ) It has been found that, for Navy purposes, 
a nursing unit accommodating 30-40 patients 
is a size most adequate and economically adminis- 
tered. In tropical climates, and in hospitals caring 
for a large number of convalescent patients, the 
number of accommodations in the nursing unit 



may vary in accordance with environmental 
conditions. 

( 2 ) The following factors are considered basic: 

Floor area per bed — 100 net square feet. 
Cubic space per bed __ 1,000 to 2,000 cubic feet. 

Height of ceiling 8'6" to lO'O". 

Bed spacing 8 feet center to center. 

1 lavatory for each toilet room in a bedroom. 

1 lavatory for each 6 patients when private toilet 

rooms are not provided. 
1 water closet for each toilet room in a bedroom. 
1 water closet/urinal for each 6 patients when 

private toilet rooms are not provided for individ- 
ual bedrooms. 
1 shower for each private bedroom. 
I shower for each obstetrical bedroom. 
1 shower or tub for each 7 patients for hospitals of 

100 b°ds or more, exclusive of private and 

obstetrical bedrooms. 
1 shower or tub for each 6 patients for hospitals of 

less than 100 beds, exclusive of private and 

obstetrical bedrooms. 
1 service sink for each nursing unit. 

22-10. Confinement Facilities Afloat 

(1) The medical officer shall make a daily 
determination as to the health of the prisoners 
and the sanitary condition of the confinement 
facilities. Cell dimensions and sanitary facilities 
shall conform to standards set forth by the Naval 
Ship Systems Command. Ventilation, heating, and 
illumination standards shall conform to those of 
the crew's living spaces. For detailed information 
concerning shipboard detention facilities, refer 
to the General Specification for Ships of the U.S. 
Navy, Naval Ship Systems Command. 

22-11. Confinement Facilities Ashore 

(1) The medical officer shall conduct daily 
inspections of such places and facilities of con- 
finement in order to provide necessary medical 
services and insure strict conformity to santiary 
standards stated in the Manual of Naval Preven- 
tive Medicine, NAVMED P-5010. Detailed in- 
formation concerning building and structural 
dimensions appear in Design Manual DM-37, 
Naval Facilities Engineering Command, and per- 
tinent Department of Defense instructions. 



Section IV. LIGHTING, HEATING, AND VENTILATION 



22-12. Lighting, Heating, and Ventilation 

(1) The medical officer or Medical Depart- 
ment representative shall make recommendations 
to the commanding officer for proper lighting, 
heating, and ventilation of ships and barracks. 



(2) Lighting intensities are prescribed by the 
Naval Ship Systems Command and the Naval 
Facilities Engineering Command. 

{3) The purpose of heating and ventilating 
living spaces afloat and ashore is to provide a 
comfortable and safe atmosphere for the occu- 



22-3 
Change 51 



22-13 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



22-16 



pants. Ventilation ducts and vents are to be main- Reference should be made to the appropriate 
tained free of dust, grime, and grease accumula- manuals of the Naval Ship Systems Command the 
tions to insure efficient and safe operation. Naval Facilities Engineering Command. 

Section V. FOOD AND WATER SUPPLY 



Article 

Food "~ 1S 

Water 22 ~ 14 



22-13. Food 

(1) The medical officer or Medical Depart- 
ment representative is charged with the follow- 
ing responsibilities: 

(a) Make frequent inspections of the sani- 
tary aspects of food storage, preparation, and 
service; examine menus to ascertain that a well- 
balanced diet is provided giving consideration 
to requirements specified in BUMED Instruc- 
tion 10110.3 series; and make appropriate recom- 
mendations to the commanding officer, 

(b) Insure the continued maintenance of 
the standards of food sanitation as set forth in 
the Manual of Naval Preventive Medicine, Chap- 
ter 1, Food Sanitation, NAVMED P-5010-1. 

(c) Insure that all foods are prepared in 
clean surroundings by personnel free of com- 
municable diseases and open lesions of the hands, 
face, and neck. 

(d) Insuie that foods of a proteinaceous 
nature are not permitted to remain at room tem- 
perature for a period exceeding 3 hours, and are 
refrigerated at a temperature not exceeding 
40° F. 

(e) The Medical Department representative 
shall certify the acceptability of food and potable 
water in the event of nuclear, biological, or 
chemical (NBC) warfare. He shall consult the 
Naval Supply Systems Command Manual (Sub- 
sistence chapter) for guidance in matters of 
NBC attack. 



22-14. Water 

( 1 ) The Medical Department is charged with 
the responsibility for advising and making recom- 
mendations to insure a safe supply of potable 
water. The Medical Department representative 
shall make special surveys of water supply sys- 
tems, including all measures for purification, and 
make necessary recommendations for the correc- 
tion of sanitary defects. In the event of an acute 
shortage of water, he shall advise the command- 
ing officer relative to the rationing of water. 

(2) In determining the potability of water, 
the Medical Department representative will be 
guided by appropriate instructions and the 
Manual of Naval Preventive Medicine, (Chapter 
5, Water Supply Ashore, NAVMED P-5010-5, 
and Chapter 6, Water Supply Afloat, NAVMED 
P-5010-6). 

(3) For purification of water in the field, 
reference should be made to the Landing Party 
Manual, U.S. Navy. 

(4) Reference should be made to the Naval 
Ship Systems Command Manual for the proper 
operation of water supply plants aboard ships; 
and to the Naval Facilities Engineering Com- 
mand Manual, Maintenance and Operation of 
Water Supply Systems (NAVDOCKS MO-210), 
for installations ashore. 



Section VI. GARBAGE, REFUSE, AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 



Garbage and Refuse Disposal 

Sewage Disposal 

22-15, Garbage and Refuse Disposal 

(1) The medical officer, or Medical Depart- 
ment representative, shall make the necessary 
inspections to insure proper methods and ade- 
quate frequency of garbage and refuse disposal. 
Aboard ship, garbage and refuse may be dumped 
at sea, at the discretion of the commanding 
officer. Shipboard garbage grinders are not to be 
operated in harbor and river areas. Ashore, 



Article 
22-15 
22-16 



garbage and refuse may be disposed of in a 
manner prescribed by the Naval Facilities Engi- 
neering Command Manual, Refuse Disposal 
(MO-213), and the Manual of Naval Preventive 
Medicine, Chapter 8, Garbage and Refuse Dis- 
posal, NAVMED P-5010-8. 

22-16. Sewage Disposal 

(1) The medical officer, or Medical Depart- 



22-4 

Change 51 



22-16 CHAPTER 22. PREVENTIVE MEDICINE 22-16 



ment representative, shall make necessary inspec- 
tions and recommendations to the commanding 
officer for the sanitary disposal of sewage and liq- 
uid industrial wastes. Reference shall be made to 
the Naval Facilities Engineering Command publi- 



cation, Sewage and Industrial Waste Systems 
(NAVDOCKS MO-212), for sewage and waste 
disposal methods at permanent installations, and 
to the Landing Party Manual, U.S. Navy, for 
methods of disposal in the field. 



22-5 
Change 58 



( 



( 




22-17 



CHAPTER 22. PREVENTIVE MEDICINE 



22-18 



Section VII. COMMUNICABLE DISEASE CONTROL 



„ Article 

General . 22-17 

Venereal Disease Control 22-18 

Tuberculosis Control 22-19 

Reports 22-20 



22-17. General 

(1) The medical officer shall be on the alert 
for the early detection of infectious diseases, shall 
recommend the necessary control measures to the 
commanding officer, and shall institute the neces- 
sary restrictions of personnel and take such other 
action, -with the approval of the commanding of- 
ficer, as may be required to prevent the spread of 
communicable disease. He may be guided in his 
responsibilities for communicable disease control 
by Control of Communicable Diseases, current 
edition, reported and published by the American 
Public Health Association, New York City. 

22-18. Venereal Disease Control 

(1) Coordination of the Venereal Disease Con- 
trol Program. — 

(a) District Control Programs. — The district 
medical officer shall coordinate the venereal dis- 
ease control program in his district by maintain- 
ing close and active liaison with all personnel in 
this field. 

(b) Local Control Programs. — Medical offi- 
cers and other officers assigned to venereal disease 
control shall be responsible for: 

(1) Planning, developing, and carrying 
out a comprehensive educational program utiliz- 
ing lectures, visual aids, and other teaching 
services. 

(2) Administering the venereal disease 
contact reporting system, and evaluating contact 
data collected. 

(3) Compiling records of sources of vene- 
real disease contacts in the locality for considera- 
tion by the appropriate Armed Forces disciplinary 
control board. 

(4) Maintaining liaison with the district 
medical officer, other military services, and 
civilian health agencies for prevention and con- 
trol of venereal disease. 

(c) Contact Interviewers. — 

(1) Hospital corpsmen are qualified con- 
tact interviewers when they have completed satis- 
factorily a course given by the area preventive 
medicine unit, U.S. Public Health Service, or 
Class B Advanced Hospital Corps School at Naval 
Hospital, San Diego, Calif. 



(2) Medical departments which have no 
qualified interviewers, and which have a need for 
them, may nominate hospital corpsmen for tem- 
porary duty orders to attend venereal disease 
contact interviewers' training courses. The area 
preventive medicine unit should be consulted for 
time and location of these courses. 

(2) Case Finding, Syphilis. — 

(a) For detection of early and unrecognized 
cases of syphilis in patients with other venereal 
diseases or nongonococcal urethritis. 

(1) Active duty Navy and Marine Corps 
members diagnosed as having nonsyphilitic vene- 
real diseases shall have a serological test for 
syphilis in conjunction with initial treatment, 
when practicable, and monthly for 3 months 
following treatment. However, if 2.4 million 
units or more of penicillin were administered in 
treatment of the nonsyphilitic venereal disease, 
only one serological test for syphilis 3 months 
later is necessary. A summary statement of sero- 
logical results shall be entered on the SF 600 
Health Record. 

(2) Incident to receipt or transfer of mem- 
bers, annual verification of Health Record, or any 
periodic physical examination, the member's 
Health Record shall be reviewed and, when in- 
dicated, appropriate followup action instituted. 

(b) The FTA-ABS (fluorescent treponemal 
antibody absorption test) is to be used for con- 
firmatory diagnosis of syphilis. 

(3) Treatment and Contact Followup. — 

(a) Treatment and Management of Venereal 
Disease, NAVMED P-5052-UA, should be con- 
sulted for guidelines and recommendations an 
therapy and clinical management of venereal 
diseases. However, because of the rapidly chang- 
ing requirements for effective therapy of gonor- 
rhea, the medical literature should be followed 
closely. 

(b) Interviewer's Aid for VD Contact 
Investigations, NAVMED P-5036, contains per- 
tinent information concerning epidemiological 
methods utilized in venereal disease control. This 
publication provides guidance related to stand- 
ard report form and reporting procedures. 

(c) SF.CNAV Instruction 6222.1 series on 



22-7 
Change 58 



22-19 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



22-30 



repression of prostitution should be consulted for 
administrative handling of venereal diseases and 
related information. 

22-19. Tuberculosis Control 

(1) The tuberculosis control program for Navy 
Department personnel, their dependents, and 
eligible civilians shall be administered in accord- 
ance with BUMED Instruction 6224,1 series and 
NAVMED P-5052 20, The Prevention and 
Management of Tuberculosis in Armed Forces 
Hospitals. 

22-20. Reports 

(1) The medical officer is responsible for the 
preparation and submission of routine reports 
and notices concerning the presence of communi- 
cable disease and other matters in the field of 
preventive medicine. Reference shall be made to 
chapter 23 for detailed instructions. 



(2) The medical officer shall cooperate with 
Federal, State, and local health agencies and civil 
authorities in the prevention, control, and report- 
ing of communicable, infectious and/or con- 
tagious diseases. He shall report all persons dis- 
charged from the service with an infectious 
disease which is considered to be a potential 
hazard to the health of the population. Such re- 
ports shall be made to the health department of 
the State which is the prospective residence of 
the individual being discharged. The report, in 
letter form with duplicate attached, shall include 
only the following information: Name, prospec- 
tive place of residence (address), diagnosis, date 
of discharge, and place of discharge. The report 
shall emphasize that the information given is 
confidential. In all cases of tuberculosis, the medi- 
cal officer of the activity in which discharge from 
the service is culminated shall notify the Tuber- 
culosis Control Division, U.S. Public Health 
Service, Bethesda, Md., 20014, giving the in- 
formation as stated above. 



Section VIII. IMMUNIZATION 

22—30. Regulations gible civilians shall be administered in accord- 

ance with BUMED Instruction 6230 series and 
(1) Immunization programs for Department the current edition of the publication NAVMED 
of the Navy personnel, their dependents, and eli- P-5052-15. 



22-8 

Change 58 



22-33 



22-31 CHAPTER 22. GENERAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING PREVENTIVE MEDICINE 

Section IX. INSECT, PEST, AND RODENT CONTROL 

Control of Disease-Bearing: Insects and Pests 

Rodent Control 



22-31. Control of Disease-Bearing Insects 
and Pests 

(1) The medical officer shall formulate plans and 
methods for the control of disease-bearing insects 
and Insect pests and shall make recommendations 
to the commanding officer regarding steps to be 
taken to this end. He, and those officers assigned 
to insect and pest control, shall be responsible for 
the eradication or control of insects and other ver- 
min to preserve property and protect the health and 
morale of personnel. The number of officers 
trained in insect and pest control will generally be 
small; therefore, the services of such officers must 
be used on an area-wide basis to give adequate pro- 
tection to all naval facilities. 

(2) These officers will be responsible for the fol- 
lowing: 

(a) Education of personnel in individual meas- 
ures for protection against insect-borne diseases 
endemic in the area. 

(b) Instruction and training of personnel as- 
signed to insect and pest control activities in proper 
methods and precautions. 

(c) Maintenance of periodic surveys to deter- 
mine breeding areas and species. 

(d) Supervision of insecticide dispersal and 
other methods of insect control. 

(e) Recommendations relative to construction 
and maintenance of screens, ditches, surface water 
drains, fills and the clearing of streams. 

(/) Recommendations for the location of camp 
sites at suitable distances from habitations where in- 
sect-borne diseases are endemic. 

(g) Inspection of naval facilities, installations, 
and adjacent areas to assure that programs are 
properly executed and making recommendations for 
appropriate action. 

(h ) Cooperation with civilian and other govern- 
mental activities having problems that may affect 
naval personnel on or in the vicinity of a station. 

(i) Reporting as required with respect to effec- 
tiveness of the recommended or instituted program. 

<3> Assisting and advising on any phase of con- 
trol required, keeping informed of latest methods. 



Article 

23-31 
22-32 

(k) Providing for procurement, storage and is- 
suance of supplies and equipment including proper 
safeguards for handling of poisonous materials. 

22-32. Rodent Control 

(1) The medical officer is responsible for the for- 
mulation of a rodent-control program for approval 
and execution by the commanding officer under the 
supervision of the Medical Department. The num- 
ber of officers trained in rodent control will generally 
be small; therefore, the services of such officers must 
be used on an area-wide basis to give adequate pro- 
tection to all naval facilities. 

(2) Officers assigned in rodent control shall be 
responsible for all phases of a complete program 
including the following: 

(0) Supervision of all rodent-control opera- 
tions on any station or ship within any command 
designated. 

(b) Instruction and training of personnel as- 
signed to rodent control In proper methods, and in 
maintaining strict sanitation as a means of control. 

(c) Maintaining a readily available supply of 
rodent-control bait, poisons, and equipment. 

(d) Inspection of ships, naval facilities, instal- 
lations, and adjacent areas to assure properly exe- 
cuted rodent-control programs and ascertain their 
effectiveness. 

(e) Inspection of ship-shore rat control meas- 
ures to Insure enforcement of proper safeguards. 

(/) Correlating rodent-control operations with 
other phases of sanitation and maintenance to facil- 
itate use of trained personnel on related projects. 

Cff) Maintaining contact with Marine Corps, 
Army, municipal, and native village officials and ar- 
range cooperative rodent-control projects where re- 
quired to control rodents on areas adjacent to naval 
facilities. 

(h) Reporting periodic inspections and routine 
activities to the medical officer as required. 

(1) Instigating precautionary measures to safe- 
guard the handling and storage of poisonous mate- 
rials used in rodent-control operations, and meas- 
ures to insure that these materials shall not fall into 
the hands of unqualified or inexperienced personnel. 



22-13 
Change 3 



22- 33 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U. S. NAVY 22-35 

Section X. QUARANTINE PROCEDURES 

Article 

General 22-33 

Responsibilities of Medical Department 22-34 

Quarantine Authority and Responsibility According to Locality 22-35 

Quarantinable and Communicable Diseases 22—36 

Control of Rodent and Insect Infestation Aboard Ships — 22-37 

Disinsectization 23-38 

Transfer of Pathogenic Cultures and Organisms 22-39 

23— 33. General <2) As regulations differ from port to port, medi- 

(1) Quarantine procedures in the Navy embrace f offlc ^ ab ° ard ™ al v ^ sels shaU « ' 

* . , . . . .. ... deavor to determine in advance the quarantine 

measures designated to prevent the dlssemtaaUon regulatlons of each ^ m which entry ta contem . 

of human, animal, or plant disease from place to p i ated m order to ^ full com pi lance witll those 

place. Basic regulations and detailed instructions regulations and to minimize delay. 

concerning such procedures are published in Gen- (3) staff medical officers of each command of the 

eral Orders. Additional instructions are published naval establishment having quarantine responsl- 

from time to time and may be found in current butties shall effect and maintain close liaison with 

official naval publications. the local quarantine officers of civil agencies. 

23-34. Responsibilities of Medical De- 23-35. Quarantine Authority and Respon- 
partment sibility According to Locality 

(1) It is the duty of personnel of the Medical There are four classes of quarantine authority 

Department, ashore or afloat, to be well informed with which the Navy must "MP*- 

« ,™ nt „,v a i ™ ff „T n t ift n B (1) In the United states - its Territories, and pos- 

concerning current naval quarantine regulations ^ Quarantine authorlty and resp onsibility is 

and instructions, to advise and make timely recom- assigned by statute to the v s _ Health 

mendations to commanding officers to insure com- Service (human diseases), the Department of Agri- 

pliance with these regulations, and to recommend culture (plant and animal diseases), and the Depart- 

the promulgation of additional or special quaran- ment of the Djterior (wildlife) . Naval regulations 

tine measures when necessary. recognize this primary authority and responsibility 



32-14 
Change 3 



22-35 



CHAPTER 22. PREVENTIVE MEDICINE 



22-37 



of other governmental agencies. Collaboration is 
effected so that the Navy carries out certain proce- 
dures in cooperation with the quarantine functions 
of other governmental agencies. The nature of this 
collaboration is set forth in detail in General Orders 
which pertain to quarantine. 

(2) Cities, counties, and States, in certain in- 
stances, have promulgated quarantine regulations 
in addition to those of the Federal agencies. Full 
naval compliance with such local quarantine regu- 
lations is mandatory. 

(3) The quarantine laws of foreign countries 
must be complied with in all instances. Where 
naval establishments are situated in a foreign coun- 
try, quarantine may be a collaborative procedure, 
with certain responsibilities delegated to the Navy, 
when special arrangements for such have been 
effected. 

(4) In naval establishments outside the United 
States, its Territories, and possessions, where neither 
Federal nor other civil authority has quarantine 
jurisdiction, or does not exercise such Jurisdiction, 
the full responsibility for quarantine devolves upon 
the naval district commandant, or the area, or 
base commander. 

22-36. Quarantlnable and Communicable 
Diseases 

(1) Diseases Subject to Quarantine. ^-By inter- 
national agreement, only six diseases are classified 
asquarantinable: 

(a) Cholera (incubation period 5 days) . 

(b) Plague (incubation period 6 days). 

(c) Louse-borne typhus (incubation period 12 
days) . 

(d) Small pox (incubation period 14 days) . 

(e) Yellow fever (incubation period 6 days). 
(/) Louse-borne relapsing fever (incubation 

period up to 12 days, average 7 days) . 

(2) Communicable Diseases.— While emphasis is 
placed on measures to prevent the dissemination of 
"quarantlnable" diseases, the Medical Department 
is charged equally with the responsibility of recom- 
mending measures to prevent the dissemination of 
communicable diseases other than those classified 
as quarantlnable both within and among naval es- 
tablishments and civilian communities. 

22-37. Control of Rodent and Insect In- 
festation Aboard Ships 

(1) Certificates of Deratization or Deratization 
Exemption. — 

(a) By international convention a "certificate 
of deratization," or a "deratization exemption cer- 
tificate" is required of vessels entering most foreign 
ports, if detention for fumigation is to be avoided. 
A certificate to be valid must be issued by the U.S. 
Public Health Service. 

(b) Medical officers of vessels proceeding to 
foreign ports must apply (as required by interna- 
tional convention) for a certificate of deratization 



or deratization exemption. These certificates may 
be obtained by requesting that a rodent inspection 
be made by a U.S. Public Health Service representa- 
tive. If on inspection a rodent problem is found 
to be present, deratization measures will be re- 
quired. After deratization, a certificate of deratiza- 
tion will be issued. If no rodent problem is found 
to be present, a certificate of deratization exemption 
will be issued. Either certificate is valid for 6 
months. Failure to possess such a certificate may 
result in a quarantine and a rodent inspection. 

(c) The carrying of certificates of deratization 
or deratization exemption is not required of naval 
vessels under circumstances other than those stated 
in articles 22-37(1) (a) and (b) because of the 
high state of ratprooflng and rat control on board 
most naval vessels. Both a quarantine and a rodent 
inspection are required, however, upon first enter- 
ing a United States port, if the vessel has made 
contact with a plague port within the previous 60 
days. 

(cf) While periodic rat inspections are not re- 
quired of United States naval vessels by the U.S. 
Public Health Service, it is appropriate and highly 
desirable to request inspections and recommenda- 
tions of the U.S. Public Health Service or naval 
rodent control officers when these are available, be- 
cause of their expert knowledge of the habits and 
methods for control of rats aboard ship. The medi- 
cal officer shall recommend that the commanding 
officer make such requests whenever the presence 
of rats is suspected. For supply ships, transports, 
and repair ships, which are most frequently seri- 
ously infested, a routine preventive inspection every 
6 months by a trained rodent control officer of the 
Navy or U.S. Public Health Service is indicated. 
Naval and/or U.S. Public Health Service rodent 
control officers are available in all major ports of 
the United States, its Territories, and possessions, 
and can be reached through the port director. 

(e) Reference shall be made to General Orders 
covering quarantine regulations for naval vessels 
for instructions as to avoidance of rat infestation 
particularly in plague ports. 
(2) Fumigation. — 

(a) Recent developments in disinfestation and 
deratization render the fumigation of ships as a 
routine procedure rarely necessary. Rodent con- 
trol will ordinarily be effected by the more simple 
and usually equally effective procedure of baiting 
and trapping. Every effort to reduce rats by trap- 
ping shall be made before resorting to more danger- 
ous methods, unless health is immediately threat- 
ened. The destruction of Insects, particularly lice, 
will ordinarily be carried out by the use of DDT 
preparations. Fumigation is never indicated for 
control of cockroaches, bedbugs, fleas, lice, ants, etc. 
In rare instances it may be used in food storerooms 
against flour moths, bean beetles, etc. 



22-15 
Change 71 



22-37 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



22-4 X 



(b) In the relatively rare instances when fumi- 
gation or disinf estation for rodent and ectoparasite 
control is deemed essential, application shall be 
made to appropriate U.S. Public Health Service rep- 
resentatives located in all major United States 
ports. If a health problem exists in the opinion of 
the U.S. Public Health Service, that Service will 
contract to have the work accomplished by civilian 
operators qualified to handle dangerous fumigants 
such as hydrogen cyanide gas or methyl bromide. 
This service will be rendered without charge. If 
fumigation is done at Navy insistence and a health 
problem is deemed not to exist, the Navy will be 
asked to pay for the entire operation or, when this 
is impracticable, to reimburse the U.S. Public 
Health Service for the fumigation costs. 

(c> The use of naval personnel to perform fumi- 
gation is apt to prove both dangerous and inefficient. 
However, when such becomes mandatory, detailed 



instructions may be found in the Bureau of Ships 
Manual, and current instructions, 

22—38. Disinsectization 

fl) Regulations governing disinsectization of ves- 
sels and aircraft are contained in General Orders. 
The technique of accomplishing disinsectization is 
contained in current Bumed directives. 

22—39. Transfer of Pathogenic Cultures 
and Organisms 

<1> Current regulations governing the importa- 
tion of pathogenic cultures and organisms from out- 
side the United States into laboratories located in 
the United States are contained in General Orders. 

(2) Shipments by United States mail shall be in 
accordance with current United States Post Office 
regulations. 



Section XI. FIELD SANITATION 

Article 

General 22-40 

Preparation for Field Service 22— 41 



22-40. General 

(1) The responsibilities of medical officers with 
regard to sanitation, when serving with personnel 
in the field, are essentially the same as those serv- 
ing with personnel housed in permanent shore es- 
tablishments. They shall maintain an 
inspection service sufficient to insure the sanitary 
operation of messing facilities, water purification 
equipment, waste disposal facilities, and other ap- 
pliances in order to protect the health of all per- 
sonnel. Sanitary appliances used in the field are 
simpler and easier to construct than those used in 
permanent installations, but more attention is re- 
quired to maintain them in satisfactory condition. 

22r41. Preparation for Field Service 

CD The medical officer shall familiarize himself 
with all health and sanitary data available on the 
area to be occupied, and formulate a plan and 
prepare the necessary sanitary orders for the prac- 
tical solution of problems likely to be encountered 
and present them to the commanding officer for ap- 
proval and execution. The plan shall provide for: 

(a) The indoctrination of all personnel in per- 
sonal hygiene, sanitation, and the special protec- 
tive measures to be used. 

(b) The assignment of an adequate comple- 
ment of nonmedical personnel (approximately 2 
percent of the command) to sanitary duties such as 



maintenance and care of latrines and urinals, fly 
control, mosquito control, rodent control, and gar- 
bage and waste disposal. In combat areas, addi- 
tional personnel must be assigned for the handling 
and burial of the dead. 

(c) The thorough indoctrination of the non- 
medical personnel in their sanitary duties for effi- 
cient performance with a minimum of supervision. 

<d> The assignment and enforcement of priori- 
ties for the acquisition of materials and supplies 
and the early construction of sanitary appliances 
in the field. * \ 

(e) The selection and physical examination of 
food handlers, and their indoctrination in personal 
hygiene, sanitation in the preparation of food, and 
the care of utensils and mess gear. 

(/) The inspection and approval by the medi- 
cal officer of galleys, before they are placed in 
operation. 

(2) The planning and the indoctrination and 
training of personnel in the training camp or stag- 
ing area in order to provide an efficient, well- 
trained sanitary organization upon landing. 

(3) The required immunizations shall be com- 
pleted in ample time to provide protection upon 
arrival. 

(4) The medical officer shall refer to the Landing 
Party Manual, U.S. Navy, for preventive medicine 
practices in the field. 



22-16 
Change ?1 



22-42 CHAPTER 22. PREVENTIVE MEDICINE 22-46 



Section XII. RADIATION HEALTH 

Article 

Scope 22-42 

Delineation of Responsibility 22^(3 

Guidance and Procedures 22-44 

Duties of Medical Department Personnel 22-45 

Radiation Health Protection Officers 22-46 



22-42. Scope 

(1) Radiation health programs comprise those 
procedures designed to protect and maintain the 
health of persons in the Naval Establishment 
whose duties involve exposure to medical or non- 
medical sources of ionizing radiation. 

22-43. Delineation of Responsibility 

(1) Radiation health programs are a medical 
responsibility. At BUMED command activities, 
the responsibility is assigned to the commanding 
officer, who may delegate program-operation 
responsibility. At ships and stations under the 
command of other bureaus and offices, responsi- 
bility for the radiation health program is as- 
signed to the head of the medical department of 
the command. 

(2) Radiological safety and control programs 
are nonmedical responsibilities, and include all 
nonhealth-related procedures and techniques 
utilized to control access to and handling of all 
sources of ionizing radiation — natural, induced, 
or contaminated. Medical department personnel 
normally shall not be assigned duties and respon- 
sibilities in these programs, except in BUMED 
command activities. 

22-44, Guidance and Procedures 

(1) Basic regulations and detailed instructions 
regarding exposure to ionizing radiation are 
promulgated by the Federal Radiation Council, 
the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, the various 
bureaus and offices, commanders in chief, type 
and force commanders, and commanding officers. 
The medical officer shall adhere to these issuances 
and to the procedures outlined in article 22-3 
as they apply to the radiation health program. 

22-45. Duties of Medical Department Personnel 

(1) The duties of medical department person- 
nel of any activity involved in the construction, 
operation, or repair of nuclear-powered vessels 



or research reactors, or in the use of ionizing 
radiation in nondestructive testing, are to: 

(a) Be well informed on current regulations 
and instructions regarding exposure to ionizing 
radiation, advise and make timely recommenda- 
tions to commanding officers to insure compli- 
ance therewith, and recommend the promulga- 
tion of additional or special instructions when 
necessary. 

(b) Determine, in accordance with current 
directives, the physical fitness of individuals em- 
ployed in or assigned to areas where exposure 
to ionizing radiation can occur. 

(c) Conduct, in accordance with current di- 
rectives, periodic medical examinations of indi- 
viduals exposed to radiological hazards. 

(d) Conduct a personnel dosimetry program 
and advise responsible officers concerning the 
radiation status of individuals under their super- 
vision. 

(e) Instruct nonmedical personnel concern- 
ing the effects of ionizing radiation. 

(f) Determine the adequacy of radiological 
control measures in effect and make recommenda- 
tions for improvements when necessary, 

(g) Treat patients injured from and/or con- 
taminated with radioactive material. 

(2) Reference should be made to subarticles 
2-141(4) and 2-142(1) concerning the duties of 
the submarine medical officer relative to nuclear 
radiation. 

22-46. Radiation Health Protection Officers 

(1) On board certain ships and at certain sta- 
tions, the medical officer is provided specially 
trained radiation health protection officers to aid 
him in executing the radiation health program. 
They may be Medical or Medical Service Corps 
officers, or civil service employees. In such situa- 
tions, these officers shall be assigned to, and carry 
out their duties within, the medical department 
of the command. They shall at all times keep the 
medical officer informed concerning the results 
of their findings and observations. 



22-17 
Change 71 



23 



«*3 



Chapter 23 

REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 



Sections 

Articles 

I. Bureau Reporting Requirements 23— 1 through 23 — 21 

II. NAVMED, Standard Federal, Department of Defense, and Other Forms 23— 50 through 23— 63 

III. Release of Information From Records 23-25 5 through 23-262 



Section I. BUREAU REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Article 

General 23- 1 

Tabulation of Bureau Reporting Requirements 23— 2 



23-1. General 

( 1 ) Medical Department personnel are re- 
quired to prepare and submit certain special 
and periodic reports as specified in article 23—2. 
Reference to official instructions for the prep- 
aration and submission of each of these reports 
will be found in the tabulation. Additional re- 
ports may be required of representatives of the 
Medical Department by U.S. Navy Regulations 
or other competent authority. 

(2) For purposes of identification and con- 
trol, each report required by BUMED has been 
■assigned a report symbol from the Department 
of the Navy Standard Subject Identification 
Codes, SECNAVINST 5210.11 series. 

(3) No report shall be considered as an offi- 



cial continuing reporting requirement of 
BUMED unless it bears a report symbol. The 
report symbol where practicable shall be placed 
on all reports (letter and form) submitted to 
BUMED, In addition, all correspondence re- 
ferring to an official reporting requirement of 
BUMED should cite the title and symbol of the 
report. 

(4) Subarticle 23 — 50(5) contains data on 
availability and stock levels of reporting forms. 

(5) The original copy only of each report 
shall be submitted to BUMED unless otherwise 
indicated. Where practicable, signatures, as re- 
quired, should appear on the reports, obviating 
the need for letters of transmittal. 



27 Dec 71 



23-1 
Change 71 



5 £3 23-2. Tabulation of Bureau Reporting Requirements 

J L ■ — 



i 

CO 



C3 

n 



Symbol 


Title 


Format 


Fre- 
quency 


1 Requiring directive 


Preparing activities 


1000-1999 MILITARY PERSONNEL 


MED- 1321-1... 


Nurse Corps Specialist 
Designated for Augmentation 
Teams. 




S-A 


BUMEDINST 1321.5 
series. 


Hospitals designated in INST. 


MED- 1 520-1. .. 


Qualifications and Recommenda- 


NAVMED 1441 


A 




Naval hospitals approved for medical 
intern training. 

Naval district commandants (less 10, 
14, 15, and 17). 

Activities under the command of 
BUMED having Medical/Dental 
Corps personnel. 


MED- 1520-6. . . 


tions on Interns. 




A 


BUMEDINST 1520.15 
series. 

BUMEDINST 1611.4 
and 1520.13 series. 


MED-1611-1. . . 


Professional Performance 


NAVMED 1611/1.. 


A 


MED- 16 16-1. . . . 


Physician's Assistant Performance 
Evaluation. 


NAVMED 1616/1 




BUPERS Manual, 1020315- 


. Selected hospitals and medical centers. 






3000-3999 OPERATIONS AND READINESS 




MED-3402-1... 




Top priority 
message. 


S 


BUMEDINST 3402.1 
series. 


Ships and stations having medical 
personnel (including Military 
Sealift Command). 


DD-DR&E (AR ) 

636 (3900) 


Research and Technology Re- 
sume for Program Planning and 
for On-Going Work at the 
Work Unit Level. 


DD Form 1498 & 
Addendum Sheet. 


A,S 


BUMEDINST 3900.3 
series. 


Naval medical activities conducting 
research. 


MED-3900-2. . . 


Research Proposal Summary 




S 


BUMEDINST 3900.3 
series. 


Activities under the command of 
BUMED conducting research. 











> 
o 

H 
E 



g 

-8 



m 
Z 
„H 

C 

in 

i 



*1 



3 

OS f 
0* Ul 



6200 PREVENTIVE MEDICINE 

MED-6200 — 1 —Preventive Medicine Activities. Letter S-A BUMEDINSTS 6200.3 

and .9 series. 

MED 6200—3 --- Health Conditions Abroad Letter S Art. 2-21. 

MED-6220— 3 —Disease Alert Report. Message, speed X BUMEDINST 6220.3 

letter, or- ltr. and 6224.1 series. 

MED-6222 — 4 .Report of Venereal Disease in PHS 956(VD) S Art. 15-25A and BU- 

Recruit. MEDINST 6222.7 series. 

MED-6222— 5 —Venereal Diesease Epidemiologic PHS 2936 S BUMEDINST 6222.7 

Report. series. 

MED-6222 — 6 Telegraphic Report of Contacts of Telegram S do. 

Early Syphilis Cases to State 
Health Officers. 

MED-6222— 7 —Separation Epidemiologic Report. PHS 691 (VD) S Art. 15-48 and BUMED- 
INST 6222.7 series. 

MED-6224 — 1 Tuberculin Testing of Recruits, Letter A Art.15-91. 

Midshipmen, and Other Special 
Personnel. 

MED-6224— 8 —Annual Report of Tuberculin NAVMED 6224/2 A BUMEDINST 6224.1 

Retesting. series. 

MED-6224 — 9 Report of Tuberculosis Contact Letter X do. 

Investigation. 

MED-6230 — 2 Malaria Control and Prevention. Message S BUMEDINST 6230.il 

series. 

MED-6230— 3 — Mass Prophylaxis for infectious Letter S BUMEDINST 6230.13 

Hepatitis. serles - 

MED-6260— 1 —Report of Occupational Health NAVMED 6260/1 S-A BUMEDINST 6260.7 

Services. and narrative. series. 



c 



Environmental and preventive 

medicine units and disease vector 
ecology and control centers. 

Ships and stations outside U.S_. 

having a medical officer or Medi- 
cal Department representative. 

Ships and stations having medical 
personnel. 

Naval training centers and Marine 
Corps recruit depots. 

Navy and Marine Corps activities. 



.Navy and Marine Corps activities in 
U.S. 



Navy and Marine Corps separation 
activities. 

NTCs, MARCO RCRUITDEPs, 
NAVSCOLCOM Newport, 
COMDTMCS QUANT, & USNA 

Ships and stations having medical 
personnel. 

Do. 



Ships and stations. 



Ships and stations overseas having 
medical personnel. 

Naval activities in U.S. and its terri- 
tories employing 300 or more 
civilians. 



o 
X 
> 
t 

H 
w 

SB 



tn 
T3 

H 

en 

n 
O 

2 

> 

z 
o 

w 

M 

n 
o 
- 

0 

t/3 



See footnote at end of table. 



r r 



23-2. Tabulation of Bureau Reporting Requirements — Continued 





Symbol 


Title 


Format 


Fre- 
quency 1 RequlrlDg directive 


Preparing activities 








AQA/I Iji VT Eft 13 AT 

t 1 o \ H) V.i I'j In ti, K A L, 








MED-6300— 1 


— Medical Services and Outpatient 
Morbidity Report. 


NAVMED 6300/1 __ 


— M BUMEDINST 6300.2 
series. 


Ships and stations having medical 
personnel. 




MED-6300— 2 


— Inpatient Admission/ 
Dispostion Record. 


NAVMED 6300/5 __ 


__ M BUMEDINST 6300.3 and 
6300.4 series. 


Ships and stations having medical/ 
dental personnel. 



MED-6300— 3 __. 



Inpatient Data Correction 
Record. 



NAVMED 6300/6 __ M,S BUMEDINST 6300.3 series Naval aerospace, submarine, and 

regional medical centers; naval and 
U.S. naval hospitals; dispensaries 
with authorized operating beds; 
and Naval Dispensary Seattle. 



MED-6300 — 4 —.Inpatient Data Correction Record. NAVMED 6300/7 
MED-6300 — 5 —Inpatient Data Transmittal Record. NAVMED 6300/8 



MED-6320 — 2 Report of Medical Treatment, 

Hospitalization, and Allied 
Services. 

MED-6320— 7 — Health Care Staffing Report. 



NAVMED U S 



M,S do. 

__ M BUMEDINST 6300. 
6300.4 series. 

BUMEDINST 6320.32 Ships and stations, 
series. 



Do. 

3 and Ships and stations having medical/ 
dental personnel. 



NAVMED 6320/7 



MED-6320 — 10 — Hospitalized Active Duty Flag or Message 
General Officer and Retired 
Marine Corps General Officer 
Report. 



MED-6320 — 12 —Analysis Unfunded Reimbursable NAVMED 6320/3 
Transactions. 

MED-6320 — 13 — Report of Details of All Nursing Copies of local 

reports. 



Service Personnel. 
MED-6320— 15 —Hospital Staffing Report. 



NAVMED 6320/8 __. 



to 



MED-6322 — 1 Report of Treatment Furnished DD 7 

Pay Patient, Hospitalization 
Furnished. 



Q BUMEDINST 6320.16 
series. 

X BUMEDINST 6320.25 
series. 



_M NAVMED P-5020, 
FinManHdbk. 

X BUMEDINST 6320.27 
series. 

Q BUMEDINST 6320.42 
series 

-M Sec. J., BUMEDINST 
6320.31 series. 



BUMED command activities ( less 
hospitals) and activities having 
dispensaries. 

Naval and U.S. naval hospitals; 
medical centers; activities having 
dispensaries with authorized 
operating beds; naval dispensaries; 
NAVMEDADMINU, Tripler; 
ASMRO. 

Medical centers, naval and U.S. 
naval hospitals. 

Stations having Nurse Corps person- 
nel. 

Naval and U.S. naval hospitals. 



Stations furnishing inpatients treat- 
ment, and certain stations furnish- 
ing outpatient care to super- 
numeraries. 



r. 



2 
> 
Z 

c 
> 

r 
O 

H 
EC 

M 

I 

P 

r 1 

0 

w 

•0 

> 

H 

H 

C 

in 

z 
> 
< 



«00 & 6500 SPECIAL FIELDS 



a- 

a 



MED-6400-1. 
MED-6410-3. 

MED-6420-l . . 

MED-6440-1. 

MED-6470-1. 

MED-6470-2 . 
MED-6470-3. 

MED-6470-4. 

MED-6470-5 . 
MED-6470-6. 



Report of Shark Attack. 



Aerospace Physiology Training 
Report. 



Letter 

NAVMED 6410/3.. Q Art. 14-5 



S BUMEDINST 6400.2 
series. 



Report of All Diving Accidents. . NAVMED 6420/1 



Personnel Assigned to 
Medical Support Teams and/or 
Readiness of Surgical Team 
Blocks. 



Report of Personnel Exposure to 
Ionizing Radiation. 



Report of Personnel Exceeding 
Radiation Exposure Limits. 

Personnel Exposure to Ionizing 
Radiation. 



Letter. 



NAVMED 6470/1. 



S Art. 2-146(3); NavShips 
250-538, U.S. Navy 
Diving Manual; and 
BUMEDINST 6420.2 
series. 

S-A BUMEDINST 6440.1 
series. 



A,S NAVMED P- 5 0 5 5 Rad- 
Health Prot Man, 
chap. 5. 



.do. 



Radioisotopes in Human Use Letter. 



Radioisotopes in Human-Use Letter. 
Volunteer R&D Project. 

Film Exposure vs Film Interpreta- Letter, 
tion Letter Error Report. 



i ... do . 



Punch Card IBM A,S ... do . 

5081 or similar. 



S-A BUMEDINST 6470.7 
series. 



.do. 



NAVMED P-5055 
RadHealthProtMan, 
chap. 6. 



Ships and stations having medical 
personnel. 

Naval aviation activities utilizing 
aerospace physiology training 
devices for training purposes. 

Naval activities having diving 
facilities. 



Activities designated in INST. 



Activities having personnel occupa- 
tionally exposed to sources of 
ionizing radiation and not having 
electric or electronic data proces- 
sing equipment. 

Activities having personnel occupa- 
tionally exposed to sources of 
ionizing radiation. 

Activities having personnel occupa- 
tionally exposed to sources of 
ionizing radiation and having 
electric or electric data processing 
equipment. 

MedDept facilities utilizing radioiso- 
topes in diagnostic, therapeutic, 
or human-use research programs. 

Do. 

Nuclear power ships, nuclear ship 
tenders, naval shipyards, and other 
photo dosimetry processing activ- 
ties. 



n 
x 
> 

| 
pi 



H 

y 
o 

y 
> 
z 
o 

5« 

n 
O 

5 



See footnote at end of table. 



2- 



23-2. Tabulation of Bureau Reporting Requirements — Continued 



Symbol 


Title 


Fre- 

Format queocy 1 Requiring directive 


Preparing activities 


6400 & 6500 SPECIAL FIELDtS- — Continued 



MED-6470-7. . . 

MED-6470-8. . . 
MED-6470-9. . . 

MED-6520-1... 
MED-6520-2... 
MED-6520-3... 



MED-6600-2 . 



Film Interpretation vs Pocket 
Dosimeter Reading Error 
Report. 

Photodosimetry Audit Discrep- 
ancy Report. 
Radiation Incident Report 



Letter . 



NAVMED P-5055 
Rad Health ProtMan, 
chap. 6. 



Letter 

Message. 



MED-6700-5.. 
MED-6700-6. 



Neuropsychiatry Report NAVMED 65 20/5. 

Psychiatric Unit Report NAVMED 6520/6. 

Psychiatric Outpatient Report NAVMED 6520/7 . 



S 

s 

M 
M 
M 



.do. 



Nuclear power ships, nuclezr ship 
tenders, naval shipyards, and other 
photodosimetry processing activ- 
ties. 
Do. 



NAVMED P-505 5, Rad 
Health ProtMan, 
chap. 5. 



Activities with personnel being occu- 
pational^ exposed to ionizing 
radiation. 

Art. 12-5(6) Naval and U.S. naval hospitals 

having a psychiatrist. 

Art. 18-1(6) Naval training centers and Marine 

Corps recruit depots. 

Art. 12-5(7) Medical activities (excluding hos- 

pitals, research units, and recruit 
evaluation units) which have 
psychologists and/or psychiatrists 
assigned. 



6600 DENTISTRY 



Dental Service Report. 



DD 477... Q Art. 6-150. 



Navy and Marine Corps activities or 
units having a dental officer. 



6700 & 6800 EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES 



MED-6700-2. . . Completion of Inactivation Letter S 



Local, Open Purchase High- 
Dollar Items. 

Litter, Blanket, and Mattress 
Excesses/Deficiencies 



NAVMED 6700/2. . Q 
Letter S-A 

r 



BUMEDINST 6700.5 
series. 



BUMEDINST 6700.20 

series. 
BUMEDINST 6700.24 

series. 



Vessels assigned to the Reserve 
Fleets (except vessels required to 
be kept operative with a complete 
or partial outfit of materials on 
board). 

Activities designated in the INST. , 

Fleet commanders in chief, naval 
force commanders, service force 
commands, and naval districts. 



"5 



> 
t- 

o 

H 
EG 
tn 

3 

H 
0 

t— ■ 

n 
> 
h 

a 

w 

> 

i 

2 
„H 

C 

in 

I 



6700 & 6800 EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES— Continued 

MED-6700-8. . . MMPNC-Inventory Letter A BUMEDINST 6700.25 

series. 

MED-6700-11.. Supply Workload Summary NAVMED 6700/1 . . Q NAVMED P-5020, 

FinManHdbk. 

MED-6700-14.. Ship/Craft Activation Letter S BUMED1NST 6700.5 

series. 

MED-6710-1... BW/CW Inventory, Phases I&II do A BUMEDINST 6710.50 

series. 

MED-6710-2... Results of Use of Investigational ....do.... A,S BUMEDINST 6710.49 

Drug. series. 

MED-6750-1.. . Dental Service Report, Equipment DD 477-1 A Art. 6-151 

and Facilities. 

MED-6770-1... Linen Inventory NAVMED 6770/1 . . Q BUMEDINST 6770.2 

series. 



MED-6770-2 . . . Emergency Expansion of Bed 
Capacity. 



NAVMED 6770/4. 



BUMEDINST 6770.3 
series. 



Naval districts; fleet commanders in 
chief; COMINCH U.S. Naval 
Forces, Europe; and Comdt. USCG. 

Naval and U.S. naval hospitals, 
and medical centers. 

Ship activating activities and/or 
supervisors of shipbuilding. 

All ships; construction forces; cargo 
handling battalions; CG's FMF, 
LANT & PAC; Marine Air Wings; 
USCG; and oversea activities. 

Stations having Medical Corps/ 
Dental Corps personnel. 

Navy and Marine Corps activities or 
units having a dental officer. 

Medical centers, naval and U.S. 
naval hospitals. 

Hospitals. 



7000-7999 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 



MED-7300-1.. . 




Prepunched data 


M 


NAVMED P-5020, 


Hospitals with data processing 




cards. 




FinManHdbk. 


capability. 


MED-7 300-2... 


EOB Cost Report (#2 Card) 




M 




Do. 


MED-7300-3. . . 


BOB Cost Report (#3 Card) 




Q 




Do. 


MED-7302-1... 




NAVMED 7302/7.. 


M 


....do 


Naval and U.S. naval hospitals with 










messing facilities. 


MED-7 3 10-3... 






M 


NAVMED P-5020, Fin- 


Medical centers, naval and U.S. 








ManHdbk; NAVMED 


naval hospitals. 










P-5069, NavMedData 












ServHdbk. 




MED-7330-10.. 


Report of Reimbursable Order 




S 


NAVMED P-5020, 


BUMED primary support activities. 




Accepted. 






FinManHdbk. 





n 
> 

n 

H 
m 



pa 

M 
13 

H 

cn 

hi 
0 
SO 

S 

I 

O 
pa 
w 

n 
o 

pa 
D 



I 



Q w 23-2. Tabulation of Bureau Reporting Requirements — Continued 



Symbol 


Title 


Fre- 

Format quency 1 Requiring directive 


Preparing activities 


10000-10999 GENERAL MATERIAL 


MED-10110-2.. 


Food Service Performance 
Analysis. 


NAVMED 10110/2. Q BUMEDINST 10110.2 

series. 


Naval and U.S. naval hospitals. 


11000-11999 FACILITIES AND ACTIVITIES ASHORE 


MED- 11 104-1 . . 




NAVMED U104/1. A BUMEDINST 1 1 105.1 

series. 


Medical centers, naval and U.S. 
naval hospitals. 


12000-12999 CIVILIAN PERSONNEL 


MED- 1 2000-1 . . 
MED-12552-1. . 


Trainees From Accredited Non- 
Federal Institutions. 


series. 


BUMED primary support activities 
and activities having dispensaries. 

Hospitals and medical centers. 




series. 



'Frequency: "D" Daily, "W" Weekly, "M" Monthly, "Q" Quarterly, "S— A" Semiannually, "A" Annually, "S" Situational, "X" see directive. 



to 



> 
o 
H 

a 

S 

W 

a 

n 
> 

s 

T3 



W 

Z 

B 

CJ 
in 

z 
> 

3 



r 



23-50 CHAPTER 23- REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 23-53 

Section II. NAVMED, STANDARD FEDERAL, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE, AND OTHER 

FORMS 

Article 

General 23-50 

NAVMED-S, Binnacle List 23-51 

NAVMED-T, Morning Report of Sick , 23-52 

Register of Patients (DD Form 739 or Mechanized Listing) 23-53 

DD Form 877, Request for Medical/ Dental Records Information 23-54 

Tabulation of Medical Department Forms 23-60 

Tabulation of Standard Federal Medical Forms 23-61 

Tabulation of Department of Defense Forms 23-62 

Tabulation of Other Prescribed Forms 23-63 



23-50. General 

(1) BUMED has promulgated certain forms 
which are designed to facilitate reporting, rec- 
ordkeeping, and administrative efficiency 
throughout the Medical Department. These 
forms are tabulated in article 23-60. 

(2) For purpose of identification and control, 
all Medical Department forms have been as- 
signed a letter or number. All correspondence 
referring to a form should cite its correct letter 
or number and title. 

(3) BUMED also maintains administrative 
control over the use of certain Standard Federal 
forms in the Medical Department. These forms' 
are promulgated by the General Services Admin- 
istration and Interagency Committee on Medical 
Records to facilitate the exchange of medical 
information throughout the Federal Government. 
These forms ate tabulated in article 23—61. 
Department of Defense forms used by the Medi- 
cal Department are listed in 23—62. Other forms 
used by the Medical Department and not listed in 
the preceding articles are listed in 23—63. 

(4) The functions of the forms are outlined 
in the tabulations or in the references cited 
therein. 

(5) (a) Forms available for issue through the 
Forms and Publications Segment of the Navy 
Supply System should be ordered when needed 
from the appropriate forms and publications 
cognizance "I" supply distribution points in ac- 
cordance with NAVSUP Publication 2002, Navy 
Stock List of Forms & Publications, Cognizance 
Symbol I. 

(b) Article 23-60 indicates by asterisk 
those forms which are stocked in the Bureau 
of Medicine and Surgery. They should be re- 
quested directly from BUMED. 

(c) Stations should maintain a 3 months' 
and ships a 6 months' supply of forms on hand. 



23-51. NAVMED-S, Binnacle List 

(1) Navmed-S shall be prepared by the 
senior representative of the Medical Department 
on board and submitted to the commanding of- 
ficer by 0930 daily. The form shall contain a list 
of all those recommended to be excused from 
duty because of illness. The list must be ap- 
proved by the commanding officer, and no 
names may be added without his permission. 

23-52. NAVMED-T, Morning Report of Sick 

(1) Navmed-T shall be prepared by the 
senior representative of the Medical Department 
on board and submitted to the commanding of- 
ficer by 1000 daily. The form shall contain a list 
of the sick to include names, diagnoses, and con- 
ditions. 

(2) When it is considered necessary to excuse 
a man from duty after the Morning Report of 
Sick has been submitted, his name shall be 
added to the Binnacle List; and the appropriate 
report shall be submitted to the commanding 
officer. If the man still is unfit for duty when 
the next Morning Report of Sick is submitted, 
his name shall be added thereto as of the date 
on which his name was first entered on the 
Binnacle List. 

(3) Names shall not be omitted from 
Navmed-T because a satisfactory diagnosis 
cannot be established. Such cases shall be noted 
as "Diagnosis Undetermined (Observation)" or 
with the name of the chief complaint. Cases of 
malingering shall be reported to the command- 
ing officer and entered in the Report Book. 

23-53. Register of Patients (DD Fonn 739 or 
Mechanized Listing) 

( 1 ) Application. — Naval medical facilities 
providing inpatient care shall maintain a reg- 
ister of patients on a current basis. The register 



23-11 

Change 65 



23-54 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



23-54 



shall include all inpatients (military, dependents 
including infants born at facility, etc.) admitted 
to the facility. 

(2) Register Number. — A 6-digit register 
number shall be assigned sequentially to each 
inpatient admitted and shall be constructed as 
follows: 

(a) First Digit. — -Month in which admitted 
(Jan, through Sep. as 1-9 and Oct., Nov., and 
Dec. as 0,X, and R, respectively) . 

(b) Second Digit. — Last digit of calendar 
year in which admitted (1968, record 8; 1969, 
9). 

(c) Third Through Sixth Digits. — A 4- 
digit sequential number recorded as 0001, 0002, 
0003, etc. during month with a new series 
beginning each month. 

For newborn, a register number shall be as- 
signed (for administrative purposes only) on 
day of birth and cross-referenced between 
records of mother and infant. 

(3) Medical facilities with ADP capabilities 
shall maintain a mechanized numeric register 
of patients in accordance with chapter XI of 
NAVMED P-5069, Naval Medical Data Services 
Handbook, and BUMED Instruction 6310.8 
series. When clinical records are retired to the 
Federal Military Personnel Records Center, an 
alphabetic register shall be prepared to accom- 
pany them. 

(4) Medical facilities without ADP capa- 
bilities shall maintain the register on DD 
Form 739, Register of Patients. The register 
shall consist of two sections, one numeric and 
one alphabetic, Ixith maintained on DD Form 
739 and filed in a suitable binder entitled "Sec. 
I — Numeric" and 'Sec. II — Alphabetic". Divide 
alphabetic section by alphabetic index guides to 
facilitate reference. On alphabetic section, enter 
alphabetic index (e.g., Aa, Am, B, etc.) in 
block entitled "Alphabetic . Index or Page 
Number"; on numeric section enter page num- 
ber only in block. 

(a) Numeric Section. — Upon admission, 
enter name of patient in numeric section of 
register and assign register number. Assign new 
register number for readmission. This section 
provides control on assignment of register num- 
bers to insure that nlunbers are assigned in 
sequence and to preclude assignment of same 



number to more thun one individual. It also 
provides reference for identifying patients when 
only the register number is known. 

(b) Alphabetic Section. — In alphabetic 
section of register enter, alphabetically by last 
name, the full name of patient entered in nu- 
meric section, and the register number. This 
section serves as a finding medium for the Fed- 
eral Military Personnel Records Center when 
clinical records are retired to that activity. Ac- 
cordingly, type all entries with black ribbon or 
neatly print in block letters with black ink, 

23-54. DD Form 877, Request for Medical/ 
Dental Records or Information 

( 1 ) Use. — DD Form 877 shall be used to re- 
quest medical or dental records, whenever 
feasible. The form should be prepared in tripli- 
cate. 

(2) Action by Requesting Activity. — Enter 
date and complete items 1 through 10 (except 
fib) and item 19. 

(a) Check appropriate box(es) in item 8a, 
RECORDS REQUESTED, to indicate whether 
military records, Veterans' Administration re- 
cords, or both are required. 

(b) Enter in item 9, REMARKS, any other 
information deemed appropriate to identify the 
records. Forward original and one copy of DD 
877; retain third copy. 

(3) Action by Addressee Upon Receipt of 
DD 877.— 

(a) If the requested records are available, 
check the appropriate box(es) in item 8b, 
RECORDS FORWARDED, complete items 11 
through 14 and forward the requested records 
to the address in item 19, together with the 
original of the DD 877. 

(b) If the requested records are not on hand 
but their location is known, forward both copies 
of the DD Form 877 to the present custodian of 
the records, using items 11 through 14 to re- 
quest compliance with the basic request. 

(c) If the requested records are not on 
hand and their present location is not known, 
complete items 11 through 14, or 15 through 
18, as appropriate, and return both copies of 
the DD 877 to the originating activity indicated 
in item 19. 



23-12 
Change 46 



23-60 CHAPTER 23. REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 

23-60. Tabulation of Medical Department Forms 



23-60 



NAVMED 



Title 



Function 



Using activities 



N Certificate of Death See ch. 17 



S Binnacle List 

T Morning Report of Sick 

U Report of Medical Treatment, 

Hospitalization, and Allied 

Services, 



IS Diet Sheet 



20 Liberty List 



64 Operations Scheduled 



418 Photofluorographic Chest 

Survey. 

952 Prosthetic Case Record 



See art. 23-51 

See art. 23-52 

See BUMEDINST 6320.3 2 series. 



Specifies proper diets for patients 
as prescribed by a medical offi- 
cer. Utilized by diet kitchen 
and ward nurse. 

Tally sheet of personnel on lib- 
erty, including name, rate, 
and time. 

Local schedule of operations to 
be performed, including pa- 
tient, doctor, anesthetist, and 
time of operation. 

See art. 15-90 



1 1« 1 Photofluorographic Log 



1161a Photofluorographic Log (fol- 

lowing sheet). 

1168 Case History — Gastrointesti- 

nal Illness. 

1178 Diseases and Operations Index 

Gard. 

1298 Dental Appointments, Daily 

1299 Dental Examination and 

Treatment Record. 

1300 , '__ Precious Metal Issue Record 

1301 Statement and Inventory of 

Precious and Special Dental 
Metals. 

1369 General Journal .__ 



See art. 6-15 2 
See art. 15-90 
do 



Navy and Marine Corps activities or 
units having a Medical Department 
representative. 

Do. 

Do. 

Navy and Marine Corps activities or 
units having a representative of 
the Medical Department, or in the 
absence of such by the senior officer 
present or the person concerned. 

Naval hospitals, U.S. naval hospitals, 
and dispensaries pro- 
viding inpatient care. 

Naval hospitals, U.S. naval hospitals, 
dispensaries provid- 
ing inpatient care, and other Medi- 
cal Department activities ashore. 

Naval hospitals, U.S. naval hospitals. 



Naval shore activities having photo- 
fluorographic facilities. 

Dental activities having prosthetic 
facilities. 

Shore activities having photofluoro- 
graphic facilities. 

Do. 



A summary of medical findings Epidemiology teams, 
and treatment of gastroin- 
testinal illness. 

Provides detailed case references Navy hospitals and U.S. naval ho»- 
for medical research, pitals. 

See art. 6-15 3 „ " Activities having a dental officer. 

See art. 6-154 Do. 

See art. 6-15 5 Activities having dental prosthetic 

facilities. 



See art. 6-15 6 



Do. 



See NAVMED P-5020, Financial Naval hospitals, U.S. naval hospitals, 
Management Handbook. and medical centers. 



1371* Certificates of Merit 



Issued by BUMED when it has 
been determined that the indi- 
vidual is entitled to upon re- 
tirement. 



1372* Certificate of Exceptional 

Service. 



1379 Dental Appointments 



Sel f -explanatory . 



Do, 



1380 Grounding Notice (Aero- 

medical ) . 

1381 Clearance Notice (Aero- 

medical). 



Issued by BUMED when it has 
been determined that the indi- 
vidual is entitled to. 

Patient's record of dental ap- 
pointments. 

See art. 15-70 Ships and stations having a flight sur 

6 eon. 

do Do. 



Activities and units having a dental 
officer. 



* Stacked In BUMED. 



23-13 

Change fx 



23-60 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



23-60 



23-60. Tabulation of Medical Department Forms — Continued 



NAVMED Title Function Usine actmtin 

13?} Medical Appointments — Records of outpatient treatment. Activities providing outpatient care. 

Daily. 

1397 Narcotic and Controlled See arts. 21-7, 21-8, 21-43, 21- Naval hospitals, U.S. naval hospitals, 

Drug Inventory 24 Hour. 44,21-47. and dispensaries. 

140* Perpetual Inventory of Nar- See arts. 21-7, 21-44, 21-45 --- Do. 

cotics, Alcohol and Con- 
trolled Drugs. 

1417 Biographical Summary To provide a summary of educa- U.S. Navy Nurse Corps officers. 

tion, nursing experience, and 
personal accomplishments. 

1426* Report of Heat Casualties To obtain data on heat casualties Provided to selected facilities by 

for research purposes. BUM ED (Code 73). 

1431 Anesthetic Data Record See NAVMED P-3069, Naval hospitals and medical center.. 

Nav.MedDataServHcibk. 

1437 Admission Record See BUMEDINST 6310.8 series Naval and U.S. naval hospitals and 

activities having dispensaries with 
authorized operating beds. 

1441 Qualifications and Recom- A source for providing qualifies- Naval hospitals approved for medical 

mendations on Interns. tions and recommendations on intern training. 

interns. It shall be prepared 
annually on all interns for the 
period 1 July to 3 0 June and 
shall be forwarded to reach 
BUMED each year by 1 
August. 

l445 * Gynecology Malignancy A source document to uniformly Naval hospitals and U.S. naval 

Data- summarize data on gyneco- hospitals. 

logical malignancy cases. 
See NAVMED P-5069, 
NavMedData ServHdbk. 

1446 Collection Agent Accounts- See NAVMED P-5020, Fi- Naval hospitals and medical 

bility. nancial Management Hand- centers. 

book. 

I455f Birth Certificate. .. . A standard format for birth certi Naval hospitals, U.S. naval hos- 

tificates issued within the pitals, medical centers, and 

Navy Medical Department. other medical facilities pro- 

viding inpatient care. 

1460 Anthropometric Data See BUMEDINST 61 10.8 Ships and stations having a 

Record, series. flight surgeon or an aviation 

medical examiner. 

1470 Medical Programs Inquiry.. . To be made available to pro- Recruiting stations and selected 

spective Medical Corps officers naval activities, 
and active duty personnel for 
requesting information on 
Navy medical programs 



'Stocked in BUMED. 

to r^Tn 0 serted r iffndf« te d. 0g * ahiti " U " a * fo "°" p ™ vided b * BUMEDNOTE 6150 of 22 Au*u$t 1963. Nime and seal of using activity 

23-14 

Change 71 



23-60 CHAPTER 23. REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 

23-60. Tabulation of Medical Department Forms — Continued 



23-60 



NAVMED 



Title 



Function 



Using activities 



1500/1* Certificate of Instruction. 



1500/2* Certificate of Instruction. 



General purpose certificate for BUMED. 
presentation to persons 
attending BUMED sponsored 
courses of instruction at 
Medical Department 
activities. 

Certificate for presentation to Do. 
Nurse Corps personnel 
attending BUMED sponsored 
courses of instruction at 
Medical Department 



1500/3* Certificate of Accomplish- 

ment. 

1510/1* Certificate of Special Instruc- 

tion. 



1510/2* Certificate of Graduation — 

Basic Hospital Corps 
School. 

1510/3* Certificate of Instruction 

Dental Technician School 
United States Navy. 



1510/4* Certificate of On-The-Job 

Training. 

15 20/1* Medical Officer Service 

Training Agreement. 

15 20/2* Certificate of Residency. . . 



1520/3* Certificate of Internship. 



1520/5* Certificate of Internship. 



1520/7 Transcript of Intern Service. 



1520/8* Certificate of Residency. 



For visiting foreign trainees. 
(See BUMEDINST 4950.2 
series.) 

Issued to Hospital Corps per- 
sonnel on completion of a 
class C medical technical 
course of instruction. 

Issued to personnel on gradua- 
tion from a basic Hospital 
Corps school. 

Issued to graduates of class A, 
B, and C dental technician 
schools upon satisfactorily 
completing the prescribed 
course of instruction. 

Issued to Hospital Corps per- 
sonnel on completion of 
specialized on-the-job 
training. 

See BUMEDINST 1520.10 
series. 

Issued by BUMED on satisfac- 
tory completion of residency 
training. 

Certificate of satisfactory com- 
pletion of dental intern 
training. 

Issued by BUMED on satisfac- 
tory completion of medical 
intern training. 

Sets forth in detail a record of 
each service medical intern 
attended and period of time 
devoted to each. (See 
BUMEDINST 1520.5 series.) 

Certificate of satisfactory com- 
pletion of dental residency 
training. 



BUMED provides to affected 
stations. 

Medical Department activities 
conducting special courses 
for Hospital Corps personnel. 

Basic Hospital Corps schools. 



Dental activities conducting ap- 
proved courses of instruction 
in a class A, B, or C dental 
technician school. 



Medical Department activities 
designated by BUMED to 
conduct such training. 



For BUMED use only. 

BUMED provides to naval 
hospitals approved for resi- 
dency training. 

Provided by BUMED to activ- 
ities approved for dental 
intern training. 

BUMED provides to hospitals 
approved for medical intern 
training. 

Hospitals approved for medical 
intern training. 



BUMED provides to activities 
approved for dental resi- 
dency training. 



♦Stocked in BUMED. 



23-15 
Change 71 



23-60 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



23-60 



23-60. Tabulation of Medical Department Forms — Continued 



NAVMED 



Title 



Function 



Using activities 



1521/1* Certificate of Fellowship Issued by BUMED as award to 

dental officers completing 



1532/1* Navy and Marine Corps 

Selection Test Data 
and Answer Sheets. 

1532/lA* Academic Qualification 

Test Scoring Key 
(AQT Form 1). 

1532/lB* Academic Qualification 

Test Scoring Key 
(AQT Form 2). 

1532/lC* Mechanical Comprehen- 

1532/lE* sion — Spatial Appercep- 

tion Scoring Key (MCT 

1- SAT 1). 

1532/lD* Mechanical Comprehen- 

1532/ IF* sion— Spatial Appercep- 

tion Scoring Key (MCT 

2- SAT 2). 



fellowships. 

See BUMEDINST 15 32.1 
series. 



.do. 



.do. 



.do. 



BUMED. 



Activities designated in INST 
to administer aviation 
selection test. 

Do. 



Do. 



Do. 



.do. 



.do. 



1532/lG* Biographical Inventory 

Scoring Key (BI 1 
Positive and Negative). 

:532/lH* Biographical Inventory Scor- .do. 

ing Key (BI 2 Positive 
and Negative). 



1532/2A* Academic Qualification 

Test (AQT Form I). 

1532/2B* Academic Qualification 

Test (AQT Form 2). 

1532/2C* Mechanical Comprehen- 

sion Test (MCT Form 1). 

1532/2D* Mechanical Comprehen- 

sion Test (MCT Form 2). 

1532/2E* Spatial Apperception 

Test (SAT Form 1). 



.do. 



.do. 



.do. 



See BUMEDINST 1532.1 
series. 



1532/2F*. . 



Spatial Apperception 
Test (SAT Form 2). 



1532/2G* Biographical Inventory 

(BI Form 1). 

1532/2H* Biographical Inventory 

(BI Form 2). 

♦Stocked in BUMED. 

23-16 
Change 71 



.do. 
.do. 
.do. 
.do. 



Do. 



Do. 

Do. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Activities designated in INST 
to administer aviation 
selection test. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 



23-60 CHAPTER 23. REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 

23-60. Tabulation of Medical Department Forms — Continued 



23-60 



NAVMED 



Title 



Function 



Using activities 



1611/1 Professional Performance 

Data Sheet. 

1900/1 Certificate Relative to a Full 

and Fair Hearing. 

1910/1* Aptitude Board Report Cover 

Sheet. 

406 1/1 Food Sanitation Training 

Certificate. 

5230/1... . Data Processing Job or Time 

Record. 

5230/2 Data Processing Service 

Request. 

6010/1 Collection Agent Ledger 

6010/5 Staff Locator 

6010/6 Collection Agents Receipt. . . 

6 0 1 0/ 7 Cash — Service Journal 

6010/8 Patient's Valuables 

6010/9 Baggage Record Card 

6010/10 Statement of Charges 

6100/1. Medical Board Report Cover 

Sheets. 

6100/2 Medical Board Statement of 

Patient. 

6100/3 Medical Board Certificate 

Relative to a PEB Hearing. 
♦■•Stocked in BUM ED. 



See BUMEDINSTS 1611.4 
and 1520.13 series. 

Used by personnel who wish 
to waive their rights to a 
hearing before a physical 
evaluation board. 

See arts. 18-6— 6B and 
BUMEDINST 1910.1 series. 

Ready identification of food 
service workers trained in 
accordance with SECNAV 
Instructions. 

To collect workload, equip- 
ment utilization, and cost 
data for operation of EDP 
and EAM installations. 

To request EAM/EDP services 
from BUMED activities with 
EAM/EDP equipment. 

See NAVMED P-5020, 
Financial Management 
Handbook. 

To provide a ready location 
reference to staff personnel— 
military and civilian. 

See NAVMED P-5020, Financial 
Management Handbook. 



Activities under the command 
of BUMED having Medical/ 
Dental Corps personnel. 

Naval and U.S. naval hospitals. 



.do. 



For depositing patient's valu- 
ables. See BUMEDINST 
6010.7 series. 

For control of baggage in bag- 
room. 

See NAVMED P-5020, Finan- 
cial Management Handbook. 

See arts. 18-20, 18-21, 18-23, 
and 18-24 and BUMED- 
INST 1910.2 series. 

See arts. 18^19 and 18-21 and 
BUMEDINST 1910.2 series. 

See art. 18-21 and BUMED- 
INST 1910.2 series. 



Training centers and recruit 
depots. 

Navy and Marine Corps activ- 
ities or units having a Med 
Dept representative. 

BUMED primary support 
activities having ADP 
equipment. 

BUMED and BUMED con- 
mand activities. 

Naval hospitals, U.S. naval 
hospitals, and medical 
centers. 

Naval hospitals and U.S. nav«l 
hospitals, and hospital ships. 

Naval hospitals, U.S. naval 
hospitals, and medical 
centers. 

Do. 

Stations providing inpatient 
care. 



Hospitals and dispensaries 
providing inpatient care. 

Hospitals and medical centers. 



Navy and Marine Corps activ- 
ities or units having a med- 
ical officer. 

Do. 



Do. 



23-17 
Change 71 



23-60 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 

23-60. Tabulation of Medical Department Forms — Continued 



23-60 



NAVMED 



Title 



Function 



Using activities 



6320/9. 



6322/00 thru 

6322/99. 
6410/3* 



Dependent Eligibility for 
Medical Care. 



Outpatient Treatment 
Record. 

Aerospace Physiology Train- 
ing Report. 



6410/4* Altitude Chamber Reaction 

Report. 

6410/5 Student Screening Form 

6410/6* Aerospace Physiology Train- 

ing Agreement. 

6410/7 Completion of Training 

Certificate. 

6410/8 Aerospace Physiology Train- 

ing and Low Pressure 
Chamber Flight Log. 

6420/1 Report of All Diving Acci- 

dents. 

6470/1 Exposure to Ionizing 

Radiation. 



Certifies the medical care Medical centers, hospitals, 

eligibility of dependents naval dispensaries, and ac- 

who do not have a valid tivities having dispensaries. 
DD 1 173 in their possession 
but have previously been 
issued one. 

See BUMEDINST 6322. 1 1 Do. 
series. 

Provides source of information Naval aviation activities utiliz- 

on aerospace physiology ing aerospace physiology 

training program workload. training devices for training 

(See art. 14-5.) purposes. 

See art. 14-5 Navy aerospace physiology 

training units. 

See art. 14-5 Do. 

do Do. 

do Do. 

do Do. 



See art. 2-146(3), NAV- 
SHIPS 250-538, U.S. Navy 
Diving Manual and BU- 
MEDINST 6420.2 series. 

See NAVMED P-5055, Rad- 
HealthProtMan. 



Naval activities having diving 
facilities. 



6520/5 Neuropsychiatry Report See art. 12-5(6). 



6520/6*. 
6520/7*. 



Psychiatric Unit Report , 



Activities having personnel 
occupationally exposed to 
sources of ionizing radiation 
and not having electronic 
data processing equipment. 

Naval hospitals and U.S. naval 
hospitals having a neuro- 
psychiatry service. 

Provides workload statistics for Navy training centers and 
recruit evaluation units. Marine Corps recruit depots. 



Psychiatric Outpatient 
Report. 



6550/1 Patient Care Plan. 



To provide psychiatric work- 
load data. See art. 12-5(7). 



To record instructions for 
nursing care to patients. See 
BUMEDINST 65 50.1 series. 



Medical activities (excluding 
hospitals, research units, and 
recruit evaluation units) 
which have psychologists 
and/or psychiatrists assigned 

Naval hospitals and U.S. naval 
hospitals, carriers, and 
cruisers. 



•Stocked in BUMED. 



23-20 
Change 71 



23-60 CHAPTER 23. REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 23-60 

23-60. Tabulation of Medical Department Forms — Continued 



NAVMED 



Title 



Function 



Using activities 



65 50/2 Ward Report 

65 50/3 Twenty-Four Hour Nursing 

Service Report. 

6550/4 Medication and Treatment 

Card. 

6550/5 Medication and Treatment 

Card PRN. 



To account for all changes in 
ward census over a 24-hour 
period. See BUMEDINST 
65 50.1 series. 

To report on patients requiring 
close observation or special 
attention. See BUMEDINST 
6550.1 series. 

To furnish information regard- 
ing regular recurring medi- 
cations and treatments. See 
BUMEDINST 65 50.1 series. 

To furnish information regard- 
ing p.r.n. medication or 
treatment. See BUMEDINST 
6550.1 series. 



Naval hospitals and 
U.S. naval hospitals, 
carriers and cruisers. 



Do. 



Do. 



Do. 



6550/6. 



Inquiry, School of Nursing . 



6600/3 Dental Health Question- 

naire. 

6600/4 Navy Periodontal Screening 

Examination. 

6620/1 Individual Dental Officer- 

Daily Dental Service 
Record. 

6700/1* Supply Workload Summary. 

6700/2 Local, Open Purchase High- 

Dollar Items. 

6700/3 Medical Equipment Mainte- 

nance Record, 



To obtain personal and pro- 
fessional references incident 
to appointment in Nurse 
Corps USNR. 



See art. 6-121A. 



See BUMEDINST 6600.7. 



For compilation of data for 
quarterly Dental Service 
Report (MED-6600-2) on 
DD Form 477. 

To report statistical data on 
supply operation. 

See BUMEDINST 6700.20 
series. 

See BUMEDINST 6700.1 
series. 



U.S. Navy Nurse Corps officers 
at recruiting stations and 
naval hospitals. 

Ships and stations having 
dental personnel. 

Do. 



Do. 



Naval hospitals, U.S. naval 
hospitals, and medical 
centers. 

Activities designated in INST. 



Ships and stations having 
medical personnel. 



6710/1.. 

6710/2*. 
6710/3*. 



Narcotic and Controlled 
Drug Account Record. 



Investigational Drug Data 
Record. 

Investigational Drug Inven- 
tory and Prescription 
Record. 



See arts. 21-7, 21-8, 21-43, 
21-44, 21-45, 21-47 and 
BUMEDINST 6710.49 
series. 

See BUMEDINST 6710.49 
series. 



.do. 



Stations having Medical Corps/ 
Dental Corps personnel. 



Do. 



Do. 



•Stocked in BUMED. 



23-20a 
Change 71 



23-60 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



23-60 



23-60. Tabulation of Medical Department Forms — Continued 



NAVMED 



Title 



Function 



Using activities 



67 50/1 Maintenance Dental Equip- 

ment— Daily. 

6750/2 Maintenance Dental Equip- 

ment—Weekly and 
Monthly. 

67 50/3 Maintenance Dental Equip- 

ment—Quarterly. 



See BUMEDINST 6700.1 
series. 



.do. 



Ships and stations having 
dental personnel. 

Do. 



.do. 



6770/1* Linen Inventory. 



6770/2 Linen Inventory Worksheet. 



6770/3 Laundry List. 



6770/4* Emergency Expansion of 

Bed Capacity. 

7220/1* Statement of Intent 



7220/2* 
/NAVCOMPT 
2184 

7220/2A* 
/NAVCOMPT 
2184A, 

7300/1 



Continuation Pay Designa- 
tion and Acceptance. 

Continuation Pay Renewal 



Posting Advice. 



7300/2. 



7300/3. 



Record of Discounts and 
Adjustments/Partial De- 
livery/Partial Liquidation. 

Accrual Accounting Detail/ 
Master Job Order Card. 



7300/5 Military Services Detail 

Card. 

7300/9 Military Services Detail 

Code Sheet. 



RMS Posting Advice/ 
Memorandum. 



7300/12*... 
7300/14* General Purpose Ledger. 



For linen record keeping and 
reporting to commanding 
officers. See BUMEDINST 
6770.2 series. 

For recording linen inventor- 
ies. See BUMEDINST 
6770.2 series. 

To requisition linen. See BU- 
MEDINST 6770.2 series. 

See BUMEDINST 6770.3 
series. 

To indicate intention to, or not 
to, participate in continuation 
pay program, if eligible. 

Contract for continuation pay. 
See SECNAVINST 7220.61 
series. 

Renewal contract for continua- 
tion pay. See BUMEDINST 
7220,1 series. 

See NAVMED P-5020, Finan- 
cial Management Handbook. 



.do. 



See NAVMED P-5069, Nav- 
MedDataServHdbk. 



Do. 

Medical centers, naval hospital 5 
and U.S. naval hospitals. 



Do. 



Do. 



Hospitals and medical centers. 



BUMED. 



Do. 



Do. 



Naval hospitals and medical 
centers except New London. 

Do. 



Naval hospitals, U.S. naval 
hospitals, and medical 
centers. 



do Naval medical data services 

centers. 

do Naval hospitals and U.S. naval 

hospitals. 

See NAVMED P-5020, Finan- BUMED command activities, 
cial Management Handbook. 

Accounting. Naval hospitals within source 

data automation project. 



*5tocked in BUMED. 

23-20b 
Change 71 



23-60 



CHAPTER 23. REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 



23-60 



23-60. Tabulation of Medical Department Forms — Continued 



NAVMED 



Title 



Function 



Using activities 



7302/1*. 

7302/2*. 

7302/3*. 
7302/4*. 
7302/5*. 

7302/6*. 
7302/7*. 



.do. 



RMS Register #10 Code 
Sheet. 

RMS Register #71 Code 
Sheet. 



EOB No. 1 Card Code Sheet do. 

EOB No. 2 Card Code Sheet do. 

DD 1 348 Code Sheet Supply. . 



See NAVMED P-5020, Finan- 
cial Management Handbook. 



7302/8*. 

7310/1*. 
10110/1. 

10110/2. 



EOB No. 3 Card Code Sheet. 

Hospital Subsistence 
Report. 



RMS Register 6 1 Code 
Sheet. 



Cost Summary Record. . . 
Therapeuic Diet Request. 



Food Service Performance 
Analysis. 



1 1 104/1* Housekeeping Report. 



See NAVMED P-5020, Finan- 
cial Management Handbook. 

Lists all personnel billed to 
Navy Subsistence Office 
and Chief of Naval Personnel 
for reimbursement of 
rations served from hospital 
messes. 

Used to record accountability 
data by activities without 
key punch equipment. 

See NAVMED P-5 020, Finan- 
cial Management Handbook. 

To order special diets for 
patients. 

Provides food service opera- 
tion and management data 
(see BUMEDINST 10110.2 
series). 

Provides summary of house- 
keeping operations, train- 
ing, and equipment data. 
(See BUMEDINST 11104.1 
series.) 



Nonmechanized BUMED 
command activities. 

Do. 



Do. 
Do. 

Naval hospitals using stock 
control portions of source 
data automation proj ect. 

Nonmechanized BUMED 
command activities. 

Naval and U.S. naval hospitals 
with messing facilities. 



BUMED command activities 
without key punch equip- 
ment. 

Nonmechanized BUMED 
command activities. 

Naval and U.S. naval hospitals 
and other facilities desiring 
to use the form. 

Naval and U.S. naval hospitals . 



Medical centers, naval and 
U.S. naval hospitals. 



23-20c 
Change 71 



( 



O 1 



23-61 CHAPTER 23. REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 

23-61. Tabulation of Standard Federal Medical Forms 



23-61 



Standard 

Form No. Title Function Using activities 



88 



93 — 

501 

502 

503 

504 

505 

506 

507 

508 

509 

510 

5H 

512 

512-A - 
513 



Report of Medical Exami- See chapter 15 
nation. 



Report of Medical His- do 

tory. 



Diagnostic Summary To record summaries of clinical diagnoses, operations, 

therapeutic procedures, pathological diagnoses, and 
other factors of clinical interest, including causes of 
death. Include one copy in the patient's clinical rec- 
ord. One copy may be included in the Health Record 
in lieu of written summary on SF-600. 

Narrative Summary To summarize the salient facts regarding a patient's 

hospitalization. Include one copy in the patient's 
clinical record. One copy may be included in the 
Health Record in lieu of written summary on SF-600. 

Autopsy Protocol To record the clinical and pathological diagnoses in 

regard to the death of a patient. Include in patient's 
clinical record. 

History — Part I To record history of present illness, including nature 

and duration of complaints and circumstances of ad- 
mission. Include in patient's clinical record. 

History — Parts 2 and 3 Part 2 to record patient's past history, including occu- 
pation, military history, habits, family history, child- 
hood and adult injuries. Part 3 to record a general 
system review. Include in patient's clinical record. 

Physical Examination To record patient's physical and mental characteristics, 

particularly appearance of specified parts of body. 
Include in patient's clinical record. 

Continuation Sheet To serve as a continuation sheet for any other standard 

clinical form. 

Doctor's Orders To record doctor's orders for patient's care and treat- 

ment. Include in patient's clinical record. 

Doctor's Progress Notes _ To enable the doctor to post information on the prog- 
ress made by a patient during hospitalization. In- 
clude in patient's clinical record. 

Nursing Notes To record medications and treatments given to patient 

by nurse, including pertinent observations. Include 
in patient's clinical record. 

Temperature — Pulse — To record temperature, pulse, and respiration observa- 
Respiration (Fahren- tions and other data. Include in patient's clinical 

heit). record. 

Plotting Chart To picture in graphic form such phases of hospitaliza- 

tion as a patient's progress or reactions to a specific 
treatment. Include in patient's clinical record. 

Plotting Chart — Blood To show blood pressure in graphic form. Include in 
Pressures. patient's clinical record. 

Consultation Sheet To record the reasons for and to report upon medical 

consultations. Include in patient's clinical record. 



514 Laboratory Reports 



To serve as a stapling sheet to hold laboratory report 
forms. Include in patient's clinical record. 



514— A ^ Urinalysis To request, report on, and record various subtests rela- 

tive to a urinalysis examination. Staple to SF-514. 

514-B _ Hematology To request, report on, and record various subtests rela- 

tive to a hematology examination. Staple to SF-514. 

514— C S.T.S. To request, report on, and record various subtests rela- 

tive to a serology examination for syphilis. Staple to 
SF-514. 

514-D _ Blood Chemistry To request, report on, and record various subtests rela- 

tive to blood chemistry. Staple to SF-514. 



Ships and stations 
having a medi- 
cal or dental 
officer. 

Ships and stations 
having a medi- 
cal officer. 

Facilities provid- 
ing inpatient 
care. 



Do. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Do. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 



Facilities having 
medical officer. 

Facilities provid- 
ing inpatient 
care. 

Activities having 
laboratory facil- 
ities and provid- 
ing inpatient 
care. 
Do. 

Do. 

Do. 



Do. 



23-21 
Change 68 



23-61 MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 

23-61. Tabulation of Standard Federal Medical Forms— Continued 



23-61 



Standard 
Form No. 



Title 



Function 



Using activities 



514_F Gastric Analysis To request, report on, and record various subtests rela- 

tive to a gastric analysis. Staple to SF-514. 

514_G _ Feces To request, report on, and record various subtests rela- 

tive to an examination of feces. Staple to SF-514. 

514-H - Spinal Fluid To request, report on, and record various subtests rela- 

tive to an examination of spinal fluid. Staple to 
SF-514. 

514_K _ Bacteriology To request, report on, and record the findings of a 

bacteriological examination. Staple to SF— 514. 

514_L Renal Function To request, report on, and record various subtests rela- 

tive to examination of specimen in regard to renal 
function. Staple to SF-514. 

514-M _ Miscellaneous To request, report on, and record laboratory examina- 

tions for which a specific form is unavailable or not 
provided. Staple to SF-514. 

514-N _ Blood Bank To request, report on, and record various blood tests 

for grouping, typing, and titer. Staple to SF-514. 

514-P __ Special Chemistry To request, report on, and record various special chem- 

istry tests. Staple to SF-514. 

514-Q _ Immunology To request, report on, and record various immunologi- 

cal tests. Staple to SF-514. 

515 Tissue Examination To record facts pertaining to the examination of a 

tissue specimen, including a pathological report. 
Include in patient's clinical record. 

516 Operation Report To record pertinent and identifying data regarding a 

patient's operation. Include in the patient's clinical 
record. 



Activities having 
laboratory facil- 
ities and provid- 
ing inpatient 
care. 
Do. 

Do. 



Do. 
Do. 

Do. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 



Facilities provid- 
ing inpatient 
care. 



23-22 

Change h*k 



23-61 CHAPTER 23. REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 

23-61. Tabulation of Standard Federal Medical Forms — Continued 



23-61 



Standard 
Form No. 



Title 



Function 



Using activities 



517 Anesthesia 



518 Blood Transfusion 



To record in chart and narrative form the administra- 
tion of an anesthesia, including a preoperative and 
postoperative review. Include in patient's clinical 
record. 

To record the elements involved in giving a blood trans- 
fusion to a patient, including certification, cross- 
matching, reaction, etc. Include in patient's clinical 
record. 

To serve as a stapling sheet to hold radiographic re- 
ports. Include in patient's clinical record. 
To request, report on, and record the results of a radio- 
graphic examination. Staple to SF-519. 
To record pertinent facts and results pertinent to an 
electrocardiographic examination. Include in patient's 
clinical record. 

521 Dental To record findings of a dental examination, treatment 

indicated, and treatment rendered. Include in pa- 
tient's clinical record. 
To obtain authorization for the administration of anes- 
thesia, the performance of operations or other pro- 
cedures, the disposal of tissues or parts which may 
be removed, and the photographing or televising of 
procedures and tissue for the advancement of knowl- 
edge. This form is required for all personnel. In- 
clude in patient's clinical record. ■ 



519 _ 
519A 

520 _ 



Radiographic Reports 

Radiographic Report 

Electrocardiographic Rec- 
ord. 



522 Authorization for Admin- 
istration of Anesthesia 
and for Performance 
of Operations and 
Other Procedures. 



Facilities providing 
inpatient care. 



Do. 



Do. 



Do. 



Do. 



Do. 



Do. 



523 -- Authorization fot Autopsy 



523B . 

524 _. 

525 - 

526 _. 

527 - ■ 

528 - • 

529 - 

530 _ 

531 - 

533 - 

534 _ 

535 - 



Authorization for Tissue 

Donation. 
Radiation Therapy 



To obtain authorization for autopsy and retention or Do. 
use for diagnostic, scientific, or therapeutic pur- 
poses of such organs, tissues, and parts as physi- 
cians in attendance deem proper. Include in pa- 
tient's clinical record. 

To obtain authorization for tissue donation Hospitals . 



Roentgen Therapy Sum- 
mary. 

Radium Therapy 



Manual Muscle Evalua- 
tion. 

Muscle and/or Nerve 
Evaluation-Manual 
and Eleetrieat:Upper 
Extremity. 
Muscle and/or Nerve 
Evaluation- Manual 
and EIeetrical:Trunk, 
Extremity, Face. 

Neurological Examina- 
tion. 

Anatomical Figure 
Prenatal and Pregnancy„ 



Labor — 
Newborn 



To provide a record of radiation therapy treatments 
performed. Include in patient's clinical record. 

To provide a summary of roentgen therapy treatments 
performed. Include in patient's clinical record. 

To provide a record of radium-therapy treatments per- 
formed. Include in patient's clinical record. 

To record a manual muscle evaluation. Include in 

patient's clinical record. 
To record a muscle and/ or nerve evaluation, manual 

and electrical, of the upper extremity. Include in 

patient's clinical record. 

To record a muscle and/or nerve evaluation, manual 
and electrical, of the trunk, lower extremity, and 
face. Include in patient's clinical record. 

To record neurological examination. Include in patient's 
clinical record 

To depict anatomical figure. Include in patient's 
clinical record. 

To record prenatal and pregnancy examinations, includ- 
ing past histories and a complete physical examina- 
tion. Include in patient's clinical record. 

To record labor history and post partum examinations. 
Include in patient's clinical record. 

To provide a complete record for the newborn, includ- 
ing method of delivery, initial physical examination, 
condition upon discharge from hospital, and followup 
examinations. Include in patient's clinical record. 



Facilities providing 
inpatient care. 
Do. 

Do. 

Do. 
Do. 

Do. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Do. 
Do. 



23-23 
Change 65 



23-61 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



23-61 



23-61. Tabulation of Standard Federal Medical Forms — Continued 



Standard 
Form No. 



Title 



Function * 



Using activities 



536 
537 
538 

539 

540 



Pediatric Nursing Notes- 
Pediatric Graphic Chart_ 



Abbreviated Clinical ree 
ord. 



To record pediatric nursing notes. Include in patient's 

clinical record. 
To picture certain phases of a newborn's hospitalization 
in graphic form. Include in patient's clinical record. 
Pediatric To provide a complete pediatric history, including fam- 

ily or contact history, record of immunization, past 
medical and surgical history, and education. Include 
in patient's clinical record. 
To provide an abbreviated clinical record, including 
pertinent history, progress notes, doctor's orders, 
nurse's notes, and laboratory and radiographic re- 
ports. Include in patient's clinical record. 

Basal Metabolism To request, report on, and record the results of a basal 

metabolism test. Include in patient's clinical record. 



Facilities providing 
inpatient care. 

Do. 
Do. 



Do. 



Hospitals, 

hospital ships, 
and naval dis- 
pensaries. 



541 Cytology Examination- To record facts pertaining to vaginal and cervical cytol- Activities having 

Vaginal and Cervical. ogy examinations. Include in patient's clinical record. laboratory facil- 

ities and provid- 
ing inpatient 
care. 

542 Specimen Record See NAVMED P-5083 Navy medical fa- 

cilities. 

543 Contributor's List of do Do. 

Pathologic Material. 

544 1 Statement of Patient's To provide information about patients treated Navy medical fa- 

Treatment, cilities providing 

care and treat- 
ment. 

600 Chronological Record of See arts. 16—44 through 16-48 Activities or units 

Medical Care. having Medical 

Department rep- 
resentative. 

601 Immunization Record See arts. 16—49 through 16—51 Do. 

602 Syphilis Record See arts. 16-52 through 16-53 Do. 

603 Dental : See art. 6-107 Activities or units 

having a dental 
officer. 

603A Dental — Continuation Continuation sheet for SF-603 Do. 



23-24 

Change 52 



23.62 CHAPTER 23. REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 

23-62. Tabulation of Department of Defense Forms 



23-62 



DD No. 



183 



389 
408 



477 
477-1 

571 - 

572 



572-1 



573 



599 — 



600 



601 
602 
675 

686 

689 



Title 



Report of Treatment Furn- 
ished Pay Patients, Hospi- 
talization Furnished. 

Request for Clinical Follow- 
Up Information. 



Request for Laboratory 
Analysis of Food. 

Medical Officers,, Profes- 
sional Training Record. 



Dental Service Report 



Dental Service Report, 
Equipment and Facilities 
Supplement. 

Blood Identification Tag __. 



Blood Donor Record Card 



Weekly Report of Bleedings. 



Shipping Inventory of Blood 
Collections. 

Patient's Effects Storage Tag. 



Patient's Baggage Tag 



Patient Evacuation Manifest. 

Patient Evacuation Tag .. 

Receipt tor Records and 

Patient's Property. 
Bacteriological Examination 

of Water. 
Individual Sick Slip 



Function 



See sec. J, BUMEDINST 6320.31 
series. 



To follow up patients having 
diseases or injuries of special 
professional interest. Not for 
routine use. 

Self-explanatory __ , 

To record data for committees 
on eligibility for American 
specialty boards, for evalua- 
tion of experience and train- 
ing acquired by medical offi- 
cers while serving in the 
Armed Forces. 



See art, 6-150 
See art. 6-151 



For use in national emergency 
and when directed by 
BUMED. 

For use in national emergency 
and when directed by 
BUMED. May be used cur- 
rently by any medical activ- 
ity which collects blood, if 
desired. 

For use in national emergency 
and when directed by 
BUMED. Specific reporting 
instructions will be issued 
under an appropriate report 
control symbol when reports 
are required. 

For use in national emergency 
and when directed by 
BUMED. 

Local control of personal effects 
retained in bag room. May 
serve as a signed receipt for 
clothing and effects returned 
to patient. 

See BUMEDINST 4650.2 



do 

do 

See BUMEDINST 6320.11 
series. 

Self-explanatory 

See art. 16-70 



Using activities 



Stations furnishing inpatient treat- 
ment and certain stations fur- 
nishing outpatient care to super- 
numeraries. 

Medical or dental officers desiring 
followup information on patients 
transferred prior to completion 
of treatment or final disposition. 

Activities having Medical Depart- 
ment representative. 

Any medical officer, Regular or Re- 
serve, on active duty. 



Navy and Marine Corps activities or 
units having a dental officer. 
Do. 



Armed services blood donor centers. 



Armed services blood donor centers. 
Any blood collecting activity if 
desired. 



Armed services blood donor centers. 



Do. 



Hospitals, 

medical centers, and hospital ships . 



Navy and Marine Corps activities 
or units having a Medical De- 
partment representative. 
Do. 
Do 

Stations in U.S. (less Alaska and 

Hawaii). 
Ships and stations. 

_ Activities having Medical Depart- 
ment representative. 



23-25 
Change 65 



23-62 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



23-62 



23-62. Tabulation of Department of Defense Forms— Continued 



DD 



Title 



Function 



Using activities 



710 



Physical and Chemical Analy- 
sis of Water. 



Self-explanatory Activities having Medical Department 

representative. 

722 Health Record Jacket To maintain individual Health Do. 

Records. 

722-1 Dental Folder See art. 6-109 , Do. 

739 Register of Patients See art. 2 J— 5 3 Naval and U.S. naval hospitals, medi- 

cal centers, and hospital ships. 

771 Eyewear Prescription For ordering spectacles from 

military optical labs. See 
BUMEDINST 6810.4 series. 
To maintain standardized records 
of patients' intake and output. 



Ships and stations having medical 
personnel. 



792 Nursing Service — Twenty- 

Four Hour Patient Intake 
Output Worksheet. 



Naval and U.S. naval hospitals, and 
dispensaries. 



877 Request for Medical/Dental 

Records or Information. 

1076 Record of Personal Effects — 

Military Operations. 

1141 Record of Occupational 

Exposure to Ionizing Radi- 
ation. 

1191 Warning Tag for Medical 

Oxygen Equipment. 

1251 Nonavailability Statement 

Dependents Medical Care 
Program. 

12 89 Department of Defense Pre- 

scription Form. 



See art. 2 3-54 

See NAVMED P-5016, Handling 
of Deceased Personnel in Thea- 
ters of Operation. 

See BUMEDINST 6150.18 series 
& arts 16-61 thru 16-63. 

See BUMEDINST 5100.1 series 

See SECNAVINST 63 20.8 series . 

Title explanatory 



Ships and stations having medical/ 

dental personnel. 
Ships and stations having medical 

personnel. 

Navy and Marine Corps activities or 

units having a Medical Department 

representative. 
Ships and stations having medical/ 

dental personnel. 
Navy and Marine Corps activities or 

units, United States and Puerto 

Rico. 

Activities having officers of the Medi- 
cal and Dental Corps and civilian 
physicians. 



23-26 
Change 65 



23-62 



CHAPTER 23. REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 



23-62 



23-62. Tabulation of Department of Defense Forms — Continued 



DD 



Title 



Function 



Using activiti™ 



1322 Aircraft Accident Autopsy 

Report. 

1323 Toxicological Examination 

— Request and Report. 

1375 Request for Payment of 

Funeral and/or Inter- 
ment Expenses. 



1380 



U.S. Field Medical Card 



1498 



Research and Technology 
Resume. 



See NAVMED P-5065, Au- 
topsy Manual. 

... do 



To submit claim for payment 
of funeral expenses when 
Government services are 
not used, or interment al- 
lowance when Navy has 
arranged for primary serv- 
ices and transportation. 

To serve as a record of the 
admission, treatment, and 
disposition ( including death ) 
of a patient, for use during 
combat or other emergency 
conditions under which it 
is impractical to prepare 
the forms normally pre- 
scribed. This form shall 
never be substituted for 
the normally prescribed 
forms when they are avail- 
able. 

See BUMEDINST 3900.3 series 



Ships and stations having a med- 
ical officer, 

Do. 

Hospitals; commandants of 

naval districts: and other ac- 
tivities providing 
Decedent Affairs Program serv- 



Navy and Marine Corps facilities 
or units having a representative 
of the Medical Department. 



Naval medical activities conduct- 
ing research. 



23-27 

Change 52 




( 

I 

I 



i 

o I 

i 



23-63 



CHAPTER 23. REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 



23-63 



23-63. Tabulation of Other Prescribed Forms 



Title 



Using activities 



ED 1573* 
PHS-691 

PHS-956 
PHS-731 
PHS-2936 
VA 21-8358 



Statement of Investigator .... See BUMEDINST 6710.49 series. 



Separation Epidemiologic 
Report. 



Report of a Suspect or 
Case of VD Among Per- 
sons Examined for Mili- 
tary Service. 

International Certificates of 
Vaccination. 



Venereal Disease Epidemio- 
logic Report. 



Notice to Veterans Admin- 
istration of Admission 
to Uniformed Services 
Hospital. 



To repc:t personnel with VD 
history or doubtful separation 
blood test. See art. 15-48 and 
BUMEDINST 6222.7 series. 

To report suspect or case of VD 
in recruits examined at train- 
ing centers and depots. See 
art. 15-25 A and BUMEDINST 
6222.7 series. 

Provides an immunization record 
for military and honmilitary 
personnel to be retained by 
individual. See BUMEDINST 
6230.1 series. 

To inform local and State health 
departments of contacts of 
persons having VD. See art. 
3-12 and BUMEDINST 6222.7 
series. 

See BUMEDINST 6320.37 series. 



Stations having MC/DC per- 
sonnel. 

Navy and Marine Corps sep- 
aration activities. 



Training centers and recruit 
depots. 



Activities having Medical De- 
partment representative. 



Navy and Marine Corps ac- 
tivities. 



Hospitals, 



•Available from Food and Drug Administration. 



23-29 
Change 5 2 



( 



( 



( 



23-255 



CHAPTER 23- REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 



23-256 



Section III. RELEASE OF INFORMATION FROM RECORDS 

Article 

General 23-255 

By U.S. Naval Hospitals and U.S. Naval Dispensaries 23-256 

By Medical Facilities Other Than Hospitals and Naval Dispensaries 23-257 

Records of Supernumeraries : — 23-258 

Show of Authority---^ 23-259 

Death Forms for Civilian Agencies and Individuals 23-260 

Clinical Records to Armed Forces Institute of Pathology 23-261 

Medical Records for Use in a Medical Care Recovery Act Claim 23—262 

23—255. General sidered to be of a private and confidential nature. 

(1) The Surgeon General has been designated Consequently information from such medical rec- 
by the Secretary of the Navy as the official re- ords the disclosure of which would constitute a 
sponsible for the execution of Department of De- c [ ear £ unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, 
fense policies set forth in DoD Directive 6040.2 shou d , be made available to the public, 
of 13 September 1967 concerned with the release „ < b > * et fase to the Indtwdud Concerned.-- 
of medical records of members or former mem- If '"dividual requests information from his 
bersof the Navy, Marine Corps, or the Reserve medlcal record ' " ? hall 1 be ^leased to him unless, 
components thereof and for determining the ex- m the o P. lm0n of the releasing authority, it might 
tent of and the form in which medical informa- f ove ' n > urlous to his physical or mental health. 

mi u r • l j In such an event, and where the circumstances 

tion will be furnished. ... ,. , . , , . ,. , 

indicate it to be in his best interests, the individual 

23-256. By U.S. Naval Hospitals and U.S. shal1 be requested to authorize the release of the 

Naval Dispensaries information to his next of kin, legal representa- 

, „ _ ,, _. , , _._ , , tive, or personal physician, as appropriate. 

(1) Commanding officers of the U.S. naval hos- (c) ReUase t0 Representatives of the Indi- 
pitals and U.S. naval dispensaries (only those pidual Concerned.— Medical information shall be 
designated as separate field command activities) re i ease d to authorized representatives of the 
are authorized to release information from medi- ; ndividua i concerned, upon the written request 
cal records physically located within the com- of the individua i or his legal representative. If 
mand in accordance with the provisions of this the individual concerned is mentally incompetent, 
article and articles 23-258 and 23-259- The insane, or deceased, the next of kin or legal repre- 
requesting office or individual shall be advised sent ative must authorize, in writing, the release 
that such information is considered to be of a of fhe individua i> s medical records. Next of kin or 
private and confidential nature and directed to j { representative must submit adequate proof 
treat u : accordingly. Service, employment, pay, (hat the member or former membcr has been de . 
or medical records of personnel of the Navy, dared mentally incompetent or insane, or furnish 
civilian employees, and others also may be adeq uate proof of death in cases where such in- 
produced in Federal, State, or territorial courts formation is not on file. Legal representatives must 
including local courts upon order of the court aIs0 ide f of app oi n t men t such as a cer- 
where litigation is pending without obtaining tified of the court order of ap p ointrnent . 
authority from the Navy Department in such (d) Rdease (Q Qlher Govermnent Depart . 
case in accordance with appropriate regulations menU and Agencies ^ Medical information shall 
subject to current restrictions on release of classi- be released) upon req uest, to other departments 
fied information and subject to the exception and agendea which have a proper and f egitimate 
noted in subarticle 23-256(5) with respect to need for the information 

release of medical information concerning civil- (1) Should the releasi author i ty have 
ian employees. When certified copies of records doubts as „ whether the re a sti depa rtment 
are produced, they shall be forwarded direct to has a and legitimate need f or & the informa- 
theclerkof thecourtissuingtheorder. tion> the lattef wiu be requested to spedfy the 

(2) The information necessary to accomplish purpose for which the medical information will 
the legitimate purpose for which required and, if be used. In appropriate cases, the requesting de- 
so required, a complete transcript of the mem- partment will be advised that the information will 
ber's or former member's medical records may be withheld until it obtains the written consent 
be furnished in accordance with the following of the individual concerned. 

policy guidelines: (2) In honoring proper requests, the re- 
fa) Release to the Public. — Information con- leasing authority shall disclose only that informa- 
tained in medical records of individuals who have tion which is germane to the request. The follow- 
undergone medical examination or treatment is ing are representative instances where other 
personal to the individual and is therefore con- departments and agencies, both Federal and State, 



23-31 
Change 50 



23-256 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



23-256 



may have a proper and legitimate need for the 
information. 

(a) Medical information is required in 
order to process a governmental action involving 
the individual whose medical record is sought. 
(The Veterans Administration and the Bureau 
of Employees' Compensation process claims in 
which the claimant's medical history is relevant.) 
In those cases where an agency requests medical 
information solely for employment purposes, a 
written authorization from the individual con- 
cerned shall be required. 

(b) Medical information is required in 
furtherance of the treatment to an individual in 
the department's custody. (Federal and State hos- 
pitals and prisons may need the medical history 
of their patients and inmates.) 

(e) Release to Federal or State Courts or 
Other Administrative Bodies. — 

(1) The foregoing limitations are not in- 
tended to preclude compliance with lawful court 
orders calling for the production of medical 
records in connection with civil litigation or 
criminal proceedings, nor to preclude release of 
information from medical records when required 
by law. 

(2) Whenever the releasing authority has 
doubts as to whether the subpoena or other com- 
pulsory process has been issued by a court of com- 
petent jurisdiction or by a responsible officer of 
any agency or body having power to compel pro- 
duction, the Judge Advocate General of the Navy 
(or other cognizant legal officer) shall be con- 
sulted. 

(f) Copies of Medical Records. — Upon re- 
quest, an individual or his authorized representa- 
tive entitled to have access to medical records, 
will be furnished copies of the individual's medical 
records. The provisions of paragraph (b) shall 
apply in those cases where release of the requested 
information might prove injurious to the mem- 
ber's physical or mental health. In those cases 
where a suit against the Government may be in- 
volved, refer to JAG Manual, sections 1315 and 
1321. 

(3) Commanding officers of naval hospitals are 
authorized to release information from medical 
records physically located within the command 
to members of their staff who are conducting 
research projects. Where possible the names of 
parties should be deleted. All other requests from 
research groups will be forwarded to BUMED for 
appropriate action. 

(4) Nothing in this article is intended to pre- 
clude the release of appropriate information 
concerning the current health and welfare of the 
individuals in the armed services, or vital sta- 
tistical data, including proof of death, concern- 
ing such personnel, nor to preclude compliance 

23-32 

Change 57 



with court orders calling for the production of 
medical records in connection with litigation or 
criminal prosecutions, nor to preclude release of 
information from medical records when required 
by law. For further information concerning 
proof of death, refer to article 23-260. 

(5) Release of medical reports or information 
concerning civilian appointees or employees is 
controlled by the following provision of the 
Federal Personnel Manual, section 339.1 — 4: 

1-4. DISCLOSURE OF MEDICAL INFORMATION 

a. Release of medical information. The Commission 
has delegated authority to agencies to release medical 
information about those medical records which belong 
to the Civil Service Commission (medical records about 
entrance qualification, fitness for duty, or otherwise filed 
in the Official Personnel Folder) for employees subject 
to the Civil Service Act. Such authority must be exer- 
cised under the following criteria: 

(1) Upon receipt of a subpoena, all medical infor- 
mation demanded by the subpoena in the recipient's 
possession will be released in accordance with the terms 
of the subpoena, subject only to the restriction in para- 
graph (3) (a) below. 

(2) Except in response to a subpoena, no medical 
information about a person will be released to any 
non-Federal entity or individual without written author- 
ization from the person. 

(3) With authorization from the person the agency 
will respond as follows to a request from a non-Federal 
source for medical information. 

(a) If in the opinion of a Federal medical officer 
the medical information indicates the existence of a 
malignancy, a mental condition, or other condition 
about which a prudent physician would hesitate to 
inform a person suffering from such a condition about 
its exact nature and probable outcome, the agency will 
not release the medical information to the person or to 
any individual designated by him, except to a physician 
designated by the person (or by his guardian or con- 
servator) in writing. The agency will release such medical 
information, along with a caution against divulgence, 
to a court in response to a subpoena (preferably to the 
court in camera). 

(b) If in the opinion of a Federal medical officer 
the medical information does not indicate the presence 
of any condition which would cause a prudent physician 
to hesitate to inform a person suffering from such a 
condition about its exact nature and probable- outcome, 
the agency will release it freely in response to a subpoena 
or to the individual or to any person, firm, or organiza- 
tion he authorizes in writing to have it, 

(c) If a Federal medical officer is not available, 
the agency should refer the request to the Civil Service 
Commission (central or regional office) together with 
the medical certificates or other medical reports con- 
cerned. Commission regional directors will act on such 
requests under the above criteria, and will refer to the 
Commission's General Counsel requests which do not fit 
the above criteria. 

(4) There is no restriction on the exchange of medi- 
cal information between Federal agencies. A request 
from another agency is answered promptly with all 
available information. 

b. Release of medical records. The preceding para- 
graph discusses release of medical information. This 
paragraph, in distinction, discusses release of medical 
records. Original medical records released for response 
to a subpoena should be retained in, the custody of the 
Federal employee responding to a subpeona duces tecum 
or subpoena for deposition. If any document is requested 



23-257 



CHAPTER 23. REPORTS, FORMS, AND RECORDS 



23-261 



for inclusion in the court record or for attachment to 
the deposition, a copy should be offered with permission 
of the court or upon agreement of counsel, thus keeping 
the Government's file intact. The release and trans- 
mission of an agency's original medical records to other 
than another Federal Agency is not recommended in any 
instance. 

(6) Attention is invited to articles 1250 
through 1252 and 1509 through 1510, U.S. Navy 
Regulations 1948, and sections 1320, 1321, and 
1330 of the JAG Manual for additional infor- 
mation concerning the release of information 
from naval medical records. 

23-257. By Medical Facilities Other Than Hos- 
pitals and Naval Dispensaries 

(1) When approved by the commanding offi- 
cer, medical officers may complete blank forms 
or furnish certificates for persons of the Naval 
Establishment which are submitted or requested 
by insurance companies and beneficial organiza- 
tions and societies, but only upon authorization 
of the individual concerned, or his legal repre- 
sentative, or his authorized next of kin in the 
case of deaths. 

(2) Medical officers are authorized to furnish 
any member or former member of the naval 
service or his personal designee a copy of his 
Health Record, upon his signed request, except 
information contained therein which would 
prove injurious to his physical or mental health. 
In such an event, and where the circumstances 
indicate it to be in his best interest, the individual 
shall be requested to authorize the release of the 
information to his next of kin, legal representa- 
tive, or personal physician, as appropriate. 

(3) Medical officers are authorized, when ap- 
proved by the commanding officer, to release 
copies of medical records to other Government 
departments and agencies in accordance with the 
guidelines in article 23-256(2)(d); and to release 
medical records to Federal or State courts or other 
administrative bodies in accordance with the 
guidelines in article 23-256(2)(e). 

(4) In circumstances not covered in (1), (2), 
and (3) above, requests for information from the 
medical records of members or former members 
of the naval- service shall be forwarded to 
BUMED (Code 3343) accompanied by a copy of 
the information requested and the signed author- 
ization. The requesting party shall be promptly 
notified of the forwarding of the request without 
being furnished a copy of the information re- 
quested. 

23—258. Records of Supernumeraries 

(1) Requests for information from the medical 
records of supernumeraries hospitalized or 



treated at naval activities as beneficiaries of other 
Federal agencies should be referred to the agency 
under whose cognizance hospitalization was 
effected. 

(2) Requests for information from the medical 
records of supernumerary patients of the Navy 
who were not beneficiaries of other Federal agen- 
cies shall be treated in the same manner as is 
prescribed for information from the medical rec- 
ords of members or former members of the naval 
service. (See arts. 23-256 and 23-257.) 

23-259. Show of Authority 

(1) Prior to the furnishing of information 
noted in articles 23-256 through 23-258, a proper 
show of authority must be established in regard 
to each request. The application may be made 
in person or in writing. 

23-260. Death Forms for Civilian Agencies and 
Individuals 

(1) AH requests received from next of kin, 
relatives, insurance agencies, companies, fraternal 
organisations, etc., for completion of blank forms 
relative to deaths of military or civilian per- 
sonnel in naval medical facilities, except in Vet- 
erans Administration cases, shall be satisfied 
locally by furnishing the information requested 
after authorization has been received from the 
next of kin. If the information is not available 
locally the request should be referred to BUMED 
for action. In most cases, the inquiry can be 
satisfied by furnishing a statement of proof of 
death or a copy of the terminal narrative sum- 
mary. 

(2) Requests for completion of such forms in 
cases of beneficiaries of the Veterans Adminis- 
tration shall be forwarded to the Manager of the 
Veterans Administration Regional Office author- 
izing the admission of the patient. 

23-261. Clinical Records to Armed Forces In- 
stitute of Pathology 

(1) Commanding officers of naval hospitals 
and dispensaries are authorized to furnish orig- 
inal clinical records to the Armed Forces Institute 
of Pathology (AFIP) upon request. A teaching 
hospital may reproduce any records considered 
to be of value for use in residency training, re- 
search, or clinical investigation before the orig- 
inal records are sent. 

(2) A chargeout card shall be substituted in 
the clinical record file for each record furnished 
the AFIP. If a clinical record on loan to the 
AFIP is not returned prior to scheduled date of 
retirement, the chargeout card shall be retired 
along with other eligible clinical records. Clinical 
records returned after retirement date shall be 



23-33 
Change 57 



23-262 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



23-262 



retired as soon as practicable and in accordance 
with SECNAVINST 5212.5 series. 

23-262. Medical Records for Use in a Medical 
Care Recovery Act Claim 

(1) When approved by the commanding offi- 
cer, medical officers may release copies of medi- 
cal records or other medical information to the 
district legal officer (or any other JAG Designee 
as designated in 2401 (b) of the JAG Manual) 
for the purpose of pursuing a Medical Care Re- 
covery Act Claim (chap. XXIV, JAG Manual). 



The responsibility for proper release of medical 
records in such cases shall rest with the JAG or 
his designees and shall be restricted to those 
medical records directly related to treatment of 
the conditions which gave rise to the claim. Re- 
quests for other medical records of the member 
concerned shall be processed in accordance with 
article 23-256 and 23-257 of this chapter. 

(2) When a subpoena for medical records is 
received, the appropriate JAG designee shall be 
consulted and the records released in accordance 
with his instructions. 



23-34 

Change 57 



r 



Chapter 24 

FISCAL MANAGEMENT 



Sections 



Articles 



Qeneral - - — -' ■- 24-1 through 24-2 



Section I. GENERAL 



Article 



Bureau Responsibility 24 _] 



Guidelines _ 



24-2 



24-1. Bureau Responsibility 

(1) The Chief of the Bureau of Medicine and 
Surgery as a Naval Technical Assistant to the Secre- 
tary of the Navy is responsible for the control, sub- 
ject to the provisions of law, of funds appropriated 
and allocated for the performance of his work, the 
sound and legal expenditure of such funds, and the 
preparation of estimates for funds required to carry 
out approved plans and directives. (See Navy Reg. 
art. 0401.) 



24-2. Guidelines 

(1) Guidelines, principles, policies, and proce- 
dures pertaining to fiscal and related matters will 
be found in manuals, handbooks, and directives 
issued by the Bureau, Navy Comptroller, Buroau of 
Supplies and Accounts, and Bureau of Yards and. 
Docks. 



24-1 

Change 7 



Chapter 25 

PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 



Article 

BUMED Responsibilities 25-1 

Responsibilities of the Chief of the Bureau 25-2 

Medical and Dental Material Distribution System 25-3 

Property Responsibility and Accountability 25—4 

Unnecessary Expenditure of Property 25-5 

Inspection of Material 25-6 

Accounting for Medical, Dental, and All Other Stores Carried in Stores Accounts at Medical or Dental 25-7 
Facilities. 

Accounting for Medical and Dental Inventories at Noncapitalized Consumer Activities 25-8 

Transfer and Loan of Property 25-9 



25-1, BUMED Responsibilities 

(1) BUMED establishes basic professional and 
technical policies governing medical and dental 
material within the Naval Establishment. BU- 
MED is also responsible for and has control of 
the acquisition and disposition of material of 
every kind, at BUMED-managed activities. 

(2) BUMED exercises technical direction over 
all medical and dental technical equipment and 
ambulances, and in the exercise of this direction 
reviews and endorses the use of such items from 
a professional and technical viewpoint. 

25-2. Responsibilities of the Chief of the 
Bureau 

(1) The Chief of the Bureau of Medicine and 
Surgery, as a Naval Technical Assistant to the 
Secretary of the Navy, is responsible for provid- 
ing technical assistance and guidance in the 
medical and dental material area required by the 
Secretary of the Navy in support of the Naval 
Establishment. 

25-3. Medical and Dental Material Distribu- 
tion System 

(1) The medical and dental material distribu- 
tion system is composed of: 

(a) The Wholesale System under the inven- 
tory management of the Defense Medical Supply 
Center with responsibility for support of the 
medical and dental material requirements of the 
Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. 
It consists of area distribution depots, specialized 



support depots, and direct supply support points 
listed in the Supply Management Data Supple- 
ment to the Federal Supply Catalog, Department 
of Defense Section for Medical Material. 

(b) The Retail System under the inventory 
management of the U.S. Navy Fleet Material 
Support Office. It consists of: 

(1) All U.S. naval hospitals, medical cen- 
ters, and those other activities designated by 
BUSANDA to carry inventories in the Navy 
Stock Account (51000 series) for their own use 
and limited support of other activities, and 

(2) Supporting Navy retail stock points 
(naval supply depots) designated by BUSANDA 
to carry inventories in the Navy Stock Account 
(51000 series) primarily for support of other 
activities. 

(3) Fleet issue ships and designated 
tenders and repair ships carrying a load list of 
cognizance symbol L (medical and dental mate- 
rial) in the Navy Stock Account (51000 series) 
for direct issue to ships of the fleet. 

25-4. Property Responsibility and Accounta- 
bility 

(1) Each of the following is responsible for all 
BUMED cognizant property under his control: 
The commanding officer or officer in charge of 
each activity under the management control and 
technical direction of BUMED; the medical 
officer, the dental officer, the Medical Service 
Corps officer, or the senior Medical Department 
representative, as appropriate, of each other ship 



25-1 
Change 15 



25-4 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



25-9 



or station; and the commanding officer or officer 
in charge of each other activity having no repre- 
sentatives of the Medical Department aboard. 
Such personnel may, for the purpose of property 
management, require subordinate Medical De- 
partment personnel to supervise, control, and be 
responsible for all such property in their custody 
(NAVREGS arts. 0717, 0903, 0907, 1220, and 
1318). 

25-5. Unnecessary Expenditure of Property 

{1) Persons having custody of property shall 
avoid any unnecessary expenditures of such prop- 
erty insofar as it may be -within their power to 
do so, and they shall prevent the same in others. 
All such persons shall be held responsible for any 
wasteful or improper expenditure or unauthor- 
ized use of any property that they may direct, 
authorize, or knowingly condone. 

(2) The degree of responsibility for custody 
and use of items classified as supplies or services 
is, in every respect, equal to that for items classi- 
fied as equipment. 

25-6. Inspection of Material 

(1) Medical and dental stores items require 
periodic inspection to detect visible evidence of 
deterioration. 

(2) Inspection should be accomplished by 
physical examination of representative samples 
of the various age groups of stocks on hand. Field 
units and special outfits are included in the re- 
quirements of this article. 

(3) Items found to be unfit for issue shall be 
surveyed in accordance with current instructions. 

(4) The necessity for "issue of oldest stock 
first" cannot be overemphasized. This is true for 
all items, but is mandatory for deteriorable items. 

25-7. Accounting for Medical, Dental, and All 
Other Stores Carried in Stores Accounts 
at Medical or Dental Facilities 

(1) BUME~D-Managed Activities Operating 
Under the Navy Stock Fund. — Under the Navy 
Stock Fund method of financing storeroom in- 
ventories, each activity invloved becomes an in- 
tegral part of the Navy Supply System for supply 
management. Therefore, each activity involved 
assumes responsibility for the system to the ap- 
propriate Navy Inventory Manager, the Comp- 
troller of the Navy, and to the Bureau of Sup- 
plies and Accounts to carry out the approved 
methods of accounting and inventory control 
for storeroom inventories in accordance with cur- 
rent directives. 

(2) Other Medical and Dental Facilities Op- 
erating Under the Navy Stock Fund.— Medical, 



dental, and other stores will be accounted for in 
accordance with current instructions. 

25-8. Accounting for Medical and Dental In- 
ventories at Noncapitalized Consumer 
Activities 

(1) Naval vessels, the Fleet Marine Force, and 
numerous small activities carry inventories of 
medical and dental stores for their own use 
which have been expended from stores accounts 
and are from a stores accounting standpoint in 
an "end-use" status. Minimum inventory and 
fiscal records must be maintained for such stores, 
consistent with the practices of good property 
management. Aboard vessels of the fleet these 
records shall conform, in general, to the proce- 
dures specified in BUSANDA Manual, volume 
III, chapter 6, part A, section I (General Supply). 
At shore stations these records shall conform, in 
general, to the procedures specified in BU- 
SANAD Manual, volume II, or the Marine Corps 
instructions (at Marine Corps activities). The 
stock records at all ships and stations shall be 
maintained with a view towards providing a 
means of identifying any misuse or misappro- 
priation of Government property, and a record 
of transactions that will serve as a basis for the 
development of usage rates and the maintenance 
of authorized levels of supply. 

25-9. Transfer and Loan of Property- 
CD Property under the cognizance of BUMED 
shall not be loaned to any State, organization, or 
private individual except as provided by Navy 
Regulations or other competent authority. Tech- 
nical medical property may be loaned or trans- 
ferred to other military activities or naval vessels 
in an emergency or at the discretion of the com- 
manding officer. When technical medical prop- 
erty, plant property Class 3, is loaned, a custody 
receipt shall be obtained and affixed to the Prop- 
erty Record Card (DD Form 1342). Loans should 
not be made for a period of more than 6 months 
except in cases of emergency or for periods re- 
quired by the using activity to effect procure- 
ment of a similar piece of equipment. The 
lending activity shall examine the custody re- 
ceipts quarterly and review its requirements to 
determine whether it can release the property 
permanently to the borrowing activity. If the 
lending activity determines that the property can 
be permanently released, the loan will be can- 
celed and transfer to accountability for the plant 
property will be effected in accordance with in- 
structions contained in the NAVCOMPT Man- 
ual, volume 3, chapter 6. 



25-2 

Change IB 



o 



o 



Chapter 26 



HEALTH PROGRAM FOR CIVIL 
SERVICE EMPLOYEES 



Sections 

Article 

I. General 26-1 through 26- 3 

II. Organization 26-4 

III. Functions 26-5 through 26-10 



Section I. GENERAL 

Article 

26-1 

26-2 

26-3 

26—2. Authority and Regulations 



Scope 

Authority and Regulations. 
Inspections 

26-1. Scope 

(1) A health program for naval civil service em- 
ployees, based on special laws relating to federally 
employed civilians, is mandatory not only at the ' 
larger naval industrial activities such as shipyards, 
air stations, ordnance plants, and supply depots, but 
also at all other activities as well. The word "na- 
val," as used throughout this chapter, includes both 
the Navy and Marine Corps. 

(2) The program is primarily preventive in na- 
ture. The medical departments, under their re- 
spective commanding officers, are responsible for 
properly carrying out measures necessary for main- 
taining and promoting the physical and mental 
health of employees. On stations where safety di- 
visions, safety offices, or less formal safety organ- 
izations exist they are responsible for the station's 
safety program. The services of safety engineers 
or other personnel, attached to safety offices, are 
separate from those of the medical department but 
occupy common ground in many places. The re- 
lationship between the medical department and 
safety office shall be one of sustained collaboration. 

(3) The health program, for naval civil service 
employees as outlined in this chapter, does not ap- 
ply to the Departmental Program in the District of 
Columbia. In this area, the health program for all 
Federal civil service employees is administered by 
the Department of Defense Civilian Employees' 
Health Service. It is under the technical control 
of the Surgeon General of the Army. 



(1) The laws authorizing health programs for 
naval civil service employees are as follows: 

(a) Federal Employees' Compensation Act of 
7 September 1916 (c. 458, 39 Stat. 742-750, as 
amended; 5 USC 751 et seq.) . 

(b) Section 4 of the Act of 10 May 1943 (c. 95, 
57 Stat. 81; 24 USC 34). 

(c) 10 USC 7205 and 7472. 

Id) Act of 8 August 1946 Cc. 865, 60 Stat. 903, as 
amended; 5 USC 150). 

(e) Executive Order 4071 of 4 September 1924. 
For medical care of civilian personnel other than 
civil service, see sections G and H, Bumed Instruc- 
tion 6320.31 series. 

(2) Regulations applicable to the operation of 
this program within the Naval Establishment are 
contained in various chapters of this Manual (arts. 
15-57, 15-90, and 23-21), in sections G and H, 
Bumed Instruction 6320,31 series, in Navy Civilian 
Personnel Instructions (290, 310, 460, 792, 810, 
830. and 5100), and in current directives and 
instructions contained in a brochure published 
by the United States Department of Labor, entitled 
"Bureau of Employees' Compensation Regulations 
Governing Administration of the Federal Em- 
ployees' Compensation Act of 7 September 1916, as 
Amended." The latter covers regulations govern- 
ing the overall medical care program for civil serv- 
ice employees sustaining injuries while in the per- 
formance of duty, including diseases proximately 

26-1 
Change 12 



26-2 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U. S. NAVY 



26-6 



caused by conditions of employment. It covers rules 
and regulations on medical treatment, hospital 
service, and all other services rendered. 

(3) Regulations on care of the dead are con- 
tained in chapter 17, in current Secnav and Btjmed 
Instructions and Notices, and the Bureau of Em- 
ployees' Compensation Manual, pase XXI, para- 
graph 1.12. 

26-3. Inspections 

(i) Staff medical officers of senior command 
echelons, in conducting medical inspections, shall 



26-4. Organization of the Occupational 
Health Division 

(1) In larger activities, subject to the concurrence 
of the management bureau and the commanding 
officer, an occupational health division or the 
equivalent thereof shall be established as part of 
the medical department of each major industrial 
activity. Where feasible the division shall be under 
the direction of a medical officer especially qualified 
in occupational medicine. The medical officer of 



Industrial I-Iygfene 

Industrial Ophthalmology or Optometry 

Program at Smaller Activities 

26-5. Functions of the Occupational 
Health Division or Equivalent 
Thereof 

(1) The functions of the occupational health di- 
vision as outlined in the following articles are essen- 
tially applicable to larger naval activities. In 
activities where lesser numbers of civilians are em- 
ployed and where the occupational hazards are not 
so extensive, the program will require such modifi- 
cations as may be indicated to meet the more modest 
needs. These smaller activities should perform as 
many of the occupational health functions as 
pcssible. 

26-6. Clinical and Medical Functions 

(1> To the extent applicable, and as modified to 
meet the specific needs of each activity, the following 
diagnostic, therapeutic, consultative, and other 
clinical services essential to the various phases of 
the program shall be performed: 

(a) Immediate treatment for occupational in- 
juries or medical conditions incurred on duty, and 



inquire into the adequacy of medical services ren- 
dered to civil service employeas and make suitable 
recommendations for corrective action when indi- 
cated. The recommendations should provide, when- 
ever feasible, that smaller activities obtain medical, 
industrial-hygiene engineering, and laboratory 
services from nearby larger activities, when these 
cannot be provided by the activity itself (see art. 
26-10) . Problems of cross utilization between naval 
activities which cannot be resolved by local arrange- 
ments should be referred to the Bureau of Medicine 
and Surgery via the cognizant management bureau. 



Article 
26-4 

the activity shall be known functionally as the occu- 
pational medical officer and shall be responsible 
under his commanding officer for the effective 
prosecution of the occupational health program. 

(2) At smaller activities, where the nature of the 
occupational health hazards is minimal and the 
number of employees is small, the medical depart- 
ment organization may include either an occupa- 
tional health division or a less formal organizational 
structure. 



Article 
26- 5 
26- 6 
26- 7 
26- 8 
26- 9 
26-10 

subsequent treatments as required and authorized 
by law. Where facilities are not available at an 
activity prior arrangements shall be made through 
the district medical officer with nearby naval activi- 
ties or with the Bureau of Employees' Compensation 
to authorize hospitals, clinics, or physicians for the 
adequate care of patients who may be injured while 
at work or who may become ill as a result of occu- 
pational exposure. 

(to Emergency and limited care for on-the-job 
nonoccupational illness or injury. Where illness, 
injury, or dental conditions require, emergency at- 
tention may be provided before referring the em- 
ployee to his private physician, dentist, or to a 
hospital. Moderate treatment or advice to relieve 
minor ailments or injuries may be provided with the 
objective of keeping employees at work. 

(c) Prompt reporting of occupational illness 
and injury. Investigate all cases of alleged adverse 
occupational health conditions to establish whether 
or not the condition was due to occupational expo- 
sure. A record shall be maintained. In the indl- 



Section EL ORGANIZATION 

Organization of the Occupational Health Division 



Section m. FUNCTIONS 

Functions of the Occupational Health Division or Equivalent Thereof- 

Clinical and Medical Functions 

Medical Records Administration 



26-2 
Change 5 



26-6 CHAPTER 26. HEALTH PROGRAM FOR CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES 26-8 



vidual's medical record, of the findings for use in 
the adjudication of possible future injury compen- 
sation claims. Copies of accident records shall be 
forwarded to the local safety office. 

(d) Physical examinations as follows: 

(1) Preplacement examinations in accords 
ance with mental and physical job requirements. 

(2) Special examinations of employees re- 
ferred by authorized personnel to determine physical 
and mental fitness to perform the duties of their 
positions, and to establish such limitations as may 
appear necessary to insure continuation of employ- 
ment without undue hazard to the employee or 
others. 

(3) Physical examinations for physical-dis- 
ability retirements from the Federal service. 

(4) Examinations required by the Bureau of 
Employees' Compensation to determine the degree 
of disability for purposes of compensation. 

(5) Periodical examinations for those per- 
sonnel engaged in hazardous and potentially hazard- 
ous occupations. 

<e) Health surveys and health programs (such 
as annual chest X-rays, health education, sight and 
hearing conservation). 

(/)■ Health counseling for civil service em- 
ployees. 

(g) Rehabilitation programs for proper job 
placement of the physically handicapped. 

(h) Instruction of employees in the medical 
aspects of passive defense. 

(i) Preparation of the quarterly Occupational 
Health Report, Navmed 576, in accordance with 
article 23-21. 

26-7. Medical Records Administration 

(1) The division shall maintain and have custody 
of civil service employees' medical records, and 
assure that they are maintained as confidential 
medical information and released only for official 
action. The word "confidential" is used here to 
connote private. 

<2> The records shall be checked to assure that 
complete and signed entries have been made in 
medical records and that required forms, reports, 
and correspondence pertaining to the treatment, 
hospitalization, and examination of civil service per- 
sonnel are up to date and conform to current 
requirements. 

(3) Medical reports for compensation purposes 
shall be accomplished in accordance with the rules 
and regulations contained in the U.S. Department 
of Labor's Bureau of Employees' Compensation 
Manual. Completed reports shall be submitted to 
an official designated by the commanding officer. 

(4) Upon separation or discharge of a civilian 
employee of the Navy or Marine Corps the medical 
record jacket, including physical examination forms, 
all records of medical and dental examinations or 



treatments, and X-ray films, shaU be disposed of in 
accordance with Secnav Instruction P5212.5 series 

26-8. Industrial Hygiene 

(1) Stations having industrial hygiene engineers 
aboard, civilian or military, shall : 

(a) Evaluate occupational health hazards by 
conducting repeated scientific studies of workspaces 
and processes. These studies shall include recom- 
mended corrective measures for the elimination of 
occupational health hazards and prevention of dis- 
eases arising from exposure to toxic materials or 
from other undesirable physical conditions. Physi- 
cal conditions which are hazardous to health or 
which tend to lower the efficiency of personnel in- 
clude inadequate illumination or ventilation, ex- 
cessive heat or humidity, high levels of noise, and 
exposure to ionizing and nonionizing radiation. 

(b) Operate an industrial hygiene laboratory 
for the purpose of scientifically measuring and ana- 
lyzing air contaminants, environmental physical 
exposures, industrial ionizing radiation exposures 
(atmospheric, radon breath, and photodosimetry 
tests) , potentially toxic proprietary products, and 
body fluids and exudates requiring highly specialized 
microanalyses, 

(c) Investigate the circumstances surrounding 
all alleged adverse occupational health conditions, 

(d) . Keep the occupational medical officer in- 
formed by submitting reports of surveys which 
should include recommendations for corrective 
action. All changes in production policies which 
may have adverse health implications shall be 
brought to the attention of the occupational medical 
officer. 

(e) Maintain an index of all actual or potential 
toxicological materials in current use in the various 
industrial processes. 

</) Take steps to insure that the use of new 
materials and processes are referred by management 
to the medical department prior to adoption. Un- 
usual new health hazards should be reported in the 
narrative portion of the quarterly Occupational 
Health Report, Navmed 576. 

(0 Compile statistics and the industrial hy- 
giene narrative portion of the quarterly Occupa- 
tional Health Report, Navmed 576, in accordance 
with article 23-21, Also compile and analyze other 
data calculated to contribute to better understand- 
ing and control of occupational health problems. 

(?i> Schedule periodic physical examinations of 
personnel engaged in occupations hazardous to 
health. 

<i) Maintain close liaison and cooperation with 
all departments of the activity to effect complete 
integration of the industrial hygiene program with 
all industrial activities of the station. 

<j) Prescribe requirements and procedures, 
under the direction of a medical officer, for the 



26-3 
Change 12 



26-8 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



26-10 



sterilizing of personal protective clothing and 
equipment such as goggles, masks, rubber gloves, 
and rubber boots. 

26-9. Industrial Ophthalmology or Optometry 

(1) The sight conservation program shall be 
under the immediate direction of a qualified 
ophthalmologist or optometrist. He shall: 

(a) Perform refractions and visual analyses, 
or arrange for these procedures to be accom- 
plished. 

(b) Prescribe for visual inadequacies and 
make recommendations applicable to employees 
having defective vision and those working at 
tasks where special eye protection is required. 

(c) Refer employees with nonoccupational 
pathological conditions detected during eye 
examinations to their family physicians. 

(d) Render consultations on visual problems. 

(e) Maintain necessary records of eye exami- 
nations, visual evaluation tests, visual surveys, 
ophthalmic materials, and other pertinent oph- 
thalmologic information. 

(f) Dispense, fit, and repair piano type spec- 
tacles and prescription protective eyewear. 

(g) Train personnel to sterilize, dispense, 
and to properly fit piano protective eyewear. 
This is especially indicated in field activities 
where the central safety storeroom or the tool- 
crib personnel are required to perform these 
duties. 

(2) Wherever it is not possible to provide re- 
fraction and fitting service at an activity, local 
ophthalmologists or optometrists may be invited 
to bid on supplying these services on a contract 
basis in accordance with Navy Civilian Person- 
nel Instruction 5100.10-5b. 

26-10. Program at Smaller Activities 

(1) The medical officer or medical department 
representatives, under their commanding offi- 
cers, shall be responsible for performing the 



functions of the health program necessary to 
meet the needs of the smaller activities in the 
prevention and care of injuries and illnesses. 

(2) Optometrist or ophthalmologist services 
may be obtained as needed in accordance with 
article 26-9(2). 

(3) Industrial hygiene engineering surveys 
shall be conducted at least once each year or 
more frequently depending upon the extent and 
nature of potential health hazards. Requests for 
assistance involving the services of an industrial 
hygienist should be made as follows: 

(a) Where funds for travel and salary are 
available for the purpose, a request for loan of 
an industrial hygienist shall be made of the com- 
manding officer of the nearest activity employing 
one. The request should be processed via the 
appropriate district commandant. Arrangements 
shall be satisfactory to the commanding officer of 
the activity to which the industrial hygienist is 
attached. A copy of the request shall be for- 
warded to BUMED and to the bureau or com- 
mand having primary support of the requesting 
activity. 

(b) Where funds for travel and salary are 
not available, request for assistance in all indus- 
trial hygiene problems should be made to the 
bureau or command having primary support of 
the activity. Arrangements will be made by that 
bureau or command to obtain either the services 
of the civilian industrial hygienist nearest the 
origin of the request, or the services of an in- 
dustrial hygienist attached to BUMED. A copy 
of the request shall be sent to BUMED. 

(c) Activities under the primary support of 
the Naval Ordnance Systems Command are 
exempted from the provisions of 26-10(3) (a) 
when the services of the Naval Ordnance Sys- 
tems Environmental Health Center are requested. 
Arrangements between the activity and the Cen- 
ter may be made in accordance with current 
Naval Ordnance Systems Command instructions. 



26-4 

Change 33 



r 



r 



( 



INDEX 



A 



Abandon ship 2-111 

Abdomen and gastrointestinal system: 

Antarctica duty 15-3I(3)(b) 

Diving duty 15-30(l)(k) 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 

Standards: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-3 

Others 15-7 

Submarine personnel 15-29(2)(i) 

Abstract of Service and Medical 

History, NAVMED 6150/4 16-55 — 57 

Academy: 

Candidates, physical examination 15-43 

Midshipmen, physical examination 15-46 

Accounting, dental 6-177 

Acids, caustic 21-26 

Administrative: 

Divisions, hospital 11-13 

Officer, hospital; duties 11-9 

Terminology, definitions 1-14 

Advanced base organizations: 

Definition 14-10 

G-Components 14-11 

Hospitals 14-12 

Staff dental officers 14-14 

Staff medical officers 14-13 

Training [4-15 

Advancement in rating: 

Dental technicians 6-67 

Hospital Corps 9-12 

Aerospace Medical: 

Center 13-25—32 

Examiners 2-130 

Institute 13-31 

Research Laboratory 13-32 

Aerospace Physiology Training Program 14-1 — 5 

Forms and reports 14-5 

Aerospace service 2-130—133 

Age: 

Antarctica duty 15-3K3)(a) 

Diving duty l5-3CKD(b) 

Nuclear shore power program 15-29B(I) 

Aircraft carrier dental officer 6-40 

Alcohol 21-1 — 51 

Custody 21-3 

Deterioration 21-6 

Emergency situation controls 21-51 

Inventory 21-4 

Report 21-45 

Loss 21-5(2) 

Methyl 21-27 

Pharmacy controls 21-7 

Prescriptions 21-2, 21-41 

Records and reports 21-40 — 48 

Security 21-4 



Allotments: 

Dental 6-176 

Ambulances civil authorities liaison and use . , 1-24(4) 

American Red Cross 1-20, 11-11(4) 

Amputation facilities (2-1 

Anesthesiology service, hospital | 1-29 

Animals, experimental 20-9 

Annual physical examinations: 

Divers 15-30(2) 

Enlisted 15-4 5 A 

Midshipmen and NESEP and NROTC students 1 5-46 

Officers 15-45 

Antarctica duty, physical standards 15-31 

Antibiotics, independent duty HC 21-23 

Antidote lockers 21-25 

Applicant, prospective; nontreatment 1-25 

Aptitude board 18-3 

Composition ig.4 

Convening authority 13.3 

Function ; 1 3.5 

Health Record entry for discharge 18-6B 

R eport 18-6— 6B 

Cover Sheet, NAVMED 1910/1 18-6A 

Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, clinical 

records to 23-261 

Armed Forces Vision Tester 15-87 A 

Articles, professional: 

Dental Corps 6.33 

Medical Corps 2-4 1 

Assistant medical officer 2-30 31 

Audit board for precious and special dental metals 6-157 

Aural rehabilitation facilities 12-1, 12-3 

Aural surgery 12-I 

Authorization for surgery, SF 522 23-61 

Autopsies 17-2 

Aviation medicine specialized care 12-1 

Aviation personnel: 

Physical examinations 15-59 

Annual and promotion 15-71 

Boards of flight surgeons 15-72 

Candidates for flight training 15-67 

Candidates for flight training, reporting . . . 15-68 

Forwarding of flight physicals 15-73 

Reexamination for physical incapacity 15-70 

Reporting on class 1 personnel 15-65 

Special reporting, flight training [5-66 

Physical standards: 

Class 1, service group I 15-62 

Class 1, service group II 15-63 

Class 1, service group 111 15-64 

Class 2, personnel 15-69 

Color perception 15-62(19) 

Ea « 15-62(24) 

Equilibrium 15-62(27) 

Eyes and vision 15-62(11) — (23) 

Instructions 15-59 

Nose and throat 15-62(26) 

Policies on service groups for aviators 15-61 



JO Feb 75 



1 

Change 83 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



Aviation personnel — Continued 
Physical Standards — Continued 

Restrictions until physically qualified 15-60 

Aviation unit, dental officers 6-56 

B 

Back, physical examination 15-89A(2) 

Barracks, sanitary standards 22-7 

Battle casualties, definitions 1-13 

Battle dressing stations, afloat 2-H6 

Beds, nomenclature 1-11 — 12 

Berthing space, afloat, sanitary standards 22-8 

Binnacle List, NAVMED-S 23-51 

Blind, bilaterally, facilities 12-1, 12-4 

Blood and blood-forming tissue diseases: 

Aviation 15-59(8) 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-4 

Others 15-8 

Blood Grouping and Typing Record 16-46A 

Board: 

Aptitude 18-3 — 6B 

Flight Surgeons 15-72 

Medical 18-7—30 

Boards and committees, hospital 11-10 

Body build (see "Height") 

Brigs 15-55, 22-10 

Budget estimates, dental 6-175 

BUMED: 

Mission and functions 1-2 

Organization 1-3 

Reporting requirements 23-1 

c 

Canadian Armed Forces personnel, dental 

treatment 6-98(1 )(a) 

Candidates, physical examinations: 

Academies 15-43 

Commission or warrant 15-42 

Naval Preparatory School 15-43 

Special requirements and tests 15-94 

Cardiovascular surgery facilities 12-1 

Casualties: 

Aviation 2-133(8) 

Mass 6-27 

Cellular tissues (see "Skin") 

Certificate of death 17-3 — 6 

Certificate, ill health 2-44 

Certificate of physical condition, annual, 

Reserve 15-76<l)(b), 15-76A(3) 

Chaplain, hospital 11-11(3) 

Chest wall (see "Lung") 

Chronological Record of Medical Care, 

SF-600 16-44 — 48 

Dental recordings 6-119 

Civil authorities, cooperation with 1-24 

2-20, 11-7(2), 22-20 

Civil litigation 1-24 

Civilian agencies, death forms 23-260 

Civilian dental professional activity 6-34 

Civilian employees: 

Administration at BUMED activities 10-1 — 3 

Dental facilities 6-74 

Dental treatment 6-98(l)(iJ 

Health program 26-1 — 10 



Civilian employees — Continued 

Medical records 26-7 

Release of information 23-255 — 262 

Physical examination 15-57 

Positions 10-4 — 5 

Civilian physicians 10-6 — 11 

Civilians, medical aid 2-47 

Clinical services, hospital 11-25 — 46 

Clinics, dental 6-75 — 81 

Coast Guard member, dental treatment .... 6-98(l)(f) 

Coccidioidomycosis facilities 12-1 

Collision afloat 2-109 

Color perception: 

Aviation 15-62(19), 15-67, 15-69 

Diving duty I5-30(l)(e) 

Nuclear surface ship program 15-29A(1) 

Standards I5-13A 

Submarine personnel 15-29(2)(c) 

Communicable disease control 22-17 — 20 

Reports 22-20 

Tuberculosis 22-19 

Venereal disease 22-18 

Comptroller division, hospital 11-23 

Comptroller, hospital 11-11(6) 

Compulsory treatment 2-22 

Conduct/duty 2-45, 6-112(2), 16-45, 16-71 

Confinement facilities 15-55, 22-10 

Consent for surgery, SF 522 23-61 

Consultation service, Bethesda Medical Center . . 13-3 

Consultation Sheet, SF 513 6-120, 16-67 

Controlled substances 21-1 — 60 

Custody 21-3 

Definition 21-1 (1) & (2) 

Deterioration 21-6 

Drug book 21-47 

Emergency situation controls 21-51 

Independent duty HC Group X control and use 2 1-50 

Inventory '. 21-4 

Report 21-45 

Loss 21-5 

Nursing service controls 21-8 

Pharmacy controls 21-7 

Prescriptions 21-2, 21-41 

Records and reports 21 -40 — 48 

Security 21-4 

Convention of Geneva 1-21 

Correspondence: 

Course, dental 6-131 

Dental 6-30 

Crew inspection 2-93 

Cross-servicing Health Record 16-19 

Individual Sick Slip, DD 689 16-70 — 73 

D 

Damage control, afloat 2-105 

Data processing division, hospital 11-22 

DD forms, list 23-62 

Dead and wounded, removal 2-119 

Deafness, surgery 12-1 

Deaths 17-1 — 6 

Autopsies 17-2 

Certificates 17-3 — 6 

Forms for civilian authorities 23-255 — 260 

Missing personnel 17-3(4) 

Dental: 

Activities, director 6-47 



2 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



INDEX 



Dental — Continued 

Appointments, Daily, NAVMED-6600/5 6-153 

Civilian professional activity . 6-34 

Classifications 6-101 

Color coding DD 722-1 6-101(3) 

Clinics 6-75—81 

Corps: 

Appointments 6-15 

Duty assignments 6-16 

Establishment 6-13 

Grades and strength 6-14 

Promotion 6-17 — 20 

Division, BUMED 6-3—11 

Examinations 6-99 

Recording 6-113 

Specifications 6-100 

Types 6-100 

Facilities 6-178 — 190 

Accounting 6-177 

Folder, DD-722-1 6-109, 16-28—29 

Health Questionnaire, NAVMED 6600/3 . . . 6-157A 

Materiel 6-160—172 

Dental officer: 

Aircraft carrier 6-40 

Assistant 6-23 

Aviation unit . 6-56 

Commanding 6-49 

Designation 6-22 

Dispensary 6-55 

District 6-47 

Duties, general 6-22 — 34 

Fleet 6-37 

Force 6-38 

Hospital 6-54 

Hospital ship 6-42 

Marine Corps 6-59 — 62 

Mobile dental unit 6-57 

Recruit depot 6-52 

Repair ship 6-41 

Research 6-58, 6-133— 134F 

Ship 6-39 

Shipyard 6-53 

Shore station 6-51 

Tender 6-41 

Training 6-122—132 

Center 6-52 

Civilian 6-129 

Correspondence courses 6-131 

General practice residency 6-122 

Graduate 6-125 

Indoctrination, basic course 6-123 

Internships 6-122 

Postdoctoral fellowship 6-124 

Postgraduate 6-127 

Request form 6-130 

Residency 6-126 

Transport 6-43 — 44 

Dental Record, SF-603 6-107 — 118 

Abbreviations and designations 6-115 

Custody 6-110 

Dependent's 6-108 

Examinations, recording 6-113 

Instruction, general 6-108 

Markings 6-116—118 

Operations, recording 6-114 

Purpose 6-107 

Recovery 6-111 

Special entries 6-112 



Dental Record, SF-603— Continued 

Treatments, recording 6-114 

Verification 6-109(2) 

Dental School, Graduate 6-135—138,13-8 

Dental service, chief of: 

Dispensary 6-55 

Hospital 6-54, 11-30 

Dental Service Reports, DD-477, 477-1 .. 6-150—151 

Dental service warrant officers 6-69 — 70 

Dental standards 6-86 — 87, 15-9, 15-27-2-5 

Annual/triennial physical .... 15-9(5), 1 5-45(4)(a)(4) 

Antarctica 15-31(3)(n) 

Appointment, males 15-9(8) 

Aviation 

Class 1, service group I 15-62(8) 

Flight training candidates 15-67(l)(g) 

Diving 15-30(1)(0 

Enlistment, reenlistment, induction 15-27-2-5 

General information 15-9(1) — (3) 

Nuclear surface ship program 15-29A(1) 

Officer candidates 15-9(9) 

Promotion, officer 15-9(4) 

Steward applicants 15-54 

Submarine 15-29(2)(f) 

Transfer to ship or station with no dental 

officer 15-9(6) 

Waivers of defect 6-87 

Women 15-9(7) 

Dental technicians 6-63 — 68 

Schools 6-139— 144B 

Dental treatment 6-98, 6-102 

Army and Air Force mejnbers 6-98(l)(e) 

Before transfer to station without 

dental officer 1 5-9(6) 

Canadian Armed Forces personnel 6-98(l)(a) 

Civil personnel injured in a naval station . 6-98(l)(/) 

Coast Guard members 6-98(I)(f) 

Dependents 6-98(l)(h), (j) 

Environmental Science Services 

Administration 6-98(1X0 

Fleet Naval Reserve and Marine Corps 

reserve on active duty 6-98(l)(b) 

Medical officer 2-23 

Naval Reserve and Marine Corps Reserve 

on active duty 6-98(l)(d) 

Navy and Marine Corps on active duty . . . 6-98(l)(a) 

Nonnaval 6-106, 11-7(3) 

Orthodontic 6-102(2) 

Persons hospitalized, accordance with law 6-98(l)(g) 

Preventive dentistry 6- 102 A 

Priority 6-98(2) 

Prisoners of war 6-98(l)(n) 

Prosthetic : 6-103 

Public Health Service members 6-98(l)(0 

Recording on SF-600 6-119 

Recording on SF-603 6-114 — 118 

Refusal 6-105, 6-112(1) 

Retired members 6-98(l)(i) 

Retired Navy and Marine Corps on 

active duty 6-98(lXc) 

Survivors of deceased members 6-98(lXk) 

Veterans' Administration patients 6-98(l)(m) 

Dentures, inscription 6-104 

Departments of Defense forms, list 23-62 

Dependents: 

Care 2-73 

Dental treatment 6-98(l)(h),(j) 

Depth perception test 15-87B 



10 Feb 75 



3 

Change 83 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



Dermatology service, hospital 11-31 

Deserters: 

Health Record 16-11 

Physical examination 15-56 

Directives 2-15 

Disbursing division, hospital 1 1-20 

Discipline case, medical board 18-13 

Disease-bearing insects and pests, control 22-31 

Diseases subject to quarantine 22-36 

Disinsectization 22-38 

Dispensary, definition 1-11 

District dental officer 6-47 

District medical officer 2-65 — 66 

Diving duty, physical standards 15-30 

Ability to equalize pressure 15-3Q(D(o) 

Diving service 2-140 — 146 

Doctor's Progress Notes, SF-509 6-121 

Drills and emergencies afloat 2-100 — 120 

Drugs 21-1—60 

Antibiotics, independent duty HC 21-23 

Automatic 48-hour stop order 21-21(4) 

Book 21-47 

Controlled 21-21 

Custody 21-3 

Definitions '. 21-1, 21-20 

Dental 6-31 

Dispensing 21-60 

Emergency situation controls 21-51 

Independent duty HC Group X, control and use 2 1-50 

Prescriptions 21-2, 21-41 

Records and reports 21-40 — 48 

Sales in exchanges 2-13(2) 

Duty/misconduct 2-45, 6-112(2), 16-45, 16-71 



E 



Ears and hearing: 

Antarctica 15-3I(3)(d) 

Aviation 1 5-62(24)— (25), 15-64, 15-67, 15-69 

Diving 15-30(l)(g) 

Eustachian tube patency test 15-93 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 

Nuclear shore power program 15-29B(1) 

Standards: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-6 — 7 

Other 15-10 

Submarine 15-29(2)<e) 

EENT service, hospital 11-32 

Elbow, physical examination 15-89A(4) 

Elective surgery 2-61 

Electrocardiogram: 

Antarctica 15-31(3)(h) 

Aviation 15-59(7), 15-60(3)(c), 

15-62(6), 15-69(6)(a)(2) 

Enlisted 15-45A(5) 

Method 15-88(1) 

Officer, triennial/annual 1 5-45(4)(a)(6) 

Emergencies: 

Afloat 2-100 — 120 

Precautions, hospital 11-7(7) 

Employee health program 26-1 — 10 

Employment, civilian 10-1 — 3 

Physician 10-6 — II 

Endocrine and metabolic disorders: 

Antarctica 15-}l(3)(e) 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 



Endocrine and metabolic disorders — Continued 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-8 

Others 15-11 

Enlisted personnel: 

Hospital Corps ratings 9-3 

Muster and discipline 2-78 

Service school assignments, physical 

examination 15-53 

Enlistment: 

Physical examination 15-40(1) 

Physical standards 15-27 

Environmental Science Services 

Administration, dental treatment .... 6-98(l)(f) 

EPTE cases 18-17 

Equilibrium, aviation 15-62(27) 

Equipment: 

Dental 6-160—172 

Medical and dental 25-1 — 9 

Esophagus (see "Mouth") 

Eustachian tube patency test 15-93 

Examination: 

Dental 6-99 

Medical (see "Physical examinations") 

Recruits, psychiatric 18-1(5) 

Exchange: 

Division, hospital 11-21 

Sale of drugs and medical items 2-13(2) 

Extremities: 

Antarctica 15-3K3)(f) 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-9—11 

Others 15-12 

Eyes and vision: 

Antarctica 15-31(3)(c) 

Aviation 15-62(1 1)— (23), 15-63, 15-64, 

15-66, 15-67, 15-69 

Civilian employees 26-9, 26-10(2) 

Detailed examination procedures 15-85 — 87B 

Diving personnel 15-30(l)(d) 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 

Intraocular tension 15-92 

Nuclear shore power program 15-29B(1) 

Nuclear surface ship program 15-29A(1) 

Refractions for employees 26-9,26-10(2) 

Standards: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-12 — 13 

Others 15-13 

Submarine personnel 15-29(2)(b) 



FAA certification 15-73(6) 

Facilities, dental 6-178 — 190 

Accounting 6-177 

FD forms, list 23-63 

Fees, witness, court 1-23(2) 

Field sanitation 22-40 — 41 

Field service 22-41 

Food handlers 22-4l(l)(e) 

Galleys 22-4l(l)(f) 

Immunizations 22-41(3) 

Indoctrination of personnel 22-4l(l)(a) 

Material and supplies 22-4 1 ( t )(d) 

Nonmedical personnel 22-4l(I)(c) 

Personnel 22-4 1(1 )(b) 

Fire and rescue party afloat 2-110 



4 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



INDEX 



Fire fighting instructors: 

Physical examination 15-58B 

Physical standards 1 5-34A 

Fire quarters afloat 2-108 

First aid: 

Boxes, afloat 2-115 

Instruction 2-18(3), 2-94 

Mass casualties, by dental officer 6-27 

Fiscal and supply division, hospital 11-16 

Fiscal matters, dental 6-175 — 177 

Fitness of recruits, psychiatric 18-2 

Fitness reports on subordinates 2-77 

Fitting out sick bay 2-91 

Fleet dental officer 6-37 

Fleet Marine Force 19-1 — 40 

Augmentation personnel 19-40 

Dental companies 6-82 — 85 

Dental support 19-11 

Division surgeon 19-21 

Force Surgeon 19-20 

Force troops medical officer 19-23 

Group medical section 19-31 

Hospital company 19-34 

Medical battalion 19-30 

Medical support . . 19-10 

Responsibilities, departmental 19-1 — 2 

Separate surgical company 19-33 

Squadron medical section 19-32 

Wing medical officer 19-22 

Fleet Reserve transfer physical examination . . 15-48(4) 
Flight surgeons, assignment and duties . . . 2-130 — 133 

Flight surgeons, board 13-28(2), 15-72 

Food and water supply 22-13 — 14 

Food service division, hospital . . 11-17 

Force dental officer 6-38 

Forms, lettered and numbered 23-50 

(NOTE. -Forms may also be indexed by title 
and basic subjects.) 

Availability 23-50(5) 

Tabulation of: 

DD 23-62 

FD 23-63 

NAVMED 23-60 

PHS 23-63 

SF 23-61 

VA 23-63 



G Components 14-11 

Garbage and refuse disposal 22-15 

Gastrointestinal system (see "Abdomen") 

General quarters 2-102 — 104 

Geneva Conventions 1-21 

Genitourinary system: 

Antarctica I5-31(3Xg) 

Diving 15-30(1)(1) 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 

Nuclear surface ship program 15-29A(1) 

Standards: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-14 — 15 

Others 15-14 

Glaucoma 15-92 

Guest scientist program 20-11 



H 



Head and necka 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-16 — 17 

Others 15- 15 

Health Care Administration School 13-9 

Health Conditions Abroad, MED 6200-3 2-21 

Health program for civil service employees: 

Authority and regulations 26-2 

Clinical and medical services 26-6 

Industrial hygiene 26-8, 26-10(3) 

Inspections 26-3 

Medical records 26-7 

Occupational health division 26-5 — 10 

Organization 26-4 

Scope 26-1 

Sight conservation program 26-9 

Small activities 26-10 

Health Record 16-1 — 74 

Abstract of Service and Medical History, 

NAVMED 6150/4 16-55—57 

Adjunct forms 16-65 — 69 

Blood Grouping and Typing Record 16-46A 

Chronological Records of Medical Care, 

SF 600 16-44 — 48 

Closure 16-9 — 17 

Consultation Sheet, SF 513 16-67 

Contents 16-2 

Cross servicing 16-19 

Custody 16-18 — 27 

Hospitalization 16-21 — 25 

Transfers to ships or stations 16-20 

Dental, SF 603 16-54 

Dental Folder, DD 722-1 16-28 — 29 

Facsimile signature 16-18(5) 

Illustrations of forms 16-74 

Immunization Record, SF 601 16-49 — 51 

Information, release of 23-255 — 262 

Ionizing Radiation, Record of Exposure, 

DD 1141 16-61—63 

Jacket, DD 722 16-28—29 

Medical Examination, Report, SF 88 .... 16-37 — 39 

Medical History, Report, SF 93 16-41 — 42 

Medical Board Report, NAVMED 6100/1 16-68 

Narrative Summary, SF 502 16-66 

Opening 16-5 — 8 

Receipt, File Charge -Out and Disposition 

Record, NAVMED 6150/7 16-18(4) 

Replacement 16-27 

Reserve, inactive 16-26 

Special Duty Medical Abstract, 

NAVMED 6150/2 16-58—60 

Syphilis Record, SF 602 16-52—53 

Verification 16-3 

Hearing (see "Ears and hearing") 

Heart, open surgery facilities 12-1 

Heart and vascular system: 

Antarctica 15-31(3)(h) 

Aviation 15-59(7), 15-62(6)— (7) 

15-64(1), 15-67(1) 

Diving 15-30(l)(j) 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 

Methods of examination 15-88 

Standards: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-I8 — 20 

Others 15-16 

Submarine 15-29(2)(h) 



10 Feb 75 



5 

Change 83 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



Heating 22-12 

Height, weight, and body build: 

Aviation 15-62(4), 15-69 

Diving 15-30(l)(c) 

Standards: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-21—23 

Others . 15-17 

Submarine 15-29(2)(m) 

Heterophoria and prism divergence at 

near and far 15-87 

Heterotopia, surgery 2-62 

Hip, physical examination 15-89A(6) 

Histoplasmosis facilities 12-1 

Hospital Corps: 

Antibiotics 21-23 

Classification codes 9-4 

Establishment 9-1 

Group X Medical 9-5—13 

Instruction 2-18(4) 

Ratings 9-3 

Strength 9-2 

Hospital, definition 1-11 

Hospital, naval: 

Administrative divisions 11-13 

Administrative officer, duties 11-9 

Anesthesiology service 11-29 

Bethesda 13-5 

Boards and committees 11-10 

Chaplain 11-11(3) 

Clinical services 11-25 — 46 

Command 11-3 

Commanding officer: 

Duties 11-7 

Delegation 11-7(8) 

Comptroller 11-11(6) 

Comptroller division 11-23 

Data processing division 11-22 

Dental service 6-54, 11-30 

Dermatology service 11-31 

Disbursing division 11-20 

EENT service 11-32 

Emergency precautions 11-7(7) 

Exchange division 11-21 

Executive officer, duties 11-8 

Fiscal and supply division 11-16 

Food service division 11-17 

Hospital ship 11-51 — 53 

Inspection 11-7(6), 11-8(5) 

Instructions and notices 11-5 

Laboratory service 11-33 

Maintenance division 11-19 

Medical service 11-34 

Mission 11-1 

Morale and discipline 1 1-8(7) 

Neuropsychiatry service 11-35 

Neurosurgical service 1 1-36 

Nursing service 1 1-37 

Nursing unit accommodations 22-9 

Obstetrics and gynecology service 11-38 

Officer of the day 1 1-8(6), 11-12 

Operating services division 11-18 

Organization 1 1-4 

Orthopedic service 11-39 

Outpatient service 11 : 40 

Patient affairs division 11-15 

Patients 11-7(3), 11-8(2), 11-49—50 

Disposition 11-50 



Hospital, naval — Continued 

Pediatric service 11-41 

Pensacola 13-30 

Personnel 11-7(4), 11-8(4) 

Personnel division 11-14 

Pharmacy service 1 1-42 

Physical medicine service 11-43 

Planning, civil defense, disaster, mobilization 11-8(8) 

Public affairs officer 11-11(5) 

Radiology service 11-44 

Red Cross field director 11-11(4) 

Relations with civil authorities 1 1-7(2) 

Release of information from individual records 23-256 

Residents 1 1-48 

Sanitary standards 22-9 

Specialized care 12-1 — 6 

Surgical service 11-45 

Training, professional 1 1-8(3) 

Urology service 11-46 

Ward medical and dental officers 11-47 

Watches 11-12 

Hospital ship 1 1-51—53 

Dental officer 6-42 

Hygiene, industrial 26-8, 26-10(3) 

Hypersensitivity to dental drugs 6-112(4) 

I 

Identifying body marks 16-39 

Immunization: 

Certificates 16-51 

Record, SF 601 16-49—51 

Regulations 22-30 

Independent duty, Hospital Corps Group X 9-8 

Antibiotics 21-23 

Drugs, control and use 21-50 

Individual Dental Officer — Daily Dental Service 

Record, NAVMED 6620/1 6-158 

Individual Sick Slip, DD 689 16-70—73 

Inductees, physical standards 15-27 

Industrial hygiene 22-6, 26-8, 26-10(3) 

Insect, pest, and rodent control: 

Disease-bearing insects, control 22-31 

Rodent control 22-32 

Inspections: 

Afloat 2-83—85 

Dental activities and facilities 6-193 — 195 

Hospitals 11-7(6), 11-8(5) 

Material 2-75, 25-6 

Medical activities and facilities 1-3(6) 

Medical services for employees 26-3 

Ships going into commission 2-79 

Submarine and diving 2-141 

Intelligence, medical 2-24 

Intelligence officers, physical standards 15-33 

Intoxication, evidence, physical examination . . . 15-58 

Intraocular tension 15-92 

Aviation personnel 15-62(23) 

J 

Joint utilization of facilities and services 1-15 

Joints, orthopedic examination 15-89A 

Journals 

Dental 6-29 

Medical 2-16—17 



6 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



INDEX 



K 



Keratoplasty facilities [2-1 

Kidney, artificial facilities 12-1 

Knee, physical examination 15-89A(3) 



Laboratory service, hospital 11-33 

Larynx (see "Mouth") 

Library service, Medical Center 13-11 

Lighting 22-12 

Lights for battle dressing stations 2-116(5) 

Limited duty 18-19 

Line-of-duty/conduct 2-45, 6-112(2), 

16-45, 16-71 

Logs: 

Dental 6-29 

Medical 2-16 — 17 

Lungs and chest wall: 

Antarctica 15-3K3)(i) 

Aviation 15-62(5) 

Diving 15-30(l)(i) 

Standards: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-24 — 26 

Others 15-18 

Submarine 15-29(2)(g) 

M 

Maintenance division, hospital 11-19 

Malignant diseases (see "Tumors") 

Man overboard 2-112 

Marine Corps dental officer 6-59 — 62 

Materiel 25-1 9 

Dental 6-160—172 

MED reports, list 23-2 

Medical aid for civilians 2-47 

Medical and dental treatment nonnaval 11-7(3) 

Medical board 18-7 30 

ADP Procedures 18-27 

Availability reports 18-29 

Certificate Relative to a PEB Hearing, 

NAVMED 6100-3 18-24 

Discipline cases 18-13 

EPTE cases . ' [ 1 g- r 7 

Health Record entry 18-28 

Involuntary separation cases 18-13 

Limited duty cases 18-19 

Mental cases 18-14 

Military unsuitability cases 18-16 

Officer cases 18-12 

Procedure 18-21 

Records for PEB 18-25 26 

Report Cover Sheet, NAVMED 6100/1 .. 18-22—30 

Disposition tables 18-30 

Report for Health Record 16-68 

Return to duty cases 18-18 

Special cases 18-20 

Statement of Patient, NAVMED 6100/2 18-21(3) 

18-24 

Treatment refusal cases 18-15 

Medical Care Recovery Act claim; 

release of records 23-262 

Medical Center: 

Bethesda [j 



Medical Center — Continued 

Groton 13-50 — 54 

Pensacola 13-25 32 

Medical Corps: 

Advancement in grade 2-4 

Appointments 2-3 

Grades , 2-2 

Number . . , . 2-1 

Medical Corps duties 2-10 150 

District medical officer 2-65 66 

Emergencies afloat 2-100 — 120 

Fleet Marine Force 19- 1 4q 

Flight surgeons 2-130 133 

General ; 2-40 47 

Medical officer 2-10 23 

Ship 2-90 — 95 

sh ° re 2-70—79 

Operating forces staff 2-80 88 

sh 'P 2-90 — 95 

Shore activity 2-70 79 

Submarine 2-140 — 146 

Surgery . 2-60—63 

Medical Department of the Navy 1-1 7 

Medical Examination, Report, SF 88 16-38 

Medical examiners . 15-g 

Medical history 15-5, 15-30(l)(a), 15-62(2) 

Medical History, Report, SF 93 16-41 42 

Medical officer designation and duties: 

General 2-10 23 

sh 'P 2-90—95 

Sh ° re 2-70—79 

Medical School 13-6 

Medical Service Corps: 

Appointments 7.4 7 

Dental service warrant 6-71 

Duties 7_g o 

Dental facilities 6-12 

Establishment 7-1 

Grades 7.2 

Strength 7.2 

Training 7-10—13 

Medical service, hospital 11-34 

Medical treatment facilities definitions [-10 — 14 

Medicines, overstocking and outdating 21-22 

Meetings, non-Federal 20-5(5) 

Mental competency cases 18-14 

Metabolic disorders (see "Endocrine") 

Midshipmen, physical examination 15-46 

Military unsuitability 18-16 

Misconduct/duty 2-45,6-112(2), 16-45, 16-71 

Missing personnel, no death certificate 17-3(4) 

Mobile dental unit officer 6-57 

Morning Report of Sick, NAVMED-T 23-52 

Mouth, nose, pharynx, esophagus, and larynx: 

Aviation 15-62(26) 

Diving 15-30(l)(h) 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 

Standards: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-27 30 

Others 15-19 

Submarine 15-29(2Xd) 



N 



Narcotic and Controlled Drug Account Record 

NAVMED 6710/1 21-43 



10 Feb 75 



Change 83 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



Narcotic and Controlled Drug Inventory — 2 i Hour, 



NAVMED 671Q/4 21-42 

Narcotics (see Controlled Drugs) 

Automatic 48-hour stop order 21-21(4) 

Narrative Summary, SF 502 16-66 

National Naval Medical Center 13-1 — 11 

NAVMED forms, list 23-60 

NBC warfare defense 2-106 

Neck (see "head") 

NESEP, physical examination 15-46 

Neurological disorders: 

Antarctica 15-3K3X)) 

Aviation 15-62(10) 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 

Standards: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-31 

Others 15-20 

Neurology facilities 12-1 

Neuropsychiatry service, hospital 11-35 

Neurosurgery facilities 12-1 

Neurosurgical service, hospital 1 1-36 

Nose (see "Mouth") 

NROTC physical examination 15-46 

Nuclear shore power program, physical 

standards 15-29B 

Nuclear surface ship program, physical 

standards . . . '. 15-29 A 

Nurse Corps: 

Appointments 8-6 

Augmentation 8-8 

Dental facilities 6-73 

Director 8-3 

Duty assignments 8-12 — 19 

Education 8-20 — 24 

Establishment 8-2 

Grades 8-5 

Mission 8-1 

Nursing Division, BUMED 8-4 

Professional articles 8-28 

Professional organizations 8-29 

Promotions 8-7 

Release 8-9 

Resignation 8-10 

Retirement 8-11 

Strength 8-5 

Subspecialty codes 8-27 

Training 8-20 — 24 

Utilization 8-25 

Nursing service, hospital 11-37 



o 

Obstetrics and gynecology service hospital 1 1-38 

Occupational health 26-1 — 10 

Ocular prosthesis, acrylic, facilities 12-1 

Officer in charge, dental 6-50 

Officer of the day, hospital 11-8(6), 11-12 

Officer of deck/day report 2-17 

Oncology facilities and patients 12-1, 12-6 

Operating service division, hospital 11-18 

Operations, Dental Record 6-114 

Optometrist, examination statements 15-13(l)(b) 

Orthodontic treatment 6-102(2) 

Orthopedic examination of major joints 15-89A 

Orthopedic service, hospital 1 1-39 

Outpatients service, hospital 11-40 



P 



Pathogenic cultures and organisms, 

transfer . 22-39 

Patient affairs division, hospital 11-15 

Patients: 

Air transportation 2-133(9) 

Hospital 11-7(3), 11-8(2), 11-49—50 

Register 23-53 

Specialized care 12-1 — 6 

Transfer 2-43 

From hospital 1 1-50 

Pediatric service hospital 11-41 

Periodontal Screening Examination, 

NAVMED 6600/4 6-157B 

Perpetual Inventory of Narcotics, Alcohol and 

Controlled Drugs, NAVMED 6710/5 21-44 



Personality disorders (see "Psychoses") 
Personnel: 

Complements and allowances: 

Medical department afloat 2-90(2) 



Medical department ashore 2-72 

Division, hospital 11-14 

Hospital 11-7(4), 11-8(4) 

Physically disqualified for reenlistment 

when separated 15-41 

Pharmacists, graduate licensed 21-60 

Pharmacy service, hospital 1 1-42 

Pharynx (see "Mouth") 

PHS forms list 23-63 

Physical defects and waiver: 

Physical defects 15-35 

Procedure for recommending waiver 15-38 

Relative significance of physical defects 15-37 

Physical examinations: 
Annual: 

Enlisted 15-45A 

Officers 15-45 

Applicants, candidates, and reservists 2-74 

Aviation personnel: 

Annual and promotion 15-71 

Boards of flight surgeons 15-72 

Candidates of flight training 15-67 — 68 

Forwarding of flight physicals 15-73 

Reexaminations for physical incapacity .... 15-70 

Reporting of examinations on class 1 15-65 

Special reporting, flight training 15-66 

Candidates for academies 15-43 

Candidates for commissions or warrant 15-42 

Candidates for Naval Preparatory School .... 15-43 

Civil employees 15-57 

Commercial life insurance 2-42(2) 

Deserters 15-56 

Enlisted applicants for service schools 15-53 

Enlistment or reenlistment 15-40 

Firefighting instructors 15-58B 

Heart and blood vessels 1 5-88 

Heterophoria and prism divergence at 

near and far 15-87 

Instructions 15-39 

Intoxication evidence 15-58 

Member on temporary disability 

retired list 15-58A 

Midshipmen 15-46 

NESEP 15-46 

NROTC 15-46 

Orthopedic, major joints 15-89A 

Personnel physically disqualified for 

reenlistment when separated 15-41 

Prisoners 15-55 

Promotion of officers 15-47 

Radiation I5-29C 

Range of motion 15-89 

Recruits 1 5-40A 



8 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



INDEX 



Physical examinations — Continued 

Reporting results 15-81—83,16-37—39 

Reserve, Navy and Marine Corps: 

Active duty 15-77 

Appoinment, enlistment, promotion 15-75 

Aviation 15-79 

Periodic 15-76 

Physical defects 15-80 

uadrennial 1 5-76A 

raining duty 15-77 

Unit assignment/transfer 15-78 

Retired members ordered to active duty 15-44 

Roentgenographs, of chest 15-90 

Separation 15-48 

Special requirements and tests 15-94 

Stewards 15-54 

Submarine and diving 2-141(3), 2-144 

Transfer 15-50 

Triennial, officer 15-45 

Validity periods of SF 88's 15-83 

Visual acuity 15-86 

Physical fitness 2-14 

Physical medicine service, hospital 11-4} 

Physical standards 15-1 — 34 

(NOTE:~For body system or part, see separate 

alphabetic listing; e.g., "Abdomen," "Bars.") 

Antarctica 15-31 

Aviation 15-59 — 73 

Diving 15-30 

Enlisted males 15-27 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A 

Intelligence officer 15-33 

Nuclear shore power program 15-29B 

Nuclear surface ship program I5-29A 

Officer 15-1 — 25A 

Reservists 15-74 

State Department duty 15-32 

Submarine 15-29 

Underwater swimming 15-30 

Women 15-34 

Physicians, civilian 10-6 — 1 1 

Plastic surgery facilities 12-1 

Poisons 21-20(3) 

Antidotes 21-25 

Distinctive colors and shapes 21-24 

Positions, civilian 10-4 — 5 

Post mortems 17-2 

Precious Metal Issue Record, 

NAVMED-6630/2 6-155 

Precious metals, dental 6-155 — 157 

Custody 6-168 

Scraps 6-163(2) 

Statement and inventory form, 

NAVMED-6630/3 6-156 

Preparatory school: 

Candidates physical examination 15-43 

Prescription Form, DD 1289 21-2, 21-41 

Preventive dentistry 6-102A 

Preventive medicine 22-1 — 46 

Prisoners 15-55, 22-10 

Prisoners of war, dental treatment 6-98(lXn) 

Private practice 1-22 

Promotion physical examinations 15-47 

Property: 

Accountability 25-4 

Accounting 25-7 — 8 

BUMED responsibility 25-1 — 2 

Dental 6-160—172 

Distribution system, material 25-3 

Inspection of material 25-6 

Transfer and loan 25-9 

Unnecessary expenditures 25-5 

Prosthetic dental treatment 6-103 

Prosthodontic Work Request and 

Prescription, NAVMED 6630/1 6-152 

Psychiatric Outpatient Report, 

NAVMED 6520/7 12-5(7) 



Psychiatric patients and facilities 12-1, 12-5 

Psychiatric Report, NAVMED 6520/5 12-5(6) 

Psychiatric units: 

Examination of recruits 18-1(5) 

Fitness of recruits . . r 18-2 

Functions of members 18-1(3) 

Instructions 18-1 

Report, NAVMED 6520/6 18-1(6) 

Psychoses, psychoneuroses, and 
personality disorders: 

Antarctica 15-3H3)(k) 

Aviation 15-62(9) 

Firefighting instructors I5-34A(2)(j) 

Nuclear surface ship program 15-29A(1) 

Standards:' 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-32—34 

Others 15-21 

Submarine 15-29<2)(a) 

Women 15-34(3) 

Public affairs, hospital '. 11-11(5) 

Public Health Service members, 

dental treatment 6-98(1X0 

Publications for dental facilities 6-145 — 146 



Q 

Quarantine procedures: 

Authority according to locality 22-35 

Disinsectization 22-38 

Instructions 22-33 

Quarantinable and communicable 

diseases 22-36 

Cholera 22-36(1 )(a) 

Plague 22-36(I)(b) 

Smallpox 22-36(l)(d) 

Typhus 22-36(l)(c) 

Yellow fever 22-36(l)(e) 

Responsibilities 22-34 

Rodents and insects aboard ship 22-37 

Transfer of pathogenic cultures 22-39 



R 

Radiation: 

Exposure recording, DD 1141 16-61 — 63 

Hazards, nuclear submarine 2-141(4) 

Health 22-42—46 

Medical Department personnel duties 22-45 

Physical examinations 15-29C 

Therapy facilities 12-1 

Radiology service, hospital 1 1-44 

Radioisotope laboratory facilities 12-1 

Range of motion 15-89 

Reading aloud test 15-21(l)(i) 

Records: 

Alcohol, controlled substances, drugs ... 21-40 — 48 

Civilian employees 26-7 

Release of information 23-255 — 262 

Request for Medical/ Dental, DD 877 23-54 

Recruit depot dental officer 6-52 

Recruits, physical examination 15-40A 

Red Cross, American 1-20, 11-11(4) 

Red Cross flag, hospital ll-7(7)(b) 

Reenlistment: 

Physical examination 15-40(2) 

Physical standards 15-27 

Refractions: 

Aviation 15-62(21) 

Civilian employees 26-9, 26-10(2) 

Refusal of treatment 2-22, 18-15 

Register of patients 23-53 

Repair ship dental officer 6-41 



10 Feb 75 



9 

Change 83 



MANUAL OF THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, U.S. NAVY 



Reports required by BUMED, list of 23-2 

(NOTE. -Reports may also be indexed by title 
and basic subject.) 

Reports, dental, list of 6-149 

Request for Medical/Dental Records, DD 877 . . 23-54 

Rescued personnel 2-113 

Research, dental 6-58, 6-133 — 134F 

Commercial items 6-134F 

Experimentation on personnel 6-134E 

Facilities 6-134A 

Objectives 6-134 

Personnel 6-1 34B 

Policy 6-133 

Projects 6-134C 

Reports 6-134D 

Research and development 20-1 — 11 

Activities and facilities 20-5 

Animals, experimental 20-9 

Career opportunities 20-4 

Categories 20-6(2) 

Commercial items 20-10 

Departmental responsibilities 20-2 

Experimentation on personnel 20-8 

Guest scientist program 20-11 

Laboratory funds 20-7 

Meetings, non-Federal 20-5(5) 

Policy 20-1 

Program management 20-6 

Projects and tasks area 20-6(3) 

Reports 20-6(5) 

Scope 20-3 

Work units 20-6(4) 

Research Institute. Medical 13-7 

Reserve, Navy and Marine Corps: 
Annual certificate of physical 

condition ]5-76UXb), 15-76A(3) 

Dental treatment 6-98(l)(d) 

Health Record 16-26 

Physical defects 15-80 

Physical examination: 

Active duty 15-77 

Appointment, enlistment, promotion 15-75 

Aviation 15-79 

Periodic 15-76 

Quadrennial 15-76A 

Training duty 15-77 

Unit assignment/transfer 15-78 

Physical standards 15-74 

Residents, hospital 11-48 

Retired personnel: 

Active duty physical examination 15-44 

Closure of Health Record 16-15 

Dental treatment 6-98(l)(c), (i) 

Ribs (see "Spine") 

Rodent control 22-32 

Ships . 22-37 

Certificate of deratization 22-37(1) 

Fumigation 22-37(2) 

Roentgenographic examination of chest 15-90 



Sacroiliac joints (see "Spine") 

Safety afloat 2-95 

Sanitation: 

Barracks 22-7 

Berthing afloat 22-8 

Confinement facilities 22-10 

Facilities afloat 22-8 

Garbage, refuse, and sewage disposal . . . 22-15 — 16 

Hospital nursing unit 22-9 

Industrial hygiene 22-6 

Responsibilities 22-4 

Swimming sites 22-5 



Scapulae (see "Spine") 
School: 

Dental 6-135—138, 13-8 

Dental Technician 6-139— I44B 

Health Care Administration 13-9 

Hospital Corps 9-11 

Medical 13-6 

Separation physical examination 15-48 

Sewage disposal 22- 1 6 

SF Forms, list 23-61 

Ship dental officer 6-39 

Ship medical officer 2-90—95 

Ships, commission inspection 2-79 

Shipyard dental officer 6-53 

Shore station dental officer 6-51 

Shoulder, physical examination I5-89A(1) 

Sick call treatment, recording of [6-44 A 

Sick, morning report, NAVMED— T 23-52 

Sick Slip, Individual, DD 689 . . 16-44A(3), 16-70—73 
Sickle cell trait: 

Aviation personnel 15-59(8) 

Diving duty 15-30<l)(q) 

Sight conservation program 26-9 

Skin and cellular tissues: 

Antarctica 15-3H3)(U 

Diving 15-30(l)(m) 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 

Standards: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-35 

Others 15-22 

Submarine 15-29(2X1) 

Special Duty Medical Abstract, 

NAVMED 6150/2 16-58—60 

Special treatment facilities 12-1 — 6 

Speeches, articles, etc. ■ 20-6(5) 

Spine, scapulae, ribs, sacroiliac joints: 

Antarctica duty I5-3K3)(m) 

Firefighting instructors 15-34A(2) 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-36—37 

Others 15-23 

Staff medical officers afloat 2-80 — 88 

Standard Federal medical forms, list 23-61 

State Department duty, physical standards 15-32 

Statement and Inventory of Precious and 
Special Dental Metals, 

NAVMED— 6630/3 6-156 

Sterilizers for battle dressing stations 2-116(6) 

Steward ratings applications; physical 

examination , . ^"ni 

Storerooms, ship, medical 2-92 

Submarine and diving services: 

Duties 2-140 

Illness, occupational hazards 2-145 

Inspection by medical officer 2-141 

Instruction 2-142 

Physical examinations 2-141(3), 2-144, 15-29 

Radiation hazards 2-141(4) 

Reexaminations 15-29(3) 

Reports 2_1 1 6 

Venereal disease 2- 143 

Submarine Medical Center 13-50 — 54 

Submarine Medical Research Laboratory 13-54 

Supernumeraries: 

Health Record closure 16-17 

Release of information from medical records 23-258 

Supplies: 

Battle dressing station 2-116(3) 

Dental 6-160—172 

Medical, inspection 2-75 

Surgery 2-60 — 63 

Authorization form SF 522 23-61 

Specialized facilities 12-1 

Surgical service, hospital 11-45 

Swimming sites 22-5 

Syphilis detection and treatment 22-18 



10 

Change 83 



10 Feb 75 



INDEX 



Syphilis Record, SF 602 16-52-53 

Systemic diseases and misc. conditions: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-38-3.9 

Others 15-24 



Tabulation: 

DD forms 23-62 

NAVMED forms 23-60 

Other (CA, CSC, FD, PHS, VA) forms 23-63 

Reports 23-2 

Standard Forms 23-61 

Teeth, numerical designation 6-115(1) 

Teeth, standards (see "Dental Standards") 

Temperament, diving duty 15-30(l)(n) 

Tender dental officer 6-41 

Tests, special physical 15-94 

Thoracic surgery facilities 12-1 

Thorax (see "Lungs and chest wall") 

Tissue Bank 14-20—25 

Auxiliary 14-25 

Tissue Graft Registry 14-24 

Toxicology Unit 13-10 

Training: 

Center dental officer 6-52 

Dental aids, audiovisual 6-132 

Dental officer 6-122—132 

Civilian 6-129 

Correspondence course 6-131 

General practice residency 6-122 

Graduate 6-125 

Indoctrination, basic course 6-123 

Postdoctoral fellowship 6-124 

Postgraduate 6-127 

Request form 6-130 

Residency 6-126 

Dental technicians 6-66 

First aid 2-18(3) 

Group X, Medical, Hospital Corps 9-11 

Health and educational program 2-18(1) 

Hospital corpsmen, instruction 2-18(4) 

Indoctrination of personnel 2-18(5) 

Medical officers, residency 11-48 

Medical Service Corps 7-10 — 13 

Nurse Corps 8-20 — 24 

Professional, hospital 11-8(3) 

Venereal disease, instruction 2-18(2) 

Transfer: 

Examinations 15-50 

Fleet Reserve, physical examination 15-48(4) 

Health record: 

Duty 16-20 

Hospitalization 16-21 — 25 

Patients 2-43 

By air 2-133(9) 

Patients from a naval hospital 11-50 

Medical reasons 11-50(2) 

Orders and travel 11-50(5) 

Personal reasons 11-50(3) 

To ship or station with no dental officer . . . 15-9(6) 
Wounded 2-120, 2-133(9) 



Transplants 12-1(1) 

Transport dental officer 6-43 — 44 

Transportation, sick and wounded 2-133(9) 

Treatment, compulsory 2-22 

Treatment, nonnaval 1 1-7(3) 

Treatment, specialized 12-1 — 6 

Triennal/annual physical examinations, 

officers 15-45 

Tropical diseases care facilities 12-1 

Tuberculin testing 15-91 

Report 15-91(2) 

Tuberculosis care facilities 12-1 

Tuberculosis control 22-19 

Tumors and malignant diseases: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-40 — 4l 

Others 15-25 



u 



Underwater swimming, physical standards 
Urology service hospital 



15-30 
11-46 



VA forms list 23-63 

Valsalva's maneuver modified 15-93 

Vascular system (see "Heart") 

Venereal disease: 

Applicants for naval service: 

Male enlisted 15-27-2-42 

Others 1 5 -2 5 A 

Control program 22-18 

Diving personnel 2-143, 15-30(1} 

Instruction 2-18(2) 

Separation procedures 15-48(6) 

Submarine personnel 2-143, 15-29(2)(j) 

Syphilis Record, SF 602 16-52—53 

Ventilation 22-12 

Veterans' Administration patients, 

dental treatment 6-98(1 )(m) 

Vision (see "Eyes") 

Visual acuity, testing 15-86 



w 



Waiver, procedure 15-38 

Waivers of dental defects 6-87 

Ward medical and dental officers 1 1-47 

Watches, hospital 11-12 

Water 22-13—14 

Battle dressing stations 2-1 16(4) 

Weight (see "Height") 

Weight control 15-51 

Witness in court 1-23 

Women personnel, physical standards 15-34 

Wrist and hand, physical examination 15-89A(5) 



X 



X-rays, chest 15-90 



10 Feb 75 



11 

Change 83 



( 



( 



Date Checked 



10 February 1975 



Signature 



MANMED CHECKLIST OF PAGES IN EFFECT 

Change 83 

Pages listed are right hand UNLESS the following left-hand page ( under- 
scored ) carries a later change number. Request missing pages from BUMED 
(Code 0113). 



Page 




Page 






Ch 


Page 


Ch. 


T 
1 


79 


A Q 




6-53 


82 


15-3 


76 


T T T 
111 


1 


A Q 

o— y 


/ 1 


D-55 thru 




15-6 


83 


V 


7 0 


All 
0-11 


/. Q 

^y 


6-59 


80 


15- 6a 


83 


Vll 


p o 


A 1 0. 
D— 1 J 




6-61 thru 




15-7 


76 


1— i. 


fl 9, 
OJ 


A 1 A 
0— 10 




6-65 


73 


15-10 


75 


1— 5 


Q 1 

OJ 


A 17 


Q O 


7-2 


-J -T 

77 


15-10a 


83 


1 c 

1- J 




o-loa 


jU 


7-3 


73 


15-11 


83 


i— oa 


o o 

OJ 


D— zu 


AS2 
DO 


8-1 thru 




15-13 


83 


T 7 
1— / 


7 0 


A 9 9 
O— 


/i 1 
Hi 


8-9 


71 


15-15 


66 


i in 
1-1U 


Q 9 
OZ 


A 0 0 


5t> 


9-1 


75 


15-17 


78 


i— J.ua 




b— zo 


Q9 


9-3 


11 


15-20 


83 


1-11 


78 




82 


Q_ c 

y— j 


1 1 
XX 


15-21 


66 


1-13 


71 


6-27 


83 


10-1 


71 


15-24 


74 


2-1 


71 


6-28a 


78 


10-3 


71 


15-25 


83 


2-3 


83 


6-30 


78 


11-1 


29 


15-27 thru 


2-5 


83 


6-30a 


80 


11-4 


74 


15-49 


74 


2-7 


71 


6-31 


80 


11-5 


68 


15-61 


83 


2-9 


71 


6-33 


63 


11-7 


29 


15-63 


79 


2-12 


73 


6-35 


63 


11-9 


41 


15-64a 


74 


2-13 


78 


6-37 


80 


11-11 


29 


15-65 


75 


2-15 


71 


6-39 


80 


11-14 


41 


15-68 


83 


2-18 


79 


6-40a 


80 


11-15 


29 


15-68a 


83 


2-19 


thru 


6-40c 


73 


11-17 


41 


15-69 


81 


2-23 


71 


6-41 


80 


11-19 


71 


15-71 


83 


2-25 


81 


6-4 2a 


80 


12-1 


63 


15-73 


83 


2-27 


thru 


6-43 


77 


12-3 


63 


15-76 


78 


2-31 


71 


6-44a 


80 


13-1 thru 




15-78 


82 


2-33 


78 


6-45 


79 


13-5 


57 


15-78a 


82 


6-1 


83 


6-47 


81 


13-7 


66 


15-79 


81 


6-3 


83 


6-49 


81 


14-1 thru 




15-80a 


81 


6-6 


83 


6- 50a 


81 


14-7 


71 


15-81 


83 


6-6a 


80 


6-51 


80 


15-1 


69 


15-84 


76 



15-85 


82 


16-14 


75 


18-9 


77 


22-17 


71 


15-87 


76 


16-15 


69 


18-12 


81 


23-2 


83 


15-90 


76 


16-19 


thru 


18-12a 


81 


23-3 


71 


15-91 


82 


16-23 


69 


18-13 


81 


23-5 


83 


15-93 


69 


16-25 


80 


18-15 


81 


23-7 


82 


15-96 


83 


16-26a 


80 


18-18 


80 


23-9 


78 


15-97 


83 


16-27 


80 


18-lBa 


80 


23-12 


80 


15-99 thru 


16-29 


76 


18-19 


81 


23-13 


78 


15-103 


76 


16-31 


thru 


18-21 


77 


23-16 


80 


15-105 


thru 


16-37 


69 


18-23 


77 


23-17 


78 


15-109 


81 


16-39 


80 


19-1 thru 




23-19 


78 


15-111 


83 


16-43 


80 


19-9 


71 


23-21 


80 


15-113 


81 


16-45 


76 


20-1 


36 


23-23 


78 


15-115 


81 


16-46a 


76 


20-4 


59 


23-26 


78 


15-117 


thru 


16-46c 


76 


20-5 


80 


23-27 


52 


15-133 


69 


16-48 


80 


20-6a 


80 


23-29 


78 


15-136 


78 


16-49 


80 


20-7 


61 


23-32 


57 


15-137 


79 


16-51 


thru 


21-1 thru 




23-33 


57 


15-139 


69 


16-57 


69 


21-17 


83 


25-1 


15 


15-141 


69 


17-1 


72 


22-1 


51 


26-1 


12 


16-1 thru 


17-3 


72 


22-3 


77 


26-4 


33 


16-5 


80 


18-2 


52 


22-5 


58 






16-7 


83 


18-4 


83 


22-7 


58 


Index 




16-9 


83 


18-5 


83 


22-13 


3 


1 thru 




16-11 


79 


18-7 


77 


22-15 


71 


11 


83 



2 




< 




c 



