^^'^,"s> 



J »i> 



w 



'm' 



'< 



w 



QP^^*^f 



Iwunif)^ 



THE 



DENTAL TIMES. 



QUARTERLY JOURNAL 



OF 



DENTAL SCIENCE. 



EDIT 



THE 




LTY 



OF THE 



s 



Mhm d 



VOL. II. 



PHILADELPHIA 

1865. 



CONTENTS 



A Case of Artificial Nose and Hard 

Palate, 1 

Nitrous Oxide, 6 

Replacement of a Tooth, 10 

Therapeutical Agents, 11 

Filling Teeth, 12 

Repairing Gold Plates, 14 

A Perplexing Case, 15 

Creasote, 16 

Dental Gossip, 19 

Case in Practice, 21 

Spirit Varnishes, to make, 22 

Tooth Powders & Mouth Washes, 23 

Rubber, 25 

Proceedings of the Hudson Val- 
ley Dental Association, 26 

Proceedings of the Susquehanns^ ; 

Dental Association,. . ,^^ ... 28 
Proceedings of the Buffiilo iSntal 

Association, 29 

Proceedings of the American 

Dental Association, 77 

Proceedings of the American 

Dental Convention, 79 

Proceedings of the Merrimack 

Dental Association, 123 

Publishers' Notice, 30 

Removal of College, 30 

Dental Meetings, 31 

Donations to College Museum^ 

31, 81,128,172 
Obituary, by Faculty of Penna. 
College of Dental Surgery,. . 
Obituary, by Pennsylvania Asso- 
ciation of Dental Surgeonn,. . 
Obituary, by Dentists of Lowell, 

Mass., 33 

Announcement of the Ninth An- 
nual Session of the Penna. 
College of Dental Surgery, 

34, 82, 129 

Inflammation, 49 

Alveolar Abscess, 52 

The Arsenical Paste, 56 



32 



32 



Extracting Teeth, 61 

Tobacco, 64 

Dental Caries — Its Effects on the 

General Health, 65 

Discolored and Necrosed Teeth,. 69 

Caoutchouc, 73 

" Nelson Goodyear's 

Patent, 73 

Caoutchouc, Charles Goodyear, 

Jr.'s Patent, 74 

Caoutchouc, Specification of Pat- 
ent for Pink Rubber, 75 

Caoutchouc, H. H. Day's Patent, 99 
* " Fixed Matter in Rubber, 

100, 168 
*• *" Rubber Compositions,.. 101 
" , Table of Comparative 

Percentage, 103 

Deformity of Artificial Teeth,. . . . 76 

Editorial, 81 

Steam Pressure in Vulcanizers,.. 97 
Making and Pointing Instruments, 104 
Duties and Responsibilities of the 

Dental Profession, 107 

Importance of the Teeth, 113 

Quack Dentists in the West, 114 

Advice to Dental Students,. 117 

Diseases of Maxillary Sinus, 119, 145 

A Case in Practice, 121 

A Case of Irregularity, 122 

Editorial, 128 

Obituary, Samuel Marlor, 128 

Amalgam FilHngs, 148 

The Steam Gauge in Vulcanizing, 149 
Ninth Annual Commencement of 
the Pennsylvania College of 

Dental Surgery,.. 151 

A Little Thing, 162 

Amalgam, 163 

Professional Education, 165 

Models for Vulcanite Work, 169 

A Case of Alveolar Abscess,. . . . 170 

Cement for Plaster Casts, 170 

Editorial, 171 



OOISTTI^IBXJTOI^S- 



T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S., Philadelphia, Pa. 

C. N. Peirce, D. D. S., « 

GrEORGE T. BARKER, B. D. S., <« 

E. WiLDMAN, M. D.,B. B. S., « 

James Truman, B. B. S., « 

H. Meredith White, M. B., A. M., " 

O.U.C, « 

Eeginald H. Shoemaker, B. B. S., " 

Edwin C. Baxter, B. B. S., " 

W. W. TOWNSEND, B. B. S., « 

GrEORGE W. CaLDWELL, B. B. S., « 

T. Embley Osmun, M. B., B. B. S., « 

Alex. O'Callaghan, B. B. S., ^ . . . . . " 

J. B. Wingate, B. B. S., Bellefonte, Pa. 

George B. Snow, B. B. S., Buffalo, N. Y. 

Br. S. B. French, Troy, " 

C. H. Eccleston, Oxford, " 

A. Lawrence, M. B., Lowell, Mass. 

Br. G^. a. Gerry, « « 

A.T.Johnson, « " 

C. A. MiLBANK, B. B. S., New London, Ct. 

L. Buffett, B. B. S., Cleveland, Ohio. 

H. Scott, M. B., Lancaster, " 

Br. Coryden Palmer, , , Warren, " 

Israel Williams, New Phila., " 

H. CowiE, B. B. S., Betroit, Mich. 

B. K. Boutelle, Manchester, N. H. 

H. A. Robinson, Foxcraft, Me. 

S. C. Richardson, B. B. S., Mattoon, 111, 

J. H. Allen, 



/or ^ — - 

^ JUL31 1891 



DEN T>i ■ T I M E S. 



Vol. II. 



PHILADELPHIA, JULY, 1864. 



No. 1. 



A CASE OP AETIFIOIAL NOSE AND HAKD PALATE. 

BY. E. WILDMAX, M. D., D. D. S. 

In May, 1863, a young man, aged 26 years, presented himself for the 
purpose of having an appliance made to repair the loss sustained by ter- 
tiary syphilis. Upon removing the black patch which he wore upon his 
face, and the cotton, with which the cavity was filled, (without the latter 
he could not articulate a word,) I found the entire external nose was 
gone, that the nasal bones, the nasal processes of the superior maxillary, 
also a large portion of their palatine processes, the approximal parts of 
the palatine processes of the palatine, and the turbinated bones had been 
destroyed. The soft palate, the uvula, and the tonsils, were uninjured. 

Tm. 1. 




FACE WITHOUT NOSE. 



i2 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

Fig. 1, will convey an idea of the external appearance of the patient, 
but not fully, as the whole upper lip was cicatrized, and the left cheek 
depressed near the border of the cavity. 

In looking into the nasal cavity, the walls of the antrum on the left 
side were found deficient, and ends of the roots of the incisors exposed 
and decayed. The tongue was visible through the opening in the palatine 
arch. The size and shape of this orifice is represented by the outer 
central line in Fig. 2. 

Fig. 2. 




INTERNAL VIEW OF SUPERIOR ARCH. 

Although desirable, it was deemed unsafe to remove the diseased roots, 
owing to the yielding nature of the superior maxillary bones. The disease 
appeared to be arrested, and the parts in a sufl&ciently healthy condition 
to warrant the application of the substitute : and time has verified this, as, 
with the exception of the exfoliation of a small scale from one of the 
superior maxillary bones, about nine months since, no change has taken 
place up to this date. 

The first step in the operation was to procure an impression, that would 
enable me to make a perfect model of all the parts involved and their sur- 
roundings, in their relative positions. For this purpose plaster was best 
adapted, but its use was precluded by the acrid secretions in the nasal 
cavity; wax and paraffin was considered the best substitute, and used. 
Owing to the rigidity of the upper lip, I was unable to use the ordinary 
impression cup with success, and was obliged to take a rough impression 
of the palatine arch, from which a model was made, and a metallic impres- 
sion cup swaged. 



A CASE OF ARTIFICIAL NOSE AND HARD PALATE. 3 

A sufficient quantity of paraffin and wax was placed in warm water, and 
with an assistant, to keep it at the proper temperature, the mode of pro- 
cedure was as follows : A proper quantity of the compound was placed 
in the cup, introduced into the mouth, and pressed up firmly against the 
arch, the part forced into the palatiue fissure was at the same time pressed 
with the finger introduced through the nasal cavity, so that it should give 
an accurate impression of its lateral borders. A groove was then cut in 
this to serve as a key, and after oiling it, a piece of the compound was 
introduced through the orifice of the nasal cavity, and pressed down to 
make the impression of the floor of the nasal cavity. When sufficiently 
hard it was carefully removed, the upper surface trimmed, placed in cold 
water to give it its greatest firmness, then introduced into the cavity, and 
pressed into its proper position. The metallic cup containing the impres- 
sion of the palatine arch was then removed. The next step was to take 
an impression of the sides of the cavity, then the top, using a curved 
wooden spatula to press the compound in proper position, being careful 
to mark or key the parts that came in contact, and have their surfaces 
oiled, to prevent adhesion : and also, that the pieces should be thinner in 
front than in their posterior parts, so that when the four pieces forming the 
impression of the base, sides and top, were in their proper position, they 
would leave a tapering cavity, with its largest diameter at the front 
orifice. Into this orifice was forced a plug or cone of the compound, fill- 
ing it completely ; in the front of this piece were inserted pieces of match 
sticks, to cause it to adhere to the next piece or mask. The head was 
now thrown back to nearly a horizontal position, wet tissue paper was 
placed over the eye-brows and lashes, the face oiled, and plaster mixed 
thick was batted on with a brush. When set, this was removed, drawing 
with it the central plug or cone : the different parts were then carefully 
removed and thrown into cold water, to give them a consistency to bear 
handling without danger of injury. On this central cone all the parts 
were placed in their proper position, and the impression of the palatine 
arch adjusted in its proper place. From this a plaster model was made, 
giving the upper part of the face, cavities, palatine arch, all correctly in 
their relative positions. 

Of the different substances — leather, wood, wax, metal enameled and 
porcelain — used for making artificial noses, I gave the preference to hard 
rubber in this case, on account of its rigidity, strength, lightness, and 
less liability to injury by accident. 

To prevent derangement, it was necessary to make the appliance 
as simple as possible ; it consisted of two pieces : the external nose, sep- 
tum and floor of the nasal cavity constituted one, having a projection 
passing downward into the palatine fissure, as represented in Figures 2 



THE DENTAL TIMES. 



and 3, A; and the other, the obturator B, Fig. 3, with a projection 
rising upward into the palatine fissure. These projections were made 
hollow, so that when the two parts were placed together, as in Fig. 3, 
there would be a cavity, or box, wherein the attachments could be placed. 



Fig. 3, 



rig. 4. 




NOSE WITH ATTACHMENTS. 

Models were made of the compound of paraffin and wax, which were 
strengthened in the weaker parts by imbedding small strips of metal in 
their substance to give sufficient firmness to admit of the necessary 
handling without injury. The model was applied to the patient and the 
nose trimmed so as to harmonize with his features. They were then 
imbedded in plaster in the usual manner for vulcanite work, with the 
exception that a stout curved wire passed through the artificial nasal 
cavities, extending beyond their borders, to give strength to the rods of 
plaster forming these cavities in the matrix, and thus to prevent their 
fracture in packing. 

This appliance was vulcanized four hours, consuming one hour in 
attaining 280° F., at which point it was held one hour, and occupying 
the third hour in elevating the temperature to 320°, where it was retained 
one hour. The work was rather overdone but not so much so as to 
injure it. 

The two pieces were retained in position by a staple and slide bolt. In 
the recess of the part of the floor of the nasal cavity, projecting into the 
palatine fissure (A, Fig. 2,) was inserted a gold staple. In the recess of 
the projection of the obturator passing into the palatine fissure (B, Fig. 



A CASE OF ARTIFICIAL NOSE AND HARD PALATE. 



4,) was tlie gold catch and shield of the slide-bolt. The object of this 
shield was to prevent any foreign substance entering the slot and 
obstructing the movements of the bolt, also to give a base of support to 
the catch. The rectangular upright of the catch was soldered to the 
shield, passed through it and a longitudinal slot in B and securely fast- 
ened to a rubber slide inlaid longitudinally, and moving freely in the 
lingual surface of the obturator. On the anterior end of this slide was 
a small rounded projection, which enabled the patient, when the two 
parts of the appliance were placed in their proper position, with the point 
of a finger introduced into the mouth, to force the slide backward, thereby 
to pass the catch into the staple and firmly secure the apparatus, or, by 
drawing the slide forward, detach the parts when desirable to remove 
them. 

The external nose was painted with oil color, to give it as nearly a fiesh 
tint as possible, although this is not attainable upon an opaque ground. 
Flesh being translucent, a true imitation can only be made upon a trans- 
lucent ground. 

Fig. 5. 




FACE WITH NOSE. 



The apparatus was introduced on June 30th, 1863, giving to the patient 
great satisfaction and comfort. His appearance was much improved, 
as may be judged by comparing Figures 1 and 5, which were engraved 
from photographs. He breathes freely through the nose, and speaks 



b THE DENTAL TOIES. 

witli ease ; the only imperfection in his speech is a nasal twang, and this 
is less now than when the instrument was first applied. The obturator 
at first extended too far back, and caused some irritation of the vellum ; 
this defect was readily remedied. 

The operation proved entirely satisfactory, with two exceptions : First, 
the color of the nose was not as natural as desirable, for the reason 
already stated; second, in deglutition and speech, when the tongue 
pressed forcibly against the posterior part of the obturator, an unpleasant 
vibratory movement of the apex of the nose was noticeable. This could 
have been remedied by an elastic attachment coupling the two parts of 
the apparatus, but this mode was objectionable by reason of its producing 
constant pressure upon the delicate parts, and thereby endangering 
absorption. A safer plan was adopted by inserting a small steel pin in 
the nose as near as possible to its apex, to which was attached the bridge 
of a pair of spectacle frames, these being retained in position by an elastic 
cord attached to the bows and passing around the head. This arrange- 
ment answered the double purpose of counteracting the vibratory move- 
ment, and the bridge of the frames concealing the upper part of the joint 
where the nose came in contact with the face, which was most conspicuous. 

Within the past week I saw the patient and examined the apparatus, it 
was as perfect as when first applied ; he wears it with ease and comfort, 
and expresses himself as being truly grateful that he can once more sport 
a nose. 

June lO, 1864. 



NITEOUS OXIDE. 

BY T. L. BUCKINGHAM, D. D. S. 

In the January number of the Dental Times, I published an article 
on the process of procuring nitrous oxide or laughing gas. I then 
stated that the properties and administration of the gas would be a 
subject for another paper. So great a change has taken place with the 
public in regard to the use of this gas since the article referred to was 
published, that it is hardly necessary to point out its properties, or give 
any directions for administering it. But as this gas has been so exten- 
sively used as an anaesthetic, and represented to be so " perfectly harm- 
less," that " it can be given in all sorts and stages of diseases," it 
may be proper, at this late day, to examine some of its properties, and see 
if it is as safe and harmless as some who have used it represent it to be. 
One, and a principal reason given for its being safe to use is, that it " con- 
sists merely of the elements of the common air, nitrogen and oxygen, 
mixed in a little different proportions." Let us examine and see whether 
the two elements which compose this gas are merely mixed together, or 



NITROUS OXIDE. « 

chemically combined. This is an important point to commence with. A 
mixture of two gases, one of which will support life, and the other, not 
being detrimental to it, maj^ be breathed for a long time without produc- 
ing any injurious effects. Take oxygen and hydrogen as an example, 
niix them and they can be breathed, and a person would scarcely know 
any difference between them and the air for a considerable length of time -^ 
but cause them to combine chemically, and we have water formed which 
cannot be substituted for air, even for a few minutes. In a mixture, the 
elements retain their individual properties, and each element is at liberty 
to enter into combination with another that may be brought in contact 
with it. But where they are chemically combined, they in a measure 
lose their individual properties, and the compound takes on properties 
differing from those of any of the elements of which it is composed. 

It is not necessary to give examples of this, for the whole science of 
chemistry is an example, without a single exception. 

But is the nitrous oxide * a chemical combination of the two elements ? 
We might cite all the authors on chemistry to show that it is, but pro- 
bably a few examples would be more satisfactory to the reader, as well 
as showing some of the properties of the gas. 

The simplest and plainest evidence of it being a combination and not a 
mixture, is shown by its taste. Neither nitrogen nor oxygen has anj^ 
taste when separated from other elements, and they are still tasteless 
when mixed together, (as they are in the air ;) but nitrous oxide has a 
sweet taste, which goes to show that it is a chemical compound. 

This gds is soluble in water. Cold water will take up its own volume 
of this gas, while one hundred cubic inches of water at 60^ will dissolve 
only three cubic inches of oxygen, and still less of nitrogen. And again, 
nitrous oxide can be reduced to a liquid state by great pressure and cold, 
and in this respect it differs from the mixture of the two elements, neither 
of which, separately nor when they are mixed, can be reduced to a fluid 
condition by any means known, unless they are first caused to combine 
chemically. 

Nitrogen and oxygen mixed together in the proportions they are in 
nitrous oxide, might be breathed for a great length of time without pro- 
ducing injurious effects. The effect would be a slight stimulation, (but no 
anaesthetic influence,) as the oxygen would be in a greater proportion than 
it is in the air, which contains four of nitrogen to one of oxygen, while in 
the former case they are in equal proportions. Even in pure oxygen an 
animal will live eight or ten hours, and then dies only from over-stimula- 
tion, the effects being very different from those produced by nitrous oxide. 

Nitrous oxide was discovered by Priestly, in 1776, and called dephlo- 
gisticated nitrous air, but its properties were not fully known until after 



8 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

the researches of Davy, in 18U0. Until that time it was considered not only 
unrespirable but poisonous. In 1800, Sir H. Davy published his Researches, 
in which he gives the effects of this gas. I quote two cases re-published 
in Brando's Manual of Chemistry, Vol. 1, page 329-30. The first 
account is by Mr. Tobin, and the second by Dr. Roget : — 

" On the 29th of April T breathed four quarts from and into a silk bag. 
The pleasant feelings produced at first, urged me to continue the inspira- 
tion with great eagerness. These feelings, however, went off towards the 
end of the experiment, and no other effects followed. The gas had probably- 
been breathed too long, as it would not support flame. I then proposed 
to Mr. Davy, to inhale the air by the mouth from one bag, and to expire 
it from the nose into another. This method was pursued with less than 
three quarts, but the effects were so powerful as to oblige me to take in 
a little common air occasionally. I soon found my nervous system agita- 
ted by the highest sensations of pleasure, which are difiicult of descrip- 
tion ; my muscular powers were very much increased, and I went on 
breathing with great vehemence, not from a difficulty of inspiration, but 
from an eager avidity for more air. When the bags were exhausted and 
taken from me, I continued breathing with the same violence ; then sud- 
denly starting from the chair, and vociferating with pleasure, I made 
towards those that were present, as I wished they should participate in my 
feelings. I struck gently at Mr. Davy : and a stranger entering the room 
at the moment, I made towards him, and gave him several blows, but 
more in the spirit of good humor than of anger. I then ran through 
different rooms in the house, and at last returned to the laboratory some- 
what more composed ; my spirits continued much elevated for some hours 
after the experiment, and I felt no consequent depression either in the 
evening or the day following, but slept as soundly as usual." 

Dr. Roget states as follows : — " The effect of the first inspirations of 
the nitrous oxide was that of making me vertiginous, and producing a 
tingling sensation in my hands and feet ; as these feelings increased, I 
seemed to lose the sense of my own weight, and imagined I was sinking 
into the ground. I then felt a drowsiness gradually steal upon me, and 
a disinclination to motion : even the actions of inspiring and expiring 
were not performed without effort ; and it also required some attention 
of mind to keep my nostrils closed with my fingers. I was gradually 
roused from this torpor by a kind of delirium, which came on so rapidly 
that the air-bag dropt from my hands. This sensation increased for about 
a minute after I had ceased to breathe, to a much greater degree than 
before, and I suddenly lost sight of all the objects around me, they being 
apparently obscured by clouds, in which were many luminous points, 
similar to what is often experienced on rising suddenly and stretching out 
the arms, after sitting long in one position. I felt myself totally incapa- 
ble of speaking, and for some time lost all conciousness of where I was, 
or who was near me. My whole frame felt as if violently agitated : I 
thought I panted violently; my heart seemed to palpitate, and every 
artery to throb with violence ; I felt a singing in my ears ; all the vital 
motions seemed to be irresistibly hurried on, as if their equilibrium had 
been destroyed, and everything was running headlong into confusion. 
My ideas succeeded one another with extreme rapidity, thoughts rushed 
like a torrent through my mind, as if their velocity had been suddenly 



NITROUS OXIDE. 



9 



accelerated by the bursting of a barrier which had before retained them 
in their natural and equable course. This state of extreme hurry, agita- 
tion, and tumult, was but transient. Every unnatural sensation gradu- 
ally subsided: and in about a quarter of an hour after I had ceased to 
breathe the gas, I was nearly in the same state in which I had been at 
the commencement of the experiment. I cannot remember that I expe- 
rienced the least pleasure from any of these sensations." 

I have re-published the above lengthy extract to show how clearly the 
effects of nitrous oxide were described over sixty years ago. From the 
time Sir Humphrey Davy investigated its properties, it was only exhibited 
to produce exhilaration, and no one, so far as I know, attempted to cause 
insensibility by it, until Horace Wells, of Hartford, Connecticut, after 
seeing its effects at an exhibition, in December, 1844, conceived the idea 
of using it to prevent pain in extracting teeth. I am aware that more 
than forty years before Davy wrote, " as nitrous oxide in its extensive 
operation seems capable of destroying physical pain, it may probably be 
used with advantage during surgical operations, in which no great effusion 
of blood takes place ;" but as it had never been used for that purpose, 
and Mr. Wells being the first to use it to relieve pain, he is entitled to 
the credit. 

Whether nitrous oxide is as safe an agent as ether or chloroform, is 
still undecided ; its friends claim that it is, while others have strong objec- 
tions to its use. One or two deaths having occurred immediately after 
inhaling it, have made dentists very careful in administering it. 

Nitrous oxide is usually administered by filling a bag that will hold 
four or five gallons of the gas, to which is attached a wooden faucet or 
stop-cock, the opening through which should be at least an half inch in 
diameter, to allow the gas to pass freely in and out. The end of the 
faucet that goes into the mouth may be made of wood, hard rubber or 
ivory ; it should be made of a substance that can be kept clean, and not 
of metal, as the teeth are somtimes closed very hard on it. 

When the gas is administered the patient is requested to exhale as 
much as possible to empty the lungs. The mouth-piece is then placed 
in the mouth, the faucet opened, and the nose closed either by the opera- 
tor or the patient. The gas is inhaled from the bag into the lungs and 
exhaled into the bag again, so that the patient receives no atmospheric air 
during the administration. From half a minute to a minute is usually 
the length of time required to bring the patient into an insensible con- 
dition. 

There is a decided objection to administering the gas in this way — 
a portion of the gas is returned from the lungs into the bag loaded with 
carbonic acid and other impurities, and then inhaled again into the lungs, 
a quantity of nitrous oxide being absorbed each time it is inhaled, so that 



10 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

by tlie time tlie patient becomes insensible there is very little gas 
remaining in the bag. These impurities in the gas might have serious 
results, and I have no doubt they cause many of the unpleasant effects 
complained of after inhaling it. 

Mouth-pieces have been made with valves in them to allow the gas 
from the lungs to escape and not pass into the bag again. These will 
be an improvement if they can be made to work properly. In those which 
I have seen, the operator has to watch when the patient exhales and open 
the valve with his finger. It is sometimes very difficult to tell when they 
are exhaling, and as the operator has also to watch the condition of the 
patient, he generally has a little more than he can attend to properly 
when he undertakes to manage the valve. 

In conclusion, I can say that I do not think the nitrous oxide .possesses 
any properties which makes it safer than ether to administer, and it is 
more difficult to prepare and keep and more likely to be impure. 



EEPLAOEMENT OP A TOOTH. 

BY C. N. PBIRCK, D. D. S. 

On the 3d of January last, a gentleman called at my office, and, as I 
was absent at the time, left with my assistant a left central incisor, and 
desired that I should call at his residence immediately upon my return-. 
At 2i o'clock, I called upon the patient, a lad of nine years, who had 
displaced the tooth by a fall an hour and a quarter previous. At this 
time the soft tissues around the tooth were very much swollen. The clot 
was turned out and the tooth tried in the socket, when, with a little 
effort, it went quite into place. It was then taken out, and the nerve 
extracted through the foramen at the apex of the fang, which was suffi- 
ciently large to admit the passage of a good sized broach. The nerve 
cavity was next filled through this opening with Hill's Stopping, the 
sharp, undeveloped edges at the end being trimmed smooth to prevent 
irritation. At 3 o'clock, the tooth, having been out a little over two 
hours, was replaced, and held in position by linen ligatures attached to 
it and the adjoining teeth. The frequent use of dilute tiuct. of myrrh as 
a mouth wash was then ordered, and a cork given him to place between 
his teeth to prevent their coming in contact and producing irritation. A 
cap was then made for the crown of the head and a pocket for the chin, 
the two being connected on either side by a strap and a buckle, and at 
night were put on, the cork placed between the teeth and the straps 
buckled tight, bringing the teeth hard upon the cork, thus preventing its 
falling out and the approximation of the teeth while he slept. The experi- 
ment has proved successful, the tooth now being perfectly firm in the 
socket and the color not in the least changed. 

Philadslphia, June 17, 1861. 



THERAPEUTICAL AGENTS. 11 

THEEAPEUTICAL AGENTS. 

BT L. BUPFETT, D. D. S. 

To therapeutical agents dentistry owes its position as a profession to a 
great extent ; throw them aside it becomes a mere trade. The dentist 
who has not a fair knowledge of remedial treatment, does not meet the 
demands of his patients, much less of the profession. Such a one has 
taken to himself the title of Dr., or perhaps, by some means it may have 
been conferred, when in reality he is at best only an artisan or mechanic, 
although he may boast of not soiling his hands in the laboratory. If 
he attempts a treatment without knowing the properties of the agents, 
applying them because some one has recommended their use, he is engaged 
in mechanical labor, for his treatment is nothing more than a mechanical 
one. 

As a general thing the agents that are demanded by the dentist are 
not numerous, yet he should have at his command most of those that are 
needed by the physician, and be able to use them understandingly if the 
case requires. There is no disease that flesh is heir to, but has its 
influence on the teeth or their surroundings, directly or indirectly. 

Many of the agents have difi"erent properties, so difi'erent results can 
be produced by the same one, according to the quantity, time and manner 
used. To apply the same remedy alike in all cases, is the worst kind of 
practice, it is really quackery. Take, for example, the most common 
agent used in dentistry, which is creasote, and let us see the different 
properties which it possesses. It is a stimulant, sedative, narcotic irri- 
tant, antiseptic, escharotic and styptic ; perhaps other qualities might be 
given it. Thus we see that this agent alone covers a large field, and to 
produce these different results, its action, chemical and physical, must of 
necessity be understood. If properly applied, it may remove fungous 
growths, if improperly, may increase them ; may stimulate, so that new 
and healthy tissue may be formed, or may destroy to a great extent. 

It is not the intent of this article to treat of the properties of any thera- 
peutical agent, but to show the need of a correct knowledge of them, and 
of a thorough dental education, which should not be a superficial one, that 
can be gained in a few weeks, or learned alone in the laboratory in mere 
mechanical labor without study. 

If practitioners would oblige their students to take a full course of 
study, allow none in their office but those who are willing to come up 
to the right standard, we should soon see dentistry taking rapid 
strides onward and upward, should feel that the millennium ^-as near. 
The opposite is too much the course pursued. They will take a young 
student and make him think their office affords all that is necessary in 
practice, put him in the laboratory and keep him there, as he can be of 



12 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

the most service to them in that place. No attention is paid to his scien- 
tific knowledge ; hardly a question is asked him in relation to chemistry, 
anatomy, or any of the branches of medicine and surgery, and if it is pos- 
sible to make a quack dentist of him, it will be done. These deficiencies 
they then try to cover up with boastings and pretensions. The aim of 
every true dentist is to advance the profession in every honorable way, 
and the character of the man can be told to a great extent by the position 
his students take in the profession. 

Clevblakd, Ohio. 



FILLING TEETH. 

BY DR. H. SCOTT. 

I have made filling teeth my specialty during the last fifteen years of 
a thirty years' practice. T do not know that I have any suggestions to 
offer that will be new to the general practitioner •. yet, a brief detail of 
some of my methods juay be useful to the young dentist. Many of my 
early ways of doing this work, I have, in common with other operators, 
long since discarded ; and I have some methods, and some views, pecu- 
liarly my own, which may, in some respects, differ from others who have 
been equally successful. 

First, my great care is to secure firm borders to my cavities, and in all 
cases, to form them more or less on the dove-tail plan, that is, wider 
within than without. The second point I gain is, to fill the cavities with 
foil, made as firm as pressure and the mallet can make it. These are 
the general ends to be gained, in which there will be no difference of 
opinion. 

I use adhesive foils exclusively, rolled into cylinders of various sizes. 
These I cut into sections of suitable length, and place them in the 
cavities endwise. In central round cavities I fill from the bottom, two- 
thirds or more of their depth, and then with my sections I commence at 
one side and finish at the other, but in some cases in the centre. Every 
section or pellet is put to its place and made firm before it is left, the 
surface being pierced, or made rough, to receive the next. In round 
cavities, of smooth or even walls, I aim to get a ball of foil that will come 
as near as possible to filling the hole. This I deem a matter of great 
importance. I always manipulate my foils out of the mouth as firmly as 
will be consistent with their proper introduction. If my foils are not 
sufficiently adhesive, I pass the pellets through a spirit flame, but if I 
have fresh foil, that has been well prepared, I pay no attention to this. I 
have used various foils, but am now using White's exclusively; it possesses 
all the qualities tbat I require, and I use none but No. 6. I cannot give 



FILLING TEETH. 13 

a description of the instruments I use, they are my own, as those used by 
others are their own. 

I dry with "blue tissue paper, rolled soft and cut into pellets of varied 
size. I keep my cavities dry where I can, for convenience ; but I can 
make just as good a filling " submarine^' as I can on dry land, only it 
requires more labor. I sometimes stop and begin a dozen times or more, 
during the process of filling one cavity. This gives the patient time to 
rest, and the operator time to deliberate. If I want to do the best work 
that it is possible to do, I prefer having only from three to six cavities 
in the same day. 

Having secured the primary ends of filling, viz., firm borders, and rolled 
pellets, pressing firmly into every niche and point of the walls ; 1 am less 
careful about polishing the surface, except front fillings that are seen, than 
many operators, deeming it a matter of trifling importance. Neither am I 
so careful to cut away all the discolored bone from the interior as I once 
was. Mischief is often done in this way, by cutting to the pulp mem- 
brane, which, in a very large proportion of cases runs into trouble, and 
often to the loss of the tooth. I often leave discolored, and even softened 
bone, where I suspect the proximity of the nerve. In this way I have 
saved many teeth, and have, in some instances, upon removing the filling 
many years subsequently, found a solid substratum of dentine. I use tin 
foil and Wood's Metallic Stopping satisfactorily in some frail teeth 5 but 
amalgums and pastes, or cements, are an abomination to me. 

I refuse to operate in all cases where the will of my patient is to interfere 
with my freedom in cutting away dead portions of enamel, as much as may 
be necessary to secure firm healthy borders, and to make enduring fillings. 
I am, perhaps, more lavish in the use of my cutting instruments than many 
eminent operators, but the result of more than one hundred thousand 
fillings sustains and justifies my practice. The fears that the '^ plugs will 
be seen^^ must be dismissed by the patient, and disregarded by the opera- 
tor, if the safety of the tooth is the end sought. In the incisors, especially, 
is firmness in this matter required, and young operators are often found 
yielding to the prejudices of the wrong directed judgment of their unin- 
formed patrons ; and it is only in after years, when the teeth are hope- 
lessly crumbled away, that both learn their mistake. 

I will, if my time permits, give, in future numbers of the " Times," 
some thoughts on fang filling, and the treatment of exposed nerves, which, 
in my practice, have not been specially flattering. Also, a chapter on 
quack dentists in the West, which will be, in some respects, refreshing. 

Lastcaster, Ohio. 



14 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

REPAIEING GOLD PLATES. 

BY DR. CORYDON PALMER. 

Allow me to offer a small, practical item npon repairing gold plates, 
for the benefit of those of our dental friends who live at a distance from 
the dental depots, and cannot so readily supply themselves with new teeth 
when wanted, and more especially in these days when gold plate teeth 
are fast going out of use. 

It often happens that a tooth, by constant hard strain, is pulled off, or, 
rather, the pins are pulled in two, leaving short portions in the tooth. 
Now, the tooth may be such a one, as for shade and form, that it can not 
be replaced. The following is my mode of managing the case : 

Take a common three-cornered file, grind the point on each side, so as 
to make it sharp ; with this sharp-pointed file cut away around the pins, 
so as to get a little more length, take a small pair of plyers and draw 
up the pins to a conical shape ; next find some platinum pins from broken 
up teeth, or some platinum pin wire, and form two pieces that will sit 
upon the pins in the tooth (this is done by drilling holes in the ends of 
the new pieces, so that they will fit on and keep their places without 
dropping.) The next thing to be done is to envelope the tooth in plaster, 
or any favorite coating, leaving the portion around the pins exposed ; 
grind some raw borax on a piece of thick glass, made rough with sand- 
stone, which is better than slate, then cut some small pieces of the finest 
gold plate, touch the pins with the borax, place these on the points in the 
tooth, place a small cutting of the gold to each one, lay the tooth on a good 
charcoal, lay some small pieces of coal around to retain the heat, and 
solder with the flame of the spirit lamp, drawing the heat low down, so 
as to flow the gold low down on the old pins. This makes two new pins, 
that will do to rivet on or solder, and saves an otherwise hopeless case. 

To rivet on a tooth after suitably countersinking the holes, take the 
plate punch, put several folds of paper against the face of the tooth, then 
use the plate punch in place of the light riveting hammer. 

Hard maple makes the best charcoal ; it is made from the sugar maple, 
and it is worth the while for those of our dental friends, who can take 
the trouble, to have it prepared for themselves. 

Another mode of managing a tooth that the pins are pulled in two, is 
this : use the pointed file to cut away around the pins, so as to form little 
depressions ; next reduce the thickness of the lining just where the pins 
go through, replace the tooth, and with the plate punch draw down the 
gold into the depressions around the pins, and solder. 

The practice of cutting away the teeth by first grinding upon each side 
of the pins, and afterwards finishing with the sharped file point, is also of 



A PERPLEXING CASE. 15 

great advantage where the teeth are too thick, and is also one of my own 
discoveries. 

I give these minute particulars for the benefit of those who are like 
myself, far away from the large dental stores, and cannot have the advan- 
tage of a large assortment to select from. 

Wark n, 0., April 13. 

■ — ^^ 

A PERPLEXING CASE. 

BY DR. n. SCOTT. 

In July, 1863, some front teeth were filled by my partner. Dr. Crider, 
for a young man, a clerk in a dry goods house, of our city. Two weeks 
later he called to say that he was suff"ering excruciating pain in the 
first superior left molar. Upon examination, every tooth in that side, 
posterior to the cuspid, was found to be perfectly sound and healthy in 
every respect, the sounding hammer giving back only the healthy sensa- 
tion. 

I at once fixed my mind on the idea that there was an impingement of 
the pulp by a filling in one of the cavities, but the most carefully 
conducted experiments failed to indicate the one. Cold and heat, and 
the hammer, were applied from day to day, without showing any re- 
sults. During all this time, and for more than two weeks, the pain 
was almost without intermission in the molar, which, to all tests, never 
varied from its normal condition. At length all pain ceased, and for 
about one month he was entirely comfortable. 

I had placed him under a promise to call, upon the earliest indication 
of trouble in any of the front teeth He, however, did not quite obey 
me. He called one morning, after breakfast, with considerable swelling 
of the upper lip, attended with a sensation of throbbing. The touch 
showed the right lateral incisor to be highly sensitive and slightly 
elongated. He stated that the tooth had been sore at supper, the pre- 
vious evening, and that the throbbing commenced about bed- time and 
continued through the night. I decided the time to arrest the inflamma- 
tion to be past. The tooth was extracted, and upon removing the filling, 
an opening was discovered communicating with the pulp cavity. The 
pulp was dead, and a sack was formed at the apex of the fang. 

The obscurity of the case was perplexing, exceeding anything I have 
ever witnessed. But the sequel was a lesson, teaching the importance of 
greater care in conducting the operation of filling where the nerve might 
be suspected near. The cause of all the young man's sufi'ering was the 
impingement of the pulp by a filling in the incisor tooth ; but why the 
seat of pain should have fixed itself in the healthy molar, in a perfectly 
healthy neighborhood, who can tell ? 

Lancaster, Ohio. 



16 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

OEEASOTE. 

• (CONTINUED.) 

BY GEO. T. BARKER, D. D. S. 

Creasote as a remedial agent in the hands of the general practitioner has 
been extensively made use of, but at present it is used less than in former 
years. One of its first uses was for the relief of vomiting, by Dr. Ellit- 
son, who states that "no medicine was at all comparable to it in allaying 
this symptom. He knew it to succeed where hydrocyanic acid had failed, 
also in cases of nervous vomiting, the vomiting of pregnancy, in cases of 
obstructed bowels, and even in those of arsenical poisoning." The dose 
was one or two drops, renewed immediately if rejected. Creasote has 
been used with some success in the excessive and persistent vomiting of 
sea sickness. It has been found efficacious in the treatment of vomiting 
from cholera, gastric inflammations and intemperance. The following 
formula has been recommended for the purpose of arresting vomiting. 

Haustus Creasoti* 
B. — Creasot, rri] ; 

Aquas camphorse ; 

Infus gentian compos, aa f 3vj ; 

Fiat haustus. — Dunglison, 

One of the first employments of creasote was for the arrestation of 
external hemorrhages, and its power has been abundantly confirmed. The 
first to experiment as to its ha3mastatic properties, were Simon, Muller and 
lleiter, their investigations being carried on with inferior animals. A 
brief description of one of their experiments may not be uninteresting. 
The crural artery of a dog was exposed, and cut a short distance from its 
division, compression at the same time being made upon the trunk ; nine 
minutes afterwards a compress of cotton, saturated with creasote, was 
applied to the divided extremity, with some degree of pressure. . On the 
removal of the compress the bleeding was found to have been arrested, 
the wounded surface dry and of an ashy gray hue. In a severe case of 
epistaxis, which had resisted other agents, Horing inserted two plugs of 
lint, wet with a solution of creasote, into the nostrils, the hemorrhage 
soon ceased. Fichtdauer has borne testimony to its efficacy in arresting 
violent bleeding from leech bites, after other haemastatics had been used 
in vain. An interesting case is detailed in the Edinburgh Medical and 
Surgical Journal, October, 1841. The operation of lithotomy having 
been performed, the usual means of arresting hemorrhages were tried with- 
out success, no particular vessel could be discovered from which the 
blood flowed. The bleeding continued until the life of the patient was 
despaired of, he being reduced to unconsciousness. A sponge was dipped 



CREASOTE. 17 

into pure creasote, as an experiment, and placed on the wound, pressure 
being made on the bleeding parts, hemorrhage immediately ceased. Dr. W. 
T. Wagg, in the Southern Journal of Medicine and Pharmacy, has detailed 
a number of interesting cases, including hemorrhage from the lungs, 
bowels and bladder, flooding after abortion, flooding where there was no 
pregnancy, &c., the medicine being given internally, with excellent suc- 
cess. In cases where there is some lesion of the integuments, as in 
excoriations, induced by lying, as bed sores, or the intertrigo of children, 
superficial ulcers, and fissures of the skin, it has been found useful. 
" Meister found the application of creasote water in cases of carious^ 
scrofulous^ syphilitic, fistulous and sanious ulcers, to be strikingly and 
almost uniformly advantageous." According to Reich and Sir Francis 
Smith, they treated with success cases of cancerum oris, and the former 
one, of scorbutic ulceration of the gums. Smith and Sinkler give the 
following as an emulsion for external use as a hsemastatic. 

R. — Creasot, f 3J ; 

Acaciae pulv., 5J ; 

Aquae, f ^viij; 

Et fiat emulsio. — M. 

Creasote as an application to chilblains, burns and ulcers, is by many 
highly recommended. Its discoverer (Reichenbach) considered it a cura- 
tive to pulmonary consumption, but its use for that purpose has been 
abandoned, it being inferior to other terbinthinate medicines. Dr. Ellit- 
son, in the Med. Chir. Trans., xix. 222, states that several cases of neu- 
ralgia, affecting the spinal or facial nerves, had been treated with creasote 
with success, after other remedies had failed. ' Other testimony, however, 
goes to prove that in some cases the remedy had no influence on the 
disease, and in others, it appeared to aggravate it. Creasote has been 
highly spoken of as a remedy for aphthous ulceration, the inflamed part 
being painted over with a solution, by means of a camel's hair pencil. 
Magendie uses the following : 

R. — Creasot, f ^ss •, 
Acaciae, giss ; 
Aquae camphor, j ^xss. M. 

As a dental remedy, creasote deserves an extended notice, as perhaps 
no one agent is so universally used by us, and is so efficacious if properly 
applied. One of the first uses was as an ingredient in the arsenical 
paste. The first to suggest this agent was Dr. Parmly, whose formula was 
equal parts of arsenious acid and sulphate of morphia and creasote, with 
3 or 5 times its bulk of conserve of roses. Dental Cosmos, Vol. III., 479. 
This was at a subsequent period modified by Dr. J. D, White, who was 



18 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

the first to recommend that arsenical paste be mixed and kept on hand 
ready at all times for use. His formula was 

Arsenous acid, grs. xxx. ; 
Morphia sulph. grs. xx. ; 
Creasote, qs. — Misce. 

The advantage of this formula over the original one of arsenic alone, 
or combined with acetate or sulphate of morphia, must be apparent to 
every one, as its influence is exerted directly upon the nerve tissue 
uniting with the albumen, and in conjunction with arsenious acid over- 
stimulating the tissue and hastening its speedy death. It was supposed, 
on first preparing the arsenical paste, that it was necessary to rub the 
arsenious acid, morphia and creasote together, for several hours, that the 
two first might be dissolved and held in solution in the creasote. It has 
now been demonstrated, by experiments, that creasote does not hold 
arsenic in solution, but that, in a short time after it is made, the arsenic 
will fall to the bottom of the jar, with the morphia next above, and, lastly, 
the creasote on top. It is, therefore, necessary, in preparing an application 
for an exposed pulp, that the pellet be carried well down to the bottom of 
the jar, so that a repetition of the treatment be unnecessary. The property 
it possesses of uniting with the constituents of nerve tissue has induced Br. 
Dwindle, of New York, to recommend it alone for the destruction of the 
dental pulp. His mode of procedure is as follows : — Dries out the cavity 
perfectly, applies a small portion of creasote, and with a nerve broach 
breaks up the attachments of the pulp in the canal ; by this means pro- 
motes absorption of the creasote, and so continues the application of 
the creasote and broach until he reaches the apex of the fang. This 
method gives no pain. He usually fills immediately, and has never had 
any subsequent trouble. (Report of American Dental Convention,) 

Creasote is most efiicacious in arresting, temporarily, the pain arising 
from an exposed pulp. This is accomplished in consequence of its uniting 
with the albumen of the nerve tissue, forming an insoluble coating, 
acting, indeed, as a protective. There is no remedy for toothache that is 
so popularly used, and there are few dentists of extended practice who 
have not repeatedly had to treat severe burns of the face, lips or cheeks, 
made by the injudicious use of creasote by those who were unaware of its 
escharotic propertieSj having applied the agent as they would a simple 
astringent solution. And we would here impress the importance of pro- 
tecting the lips and tongue when creasote is used about the teeth, as a 
drop upon those tissues may induce a painful and unsightly ulceration. 

The antiseptic properties of creasote eminently fit it as an agent in the 
treatment of teeth containing devitalized pulps which are undergoing, or 



DENTAL GOSSIP. 19 

have undergone, decomposition. One or two applications, accompanied 
with washings of warm water, will remove the odor and restore the parts 
to a healthy condition. Creasote may be either injected into the fang 
canal by a delicate syringe, or upon a thread of floss silk carried to the 
apex upon a broach ; the latter is probably the best method. The power 
of arresting decomposition in tissue by creasote has caused certain practi- 
tioners to recommend that it be placed in the fang at its apex, to over- 
come any inflammatory tendency, or to arrest decomposition in any minute 
portion of pulp which may not have been removed. 

Creasote is an excellent remedy for the treatment of alveolar abscess. 
It should be applied directly to the point of inflammation, where it acts, 
probably, in several different ways ; first, by constricting the cells of the 
limiting fibrine or sack, this will reduce the suppurative discharge : 
second, by its stimulant properties promoting absorption of the sack, and 
by its antiseptic virtues preventing decomposition. In treating alveolar 
abscess no successful result can be expected unless the agent is brought 
directly in contact ; this can usually be accomplished by means of a 
broach, having upon its apex a pledget of cotton saturated with creasote, 
using the broach as a piston. 

Creasote has been used to arrest decay in the deciduous teeth. A 
foreign journal, in treating of this subject, says, the great fluidity of 
creasote frequently occasions much inconvenience when it is applied for 
caries of the teeth, and M. Stanulus Martin, to obviate this, recommends 
the combination of 15 parts of creasote, by weight, to 10 parts of collo- 
dion, to fill cavities. 

Creasote, when pure, is an acid, colorless, and is solid at the ordinary 
temperature of the atmosphere. Carbolic acid, au article which has 
attracted considerable attention in Europe, is by many excellent chemists 
considered identical with pure creasote, as made from coal tar. 



DENTAL GOSSIP. 

BY O. U. C. 

Messrs. Editors : — I have been more than surprised, indeed grieved, 
that in a whole year's publication of " The Dental Times," you have 
either intentionally or from inexcusable neglect, failed to make the cus- 
tomary editorial notice of that able periodical, " The Dental Register of 
the West ;" and this too, after its kind and considerate notice of the 
" Times," (if in no other way,) in making a selection or selections from 
its pages without credit. I do hope, therefore, that you will, without 
further delay, extend the usual editorial courtesy " in such cases made 
and provided," and thus welcome the journal under notice into the rank 
of the fraternity. 



20 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

As specimens of very fine writing I submit the following, about which 
it is difficult to determine which most to admire, the brilliancy and 
elevated tone of the language used, or the clear and lucid manner in 
which the ideas are evolved. Any professional writer or speaker desiring 
to create a profound sensation, or excite the risibilities to an alarming 
extent, could not do better than adopt something like the following : 

" Let us ask then what irritation is l It is the disturbance of the 
^me,' in its most occult relationship to organism in the sea of nervo-auro 
in the mucoid nervine, within and without the perceptible nervous tracts of 
the living body," etc. — Dental Register of the West, for February, p. 62. 

"Thus in the planetary system, the centrifugal force by which a revolv- 
ing body tends to fly from the centre of motion in the direction of the 
tangent' to the path the body describes, is opposed to the centrifugal 
force through which a body revolving about the centre is drawn toward 
thfd centre ; thus each, while opposing the other, is at the same time con- 
trolling and controlled by the other." — Dental Cosmos, January, 1864, 
page 331. 

Here we have the very singular anomaly presented, and which is cer- 
tainly a bran new theory in the law of forces, of the centrifugal being 
opposed to the centrifugal, 

" By the especial favor of heaven has this department (the dental) 
been ushered into existence, in its present necessities and nakedness of 
form, for the fulfilment of law heretofore substituting and holding rela- 
tion to this department, just as Judaism did to Christianity. And, thanks 
be to Grod, the so-called publicans and sinners of the profession, like the 
Gentiles and conquerors of old, accepted the truth of the dental depart- 
ment readily, because they had no false record, or false dignity, or self- 
righteousness to interpose between their eyes and the truth, and they 
were at once soundly cx)nverted," etc. — Dental Register, May, 1863, 
page 200. 

I could go on much further, but enough has been given to show what 
nonsense may be uttered in the name of dentistry, and that, too, (in the 
latter extract,) under the caption of *«The use of the Mallet." 

" The how of this first complete step, equivalent to all the subsequent 
steps to full expression of bodily form of material presence, is too occult 
for elucidation by the use alone of any language now at command, but 
when a truly natural language shall find means of expression, any feeling, 
idea, thought, opinien, belief, or knowledge, will be easy of complete 
enunciation. * * -x- * * * ^ 

" Then, if all certainty depends upon the unknown, is it not clear that 
negation is quite equal to affirmation ! or that is equal to 1 ? or theory 
to practice, or infinity to eternity, or God to creation ?" — Dental Regis- 
ter, for July, 1863, pages 280 and 282. 

As a companion to the above, and found outside the precincts of the 
profession, and to show that the writer of the above is not alone in pos- 
session of these brilliant scintillations of mind, I append the following : 

«' The asteric stand-point of Christian exegetical analysis and aggluli- 



CASE IN PRACTICE. 21 

nating the polsynthetical ectoblasts of homogeneous asceticism." — Sun- 
day Paper. 

I have heard a story somewhat as follows : — A gentleman from abroad 
called upon a dentist in a neighboring city for some operations, in the 
way of fillings, upon his teeth. On the completion of said operations, the 
charge of eleven hundred and fifty dollars and fifty cents was made. 
The gentleman remonstrated — would not pay any such price. Dentist 
firm at first, but subsequently came down to eigfit hundred dollars. G-en- 
tleman still dissatisfied — tendered ^ve hundred dollars^ promising to pay 
the other three hundred after a fair trial of the operation, and which 
amount was finally accepted and the bill settled. 

Somewhat similar in principle, though trifling by comparison, is the fol- 
lowing, clipped from a newspaper : — 

[At the N. Y. Fair ! — Scene : very pretty girl pinning bouquet on 
Young Swell's coat.] Young Swell — " Twenty-five cents for the bouquet, 
I think you said ; here's a Two-Dollar Grreenback." Young Lady — 
" Yes ; Twenty-five cents for the bouquet ; a dollar for pinning it on your 
coat ; and seventy-five cents for the pin. That's just right ; thank you. 
Can't I show you something else ?" 

This is a species of buncombe (to call it by no worse name,) that 

deserves occasional ventilation. 

Philada., June, 1364. 

■ ^»o I — ^ 

CASE IE PEAOTIOE. 

BY H. COWIB, D. D. S. 

A soldier of the Twenty-fourth Michigan Volunteer Infantry, wounded 
at the battle of Grettysburg, called at the ofiice to consult with Dr. Cle- 
land, in company with myself, as to the best means of obviating an obstruc- 
tion in his speech. 

On examination, it appeared that he had been shot with a musket ball, 
the missile entering below and slightly anterior to the left ear, passing 
through and shattering the lower jaw, thereby severing the muscles of 
that side, continuing on through the centre of the palate bones, and making 
its exit through the right eye. 

The difficulty experienced in his case consisted in obtaining an impres- 
sion. He being unable to open his mouth to a greater extent than one 
inch. Remembering a case related by Dr. Wildman, Prof, of Mechanical 
Dentistry in the Pennsylvania College, where he had taken an impression 
in sections, I applied his method in this case, and was thus enabled to 
obtain a good impression of the necessary parts, and succeeded in making 
a palate piece ; obviating, in a great measure, the defect in the speech of 
the patient, enabling him to once more pursue his business, which was 
that of a telegraph operator. 

Detroit, Michigan, April 20, 1864. 



22 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

SPIRIT VARNISHES. 

BY E. TVILDMAN, M. D., D. D. S. 

In the laboratory a spirit varnish is required to varnish models, to pre- 
vent the hands from becoming soiled by the plaster in handling them, and 
also to ensure a better parting from the sand in moulding. 

The following formulae will enable the dentist to prepare very good, 
cheap and reliable varnishes for dental purposes. 

SHELLAC VARNISH. 

Gum shellac, 5 ozs., avoirdupois. 
Alcohol, above 60 per cent., 1 pint. 

These are mixed together in a bottle, and in a few days the shellac will 
be taken up. It should be frequently shaken. The operation will be 
hastened if the bottle is placed in warm water ; in this case the bottle 
should be loosely corked, as the vapor of alcohol, if it had no vent, might 
burst the bottle. 

SANDARACH VARNISH. 

Grum sandarach, 5 ozs., avoirdupois. 
Alcohol, above 60 per cent., 1 pint. 

This is made in the same manner as the shellac varnish, and by the aid 
of the warm water bath the gum is dissolved in a few hours. The safer 
plan in making these spirit varnishes is to allow the gums to dissolve at 
the ordinary temperature. In using heat we facilitate the solution of the 
gams, but at the same time the vapor of alcohol is generated, which is 
very inflammable, and without care may cause an explosion. 

Shellac varnish makes a tougher film on the face of the model, it is 
brown, is more viscid and consequently does not penetrate the plaster as 
much as the sandarach. 

Sandarach varnish dries quickly, and if only clear pieces of the gum 
are used, which is the proper mode, it makes a colorless film, is sufficiently 
hard for all practicable purposes, and, owing to its perfect solution or 
fluidity, penetrates the plaster deeper and gives greater solidity to the face 
of the model. 

In case the varnish becomes too thick by long standing and not pro- 
perly corked, add a little alcohol to bring it to the proper consistence. 

Where it is desirable to make a very hard surface to the model, take 
some of the above sandarach varnish and dilute it with alcohol to make it 
more penetrating, and apply several coats until a smooth surface is 
obtained ; by this treatment of a model, made of good plaster, which has 
been properly mixed, we obtain a very hard surface. 

I give a decided preference to the sandarach varnish, owing to its more 
penetrating properties, and giving the model a more sightly appearance. 



TOOTH POWDERS AND MOUTH WASHES. 23 

TOOTH POWDEES AND MOUTH WASHES. 

BY GEO. T. BARKER, D. D. S. 

It is of tlie first importance to the dentist to select and prepare a suita- 
ble dentifrice for the use of his patients, and we consider it highly eensur- 
ble for any dentist to recommend any of the many tooth powders, the 
formula of which is unknown to him, no matter what may be its reputa- 
tion, or how much it may be extolled by the judicious use of printer's 
ink. That many of these tooth powders are positively hurtful is beyond 
question, and many can doubtless attest the truth of these remarks, by 
recalling instances where the teeth have been injured and the gums caused 
to recede by the use of an improper tooth powder. In the formation of 
a dentifrice, one simple rule should be universally adopted, viz : select 
only such materials as are soluble in the saliva, discarding all insoluble 
substances, such as charcoal, pumice stone, or the ashes of difi"erent sub- 
stances. Charcoal is an article once considerably used for cleaning the 
teeth, but should never be so used, as the small particles work their way 
between the gum and the tooth, irritating the periosteum, causing it to 
recede, the teeth to gradually loosen j also furnishing points for the accu- 
mulation of tartar, which is so hurtful to gum tissue. Dr. Chas. E. Fran- 
cis, in an excellent article on this subject. Vol. I., No. 2, of this Journal, 
says : " I have known instances where particles of charcoal have remained 
imbedded beneath the surface of the gums for jive years after its use had 
been abandoned." Another care in forming a tooth powder should be to 
adopt one containing not too many ingredients, but on the contrary, let each 
article be selected for some specific object, not trusting, as did the early 
writers on dentistry, to a multiplicity of ingredients, expecting that by 
being brought in contact some new substances would be formed ; as an 
instance of this, we would quote from Fitches System of Dental Surgery, 
published in 1829. 

OPIATE FOE THE TEETH. 

« Take prepared coral, ^ij ; 
Gum shellac, dragons' blood, catechu, or Japan earth, aa. Jj ; 
Cinnamon, cloves, root of pyrethrum, aa. ^vj ; 
Red gaunders, cuttle fish bone, calcined egg shells, ^ss ; 
Decripitated salt, 2J. 

Reduce them all to powder, and sift them through a linen sieve as fine as 
silk, then mix them in a marble mortar, with a sufficient quantity of the 
honey of roses." 

A tooth powder should also possess the quality of being pleasant to the 
taste, and of an agreeable perfume. To accomplish the first named 



24 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

result, gum myrrh and particularly cinchona bark must he discarded. 
Myrrh from its nature is gummy, and clings to the teeth instead of cleans- 
ing them, and there are other astringents better fitted for use, not pos^ 
sessing this quality. 

We append several formulaes, none of which, however, we claim as 
original, many of them being selected from a French work on the Art of 
Perfumery, by Piesse. 

FARINA PIESSE'S POWDER. 

Precipitated chalk, 2 pounds ; 

Orris root, 2 " 

Rose pink, 1 drachm j 
Fine powdered sugar, i pound ; 

Otto of neroli, i drachm ; 

" lemons, i ounce j 

" bergamot, i " 

" orange peel, i " 

*« rosemary, 1 drachm. 

Instead of using so many articles for a perfume, some may prefer a few 
drops of the best otto of rose. 

ROSE TOOTH POWDER. 

Precipitated chalk, 1 pound ; 
Orris, i " 

Rose pink, 2 drachms ; 

Otto of rose, 1 " 

« santal, { « 

OPIATE TOOTH PASTE. 

Honey, i pound j 

Chalk, i « 

Orris, i «« 

Rose pink, 2 drachms ; 

Otto of cloves, i " 

<« nutmeg, i « 

" rose, i " 
Simple syrup enough to form a paste. 

VIOLET MOUTH WASH. 

Tincture of orris, i pint; 

Espiret de rose, i " 

Spirit, ^ « 

Otto of almonds, 5 drops. 



RUBBER. 25 

EAU BOTAT. 

Tincture of cedar wood, 1 pint; 
" " myrrh, i " 

« " rhatany, i « 
Otto of peppermint, 5 drops. 

All tliese tinctures should be made with grape spirit, or at least with 
pale unsweetened brandy. 

BOTANIC STYPTIC. 

Kectified spirit, 1 quart ; 

Rhatany root, 2 ounces ; 

Gum myrrh, 2 " 

Whole cloves, 2 " 
Macerate for fourteen days and strain. 



RUBBEE. 

BY EDWIN C. BAXTER, D. D. S. 

Many objections have been urged, and much been said condemning the 
use of vulcanized rubber as a base for artificial dentures ; still, its use is 
daily increasing, and in many parts of the country is already employed 
almost to the exclusion of every other material. Having had some 
experience in working it, and an opportunity of observing its effects, I 
will endeavor to answer some of the objections as they occur to me, and 
throw out a few hints in regard to its manipulation. One writer states, 
unqualifiedly, that the rubber is colored with a preparation of arsenic, 
and portrays almost the horrors of death by that poison as consequent 
upon its use. Such a statement coming from a dentist might have some 
weight with patients unacquainted with the material ; therefore, I would 
say, for the benefit of such, that arsenic is not incorporated in the rubber 
in any form. Rubber is colored with a preparation of mercury, and upon 
this fact many found their objections, setting forth the liability of the 
wearer to salivation, a consequence much to be dreaded, but which I 
have reason to believe cannot be attributed to the use of the rubber, as 
the coloring matter cannot be separated after vulcanizing. I have never 
seen any ill effect result from its use, and have had an opportunity 
of observing its effects for three years where it is used very extensively. 
An acquaintance of mine has contracted the habit of chewing rubber, and 
for ten successive days it was chewed an average of six hours a day, with 
no perceptible effect, which would not have attended the mastication of 
any substance the same length of time. The rubber chewed was, of 
course, not vulcanized, and the coloring matter was freely dissolved and 
taken into the stomach, which was indicated by the color diminishing and 



26 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

the lips and saliva becoming perceptibly reddened. After being chewed 
a few hours, it became very soft, and retained its pliability. 

If rubber, after vulcanizing, is as injurious as is frequently represented, 
it must be more so previous to vulcanizing, when the coloring matter is 
freely separated, as in the case cited, where it was chewed without any 
perceptible result. 

Wax that has been boiled, is preferable for fastening the teeth to the 
wax plate, it being more easily removed from the pins ; and for this rea- 
son, when practicable, the flasks should be parted without heating. Dark 
joints, and the liability of the teeth being pressed out of place, are objec- 
tions which may be easily overcome by a little care in grinding, and 
allowing them to stand over night in the flasks before packing. In pack- 
ing, heat the flasks to a temperature sufficient to soften the rubber, pack 
a surplus quantity — having provided for its exit by numerous grooves — 
raise the temperature and bring the flasks together slowly. An air cham- 
ber is not important in full upper sets, for, if the impression is correct, 
they will fit equally as well after being in the mouth a short time ; are 
free from the objections to air chambers, and the plate can be made much 
thinner, which is very desirable. 

Some condemn the rubber block teeth as having an unnatural appear- 
ance, but by the use of the single gum teeth they can suit their own 
ideas with as much facility as if setting them on plate, and with a little 
care in grinding, the joints will be equally as good. 

Kknduskkag, Mains, June 16. 

SYNOPSIS OF PROCEEDINGS OF DENTAL ASSOCIATIONS. 



Hudson Valley Dental Association. 

BY DR. S D. FRENCH. 

At a meeting of the Dentists of Troy, Lansingburgh, Waterford and 
vicinity, held at the office of Dr. 0. R. Young, December 8th, 1863, for 
the purpose of organizing the meeting, Dr. H. H. Young was elected 
temporary Chairman, and S. J. Andres temporary Secretary. The object 
for which the meeting was called was stated by Dr. N. D. Ross, and 
several of the gentlemen present expressed themselves very much in 
favor of forming a Dental Association, and all present were unanimous 
in their expression that it would be for the general interest of the profes- 
sion to form such an Association, whereupon a motion was made by Dr. 
S. D. French that a committee of three be appointed by the Chair to 
draft a Constitution and By-Laws. 

The Chair appointed Dr. S. D. French, Dr. L. C. Wheeler and Dr. 0. 
R. Young such committee. 

On motion, the Chair was added to this committee. 



HUDSON VALLEY DENTAL ASSOCIATION. 2T 

On motion, the meeting adjourned to meet at the call of the Chairman, 
at the office of Dr. French, to hear the report of the Committee on Con- 
stitution and By-Laws. 

In pursuance of such call, a second meeting was held at the office of 
Dr. S. D. French, Tuesday, December 29th, 1863, at 7 o'clock, P. M., 
when the committee made their report, and, on motion, the Constitutiou 
and By-Laws were unanimously adopted, when the meeting adjourned to 
meet at the office of Dr. Jenkins, January 5th, 1864, at 7 o'clock, P. M., 
for the election of officers. 

At an adjourned meeting, held at the office of Dr. C. H. Jenkins, for 
the election of officers, the meeting was called to order and proceeded at 
once to elect its officers for the ensuing year, whereupon the following 
gentlemen were chosen : President, Dr. H, H. Young ; Vice-President, 
Dr. S. D. French ; Recording Secretary, Dr. S. J. Andres ; Correspond- 
ing Secretary, Dr. S. P. Welch ; Treasurer, Dr. O. R. Young • Executive 
Committee, Drs. L. C. Wheeler, S. P. Welsh and C. H. Jenkins. 

The President, on taking the chair, delivered the following address : 

Gentlemen of the Hudson Valley Dental Association : — Through }Our 
partiality you have elected me your presiding officer for the present year. 
To say that I feel flattered by the unanimity with which you have con- 
ferred this honor upon me, is but a feeble expression of the sentiment 
which animates me in the acceptance of the office and duties imposed. 

With your organization completed, and with the same unanimity pre- 
vailing which we have seen this evening among the members present, 
augurs a success and fellowship worthy of the spirit which has induced 
the effort now being made to elevate a higher standard of professional 
etiquette, to cultivate a more thorough acquaintance with the science and 
practice of Dentistry, and to make ourselves the recipients of a deserved 
public confidence. 

Our profession, to be respected, demands intellectual culture, and a 
high state of moral excellence. 

By association, we shall assimilate in the attainments characteristic of 
acknowledged gentlemen. To become such, and to perfect our skill, so as 
to render the best practical assistance to our present patrons, will insure 
to us their gratitude and high esteem, and through them perpetuate our 
memories in the future. Let us, then, highly appreciate an attendance 
upon our Regular Meetings, and come together to canvass the merits, 
and discuss the principles of our practice. 

The facilities afforded to acquire knowledge at the present day are so 
great that continuous improvements are constantly being made. The prac- 
tical results of experience are distributed, and a community of thought 
prevails, so that he who puts himself in a position to listen with attentive 



28 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

ear, or who will not shut his eyes to recurring events, must, necessarily, 
advance in the right direction. 

The Den.ist who reposes on the reputation already won, quiet in his 
way, is asleep, and, like Rip Van Winkle, will, perhaps, awaken one day, 
and, to his surprise, find that he is lost to everybody but himself, and 
that his former reputation is, to say the least, of doubtful character. 

Some of us co-laborers, through a series of nearly one-third of a 
century, or an entire generation, have sought the elevation of our profes- 
sion. We have lived, in those early days, when Dental Laboratories were 
inaccessible for purposes of instruction ; when, between member^, there 
was little or no interchange of sentiment. Those days are past now, our 
younger members are instructed in our Dental Colleges, advised in 
our Dental Associations, well-read in the Dental periodicals of the 
day, they are taken in hand by the older members of the profession 
and conducted to eminence and usefulness. Auspicious days are these 
to seekers and lovers of Dental literature. 

As ours is a mutual association, instituted for protective good will to 
and for each other, so let it be, in its object, an earnest — that our 
patrons shall be well served ; that we prove reliable in our doings and 
relations with each other 5 so we elevate and give character to ourselves 
and the noble profession represented in the Hudson Valley Dental 
Association. 

Grentlemen, soliciting your forbearance, and relying on your assistance, 
it shall be my pleasure to discharge the duties of your First President 
to the best of my abilities, and I thank you, in my heart, for the honor 
conferred. 



Susquehanna Dental Association. 

BY DR. J. D. WINGATE. 

In pursuance of a call by a number of Dentists, a Convention of the 
Profession met at the Montour House, in Danville, Pa., and formed them- 
selves into a permanent organization, adopting the name of The Susque- 
hanna Dental Association. 

List of Members Present, — Drs. G. B. Brown and E. C. Kester, Dan- 
ville J W. A. Chittenden, Scranton 5 C. S. Beck and J. M. Barrett, 
Wilkesbarre ; C. W. Sanders and John Vallerchamp, Selinsgrove ; John 
Locke, K. E. Berlin and H. Gerhart, Lewisburg ; E. Gr. Home, Ber- 
wick ; George Rishel, Wm. N. Rishel and H. C. Hower, Bloomsburg ; 
H. H. Martm, Jersey Shore 5 J. L. Andrews, Milton j G. W. Renn, Sun- 
bury; B. L. Rich, Millville; M. D. L. Dodson, Williamsport ; John D. 
Wingate, Bellefonte ; C. M. Williams, Pittston j B. F. Kinney, Light 
Street, and W. F. Vallerchamp, New Berlin. 



BUFFALO DENTAL ASSOCIATION. 29 

After the adoption of a Constitution and By-Laws, the following offi- 
cers were elected, viz.: Drs. J. M. Barrett, President; G. B. Brown, 
Vice-President ; John D. Wingate, Recording Secretary ; M. D. L. Dod- 
son, Corresponding Secretary ; H. H. Martin, Treasurer ; John Locke, 
Librarian. 

Drs. H. Gerhart, W. A. Chittenden and G. W. Renn were appointed 
Executive Committee. 

Drs. H. Gerhart, C. S. Beck, M. D. L. Dodson, G. W. Renn, R. E. 
Burlan and John Locke were appointed Essayists for the year. 

After a full, free and amicable discussion, the following, oflfered by Dr. 
H. H. Martin, was agreed upon, namely : — 

Resolved, That it is the duty of the members of this Convention cor- 
dially to unite in raising the prices of their dental services to a fair 
remunerative standard, in view of the great advance of all things sur- 
rounding them ; and that we each pledge to the other our honor to labor 
for the accomplishment of this end, to which we are most justly entitled. 

Resolved, That when we adjourn, it be to meet in Lewisburg on the 
Wednesday after the second Monday of January next. 

Drs. John Yallerchamp, J. L. Andrews, J. M. Barret, R. E. Burlan 
and E. C. Kester were appointed delegates to the American Dental Asso- 
ciation. 

Communications were read, and ordered to be filed, from Prof. C. N. 
Peirce, of Philadelphia, Dr. A. Jones, of New York, and Prof. J. H. 
McQuillan, of Philadelphia, all containing good advice and encourage- 
ment for the success of the Society. 

The Evening Session was occupied in advancing various opinions and 
discussions relating to the advancement of dental science. 

Danville, Pa., May 4, 1864. 



Buffalo Dental Association. 

BY G. B. SNOW, D. D. S. 

A meeting of the Dentists of this City was held at the rooms of the 
Buffalo Medical Association, on South Division street, last Friday night, 
for the purpose of organizing a Dental Society. A Constitution was 
adopted, and the following officers elected : — 

President, Dr. George E. Hayes; Vice-President, Dr. R. G. Snow; 
Secretary, Dr. G. B. Snow ; Treasurer, Dr. J. R. Wetherill. 

Nearly all the dentists practicing in the city were present, and a great 
deal of interest was manifested in the proceedings. It was proposed \o 
hold meetings on the first Monday evening of each month, for the discus- 
sion of subjects connected with dentistry. The next meeting will be held 
at the Medical Hall, on Monday evening, June 6th, at 8 o'clock. 

Buffalo, N. Y. 



30 THE DENl^AL TIMES. 

Etrttortal. 



PUBLISHEES' NOTICE. 

The second volume of the Dental Times commences with this number, 
and we consider it not inappropriate to take a brief retrospective view of 
the past, as well as to form plans of increased usefulness in the future. 
This Journal was established at a time not the most auspicious, in 
consequence of the devotion of the public mind almost exclusively to the 
different moves in the great conflict with rebellion: yet, nevertheless, it 
was concluded to publish the Times, and by making it a valuable assistant 
to the dental practitioner, deserve success. It was also determined to 
publish a journal which should only contain original material, the only 
deviation being for some article of special interest to the profession, which 
might be deemed worthy of republication. No space, however, being 
devoted to " sehdionR^^ from dental and medical magazines, such quota- 
tions being not unfrequently but a repetition of what has been subscribed 
for and read, or upon subjects entirely foreign to our speciality. In this 
respect we claim to have been eminently successful, no article upon our 
pages having appeared elsewhere. This is also a determination for the 
future, and our readers may be certain that, having been the only 
dental journal in this country that has succeeded in accomplishing such a 
result, there will be rarely, if ever, a departure from this rule in the 
future. The decided advance in paper, printing, labor, and materials of 
all kinds necessary for a magazine, has greatly increased the expense of 
publication ; but we have concluded not to advance our subscription price, 
but continue at the original cost of one dollar per annum, in advance. 



REMOVAL. 
The building in which the Pennsylvania Dental College has been located 
for the past eight years, also, being occupied by the Faculty of the above 
named Institution four years previously, under the title of the Philadelphia 
College of Dental Surgery, being desired by its owner, Mr. S. S. White, 
a change of location was rendered necessary. We are pleased to state to 
our friends that we have secured a much more commodious and convenient 
building, on the S. E. corner of Arch and Tenth streets, which is now 
undergoing alteration to fit it for our purposes. When completed, we 
shall have the finest clinical operating room in this country, it being a 
single room, with a front on Tenth street of 85 feet, and on Arch street 
20 feet, with an operating light that cannot be surpassed. The building 
will be finished about the 1st of August next, at which time we shall 
remove to it. 



DENTAL MEETINGS. 81 

DENTAL MEETINGS. 

The attention of our readers is directed to the fact that the annual 
meeting of the American Dental Association will be held at Niagara Falls, 
New York, on the last Tuesday in July. The annual meeting of the 
American Dental Convention will commence at Detroit, Michigan, on 
the first Tuesday of August. Both these meetings promise to be largely 
attended, and every dentist who attends cannot fail to derive benefi,t from 
these annual gatherings of earnest dental practitioners. 



[t^ We have lately been shown teeth from rubber work, manufactured 
by W. A. Duff & Co., No, 516 Arch street, with double-headed pins, 
which we think, in some respects, are better than any in the market. 
Besides having good solid heads on the pins on the outside, they have 
heads inside the teeth as large as are usually put in teeth for plate work. 
The pins were also suj05eiently long to allow of being bent, so as not to 
show through the rubber when finished. A more extended notice of 
these teeth may be seen by reference to our advertising columns. 

T. L. B. 

—— — — ' » m : • » ■ • • • 

tt^ We are indebted to Dr. Lewis Buffett, of Cleveland, Ohio, for the 
model of a mouth, representing the transposition of the cuspid and lateral 
incisor of the right side. The cause of this malposition Dr. B. attributes 
to the premature removal of the deciduous cuspid, which is undoubtedly 
correct. We are also indebted to Dr. Gr. F. Bixbey, for a lateral incisor, 
with one of the most singularly malformed fangs that it has ever been our 

pleasure to possess. c. n. p. 

— — < ♦ •» » ^ . . .. 

[t^ We acknowledge the reception of two sets of teeth in sectional 
block, from Mr. C. H. Eccleston, the manufacturer. We r-egret, owing 
to the press of matter, that we are unable to insert his accompanying 
communication. 

The specimens laid before us possess a more natural appearance than 
we generally find in artificial teeth, and one feature is particularly worthy 
of notice, the latterals are broader and in better relative proportions to 
the front incisors than usually made. E. W. 



4 <•• » 



HF" In consequence of a press of matter, the continuation of the article 
on Caoutchouc, by Professor Wildman, will be postponed until the next 
number. 



32 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

OBITUARY. 

With feelings of deep regret we are called upon to announce the 
decease of our friend and co-laborer, Edward N. Bailey, D. D. S., 
Demonstrator of Mechanical Dentistry in the Pennsylvania College of 
Dental Surgery, which occurred on the 18th of June, 1864, after a brief 
illness. To state that his family and the profession have met with an 
irreparable loss, is but to pay a just tribute to his memory : for no one 
in this city was more active or devoted to the advancement of his profes- 
sion than Dr. Bailey, and possessing, as he did, mechanical and scientific 
ability of the first order, he was ever seeking to bring his special branch 
of dentistry up to its appropriate stand-point. Of his usefulness as a 
demonstrator, we sincerely state that his course has ever met with our 
unqualified approbation, and none can better attest his worth than the 
classes of the last two sessions. 

At a meeting of the Faculty of this College, it was unanimously 

Resolved, That we have learned of the decease of Edward N. Bailey, 
D. D. S., Demonstrator of Mechanical Dentistry in the Pennsylvania 
College of Dental Surgery, with feelings of deep emotion and regret, 
endeared as he was to us by his many virtues and his exceeding value as 
a demonstrator in his department. 

Resolved, That in the early loss of Dr. Bailey, his family have lost a 
loving father and friend, and the profession an intelligent, earnest and 
devoted practitioner, one whose aim was ever to advance and promote its 
best interests. 

Resolved, That we tender to his bereaved family our heartfelt con- 
dolence and sympathy in their deep affliction, ever remembering that 
" the ways of Deity are past finding out," and that "He doeth all things 
well." 

Resolved, That a copy of these resolutions be transmitted to the family 
of the deceased, and that they be published in the several Dental Jour- 
nals. G. T. B. 



PEmSTLYANIA ASSOCIATION OP DENTAL SUROEONS. 

The regular monthly meeting of the Association was held June 14, 
1864. The President, Dr. Fouche, in the chair. 

Dr. Buckingham announced the sudden death of Dr. E. N. Bailey, an 
active member of the Association : and moved the appointment of Drs. 
Barker and Peirce as a committee to draft resolutions, expressive of the 
sentiments of the meeting in relation thereto. 

The committee reported the following, which were unanimously adopted, 



OBITUARY. 



3^ 



after which appropriate and feeling remarks were made by Drs. Barker 
and Buckingham, upon the character of the deceased, as a man and asso- 
ciate, and of the energy with which he had sought to advance the reputa- 
tion of the profession, in the few years allotted him of active life : 

Whereas^ In the death of our esteemed associate and active co-laborer, 
Br. E.N. Bailey, this Association feel that they are called upon to lament 
the loss of one of their most active members ) and one who, by his past 
energetic and earnest co-operation in all efforts put forth to advance the 
standard of professional excellence, deserves more than a passing tribute. 

Resolved, That the departure of Dr. Bailey from this field of activity, 
inculcates the serious lesson to each one of us, his friends and associates 
to reverence his memory by increased efforts to enlarge the usefulness and 
cherish the character of the profession, to which his short career was so 
untiringly devoted. 

Resolved, That while fully aware of the inadequacy of words upon the 
occasion of such bereavements, yet we tender to the family our earnest 
sympathy in this, their hour of affliction, and sincerely trust that the 
benevolent hand of time may yet prove to them that these 

" Severe afflictioDS, 
Not from the ground arisQ, 

But oftentimes celestial benedictions 
Assume this dark disguise." 

Resolved, That a copy of these resolutions be forwarded to his family, 

and also to the Dental Journals, for publication. Adjourned. 

James Truman, Secretary. 



At a meeting of the dentists of Lowell, Wednesday evening, May 18th, 
the following preamble and resolutions were adopted : 

Whereas, It has pleased the Grreat Dispenser of events to call from 
earth our esteemed professional brother and fellow-citizen. Dr. Samuel 
Abbott; therefore, 

Resolved, By the Dental profession of Lowell, that by his death we 
have lost an honorable member of our fraternity, and the public a useful 
and worthy citizen. 

Resolved, That we deeply sympathize with his afflicted family and 
friends in this their sad bereavement, and invoke, in their behalf, the 
comforting spirit of Him who doeth all things well. 

Resolved, That a copy of these resolutions be respectfully tendered to 
the family of the deceased, also published in the papers of the city, and 
in the Dental Cosmos, Dental Times, and Register of the West. 

G. A. Uerrt, Secretary, A, Lawrence, Chairman. 



84 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

PEMSymNU COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 

THE NINTH ANNUAL SESSION, 1864-'65. 



2A 2^\i2J E) y, 2*2i2*Qe)a 

HENRY C. CAREY, President, GEORGE TRUMAN, M. D., 

W. L. ATLEE, M. D., S. DILLINGHAM, D. D. S., 

DANIEL NEALL, D. D. S., G. R. MOREHOUSE, M. D., 

ELLESLIE WALLACE, M. D., THOMAS WOOD, 

BENJAMIN MALONE, M. D., J. R. McCURDY, 

W. W. FOUCHE, D. D. S., CHARLES HAMILTON, Seo'y. 



^^<0¥a.!?l^. 



J. D. WHITE, D. D. S., 

EMERITUS PROFESSOR, 

T. L. BUCKINGHAM, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY AND METALLURGY. 

C. N. PEIRCE, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF DENTAL PHYSIOLOGY AND OPERATIVE DENTISTRY. 

E. WILDMAN, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR r?P MECHANICAL DENTISTRY. 

G. T. BARKER, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF PRINCIPLES OF DENTAL SURGERY AND THERAPEUTICS. 

W. S. FORBES, M. D., D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY. 

JAMES TRUMAN, D. D. S., 

DEMONSTRATOR OF OPERATIVE DENTISTRY. 

E. N. BAILEY, D. D. S., 

DEMONSTRATOR OF MECHANICAL DENTISTRY. 



The Lectures to the Hegular Course will commence on the 
1st of November and continue until the 1st of March. 

During the last two weeks of October, preliminary Lectures are delivered, 
one each day. 

The Rooms for Operative and Mechanical Dentistry are open from the 
1st of October and throughout the session, under the supervision of the 
Demonstrators. 

The Dissecting Room, under the superintendence of the Professor of 
Anatomy and Physiology, is open during the session. 

Fees for the Course, (Demonstrators' Ticket included,) - $100 
Matriculation, (paid but once,) - - - - 5 

Diploma Fee, ------ 30 

O. IsT. I^EIRCE, Dean, 

C. p. RC^EISS, Janitor. 501 North Seventh St., Philadelphia. 

P. S.— Board may be had at from f 3.50 to $6.00 per week. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 36 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OP DENTAL SUEaERT. 
The Ninth Annual Session, 1864-1865. 

The ninth annual session of the Pennsylvania College of Dental Sur- 
gery will commence on the first of November, and continue until the first 
of March. Preliminary lectures will, however, be delivered each day 
during the latter half of the month of October. The Dispensary and 
Laboratory of the College will also be open from that time, where ample 
opportunities will be afforded for the prosecution of the practical part of 
the profession under the daily supervision of the Demonstrators, who are 
gentlemen of known integrity and thorough capability. During October, 
as well as the entire session, a clinical lecture will be delivered, and 
operations performed by one of the Professors every Saturday afternoon. 

The course is so arranged that fifteen lectures are delivered each week, 
on the various branches taught in the school. A synopsis of the manner 
in which each department is treated will be found under the head of the 
different chairs. 

These lectures occupy about the average time of three hours each day. 
In addition, four hours are daily spent by the student in actual practice. 
With this object in view, the operating rooms are furnished with twenty 
chairs, so arranged as to command the best light, and all the appliances 
necessary for comfort and use. To these chairs the students are assigned 
in classes, and certain hours are fixed for each member of the class to 
operate. 

Each student is required to provide his own instruments, (except those 
for extracting,) and to operate with them. He is expected to keep them 
in perfect order, and for that purpose is provided with a table in which 
they can be locked up when not in use. As the operations performed at 
the College are entirely gratuitous, a superabundance of patients invari- 
ably present themselves. 

In the mechanical department every process known in the profession, 
which has any value to the mechanical dentist, is fully taught 5 and 
receipts of valuable compounds are freely imparted. All the conveniences 
are at hand in the Laboratory for the preparation of metals, manufacture 
of teeth, (single and in blocks,) mounting, etc. ; and the student is 
required to go through all the necessary manipulations connected with the 
insertion of artificial teeth — from takmg the impression to the thorough 
construction of the denture, and proper adjustment of it in the mouth of 
the patient. 



36 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

In addition to the facilities afforded by the College for a thorough course 
of instruction in the theory and practice of Dentistry, the celebrated 
hospitals and clinics of the city constantly enable the student to witness 
various important surgical operations which are highly interesting and 
instructive. The medical and surgical clinics of the Blockley Hospital, 
in particular, one of the largest eleemosynary establishments in the world, 
are open to Medical and Dental students, free of charge. The staff of 
this institution is composed of some of the most eminent physicians and 
surgeons of Philadelphia. 



COURSE OF LECTURES. 



OHEMISTKY AM METALLUEGY. 

The course of instruction from this chair will commence with the con- 
sideration of the imponderable substances. 

The laws that govern the imponderable bodies will next claim attention, 
with some notice of symbols or chemical notations. Individual elements, 
and the compounds resulting from their combinations, will then be con- 
sidered. Organic chemistry will receive its full share of attention. 

The course will be illustrated by diagrams and such experiments as can 
be performed before the class. 



DENTAL PHYSIOLOGY AND OPEEATIYE DENTISTRY. 

The lectures in this department will embrace the Physiological Ana- 
'tomy of the teeth, general and microscopical, in addition to a minute and 
careful description of the various operations performed by the dental prac- 
titioner. 

The microscope, models and diagrams, will be employed in illustration. 

At the Clinic the incumbent of this chair will also demonstrate before 
the class the various operations described in his course of lectures. 



MECHANICAL DENTISTEY. 
The instruction from this chair will embrace the entire range of manip- 
ulations legitimately connected with the laboratory, arranged in two divi- 
sions — Mechanical Dentistry proper, and that to which has been applied 
the appellation of the Plastic department. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 37 

I. Mechanical dentistry proper will include everything appertaining to 
the construction of dental substitutes, passing through the different stages 
of preparation, from taking the impression, to the completion and proper 
adjustment of the case in the mouth, conjointly with features, expression 
of countenance, enunciation, etc. It will likewise embrace the metallurgic 
treatment of the various metals employed, the preparation of plate and 
wire, the alloying of gold, together with the alloys used, as well as those 
designated as solders. 

II. This division will comprise all that appropriately belongs to the 
manufacture of porcelain or mineral teeth — single teeth, block-work, con- 
tinuous gum-work, vulcanite, etc. The materials, their preparation, 
compounds and uses, will be specially regarded. 

All new inventions, modifications, and improvements, in this branch of 
the art, will in place receive due attention and investigation. 



PEINOIPLES or DENTAL SUEGEKT AND THERAPEUTICS. 

The lectures delivered from this chair will embrace General Pathology, 
Dental Pathology, the Pathological Relations of the Teeth to other parts 
of the System, together with a minute description of all special diseases 
that have any relation to Dental Surgery, or of interest to the Dentist. 

They will also include a careful examination of therapeutic agents and 
their general application. Their indications in the medical and surgical 
treatment of diseases of the mouth, both idiopathic and^symptomatic, will 
be fully illustrated, and also the general hygienic rules and principles 
which come within the province of the practitioner. 



b 



ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY. 

The instruction in this department will embrace a plain and compre- 
hensive view of the structure and functions of the Human Economy. The 
valuable anatomical preparations of the incumbent of this chair, (consist- 
ing of Papier Mache manikins, models in wood, drawings, wet and dry 
preparations,) will enable him to fully illustrate his course. With the 
same object, vivisections on the lower animals will also be employed. 

The special relations of this branch to the wants of the dentist will be 
kept steadily in view, and such descriptions of the natural history, micro- 
scopical structure, connections, &c., of the teeth, as their importance 
demands, will be given. 

The great facilities for the study of practical anatomy, to be found in 
the city of Philadelphia, obviate the necessity of providing a dissecting- 



38 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

room in the College. For the usual fee of $10, the student can have 
access to one of several well-ordered and well-supplied dissecting-rooms. 



EEGULATIONS. 



The candidate must be twenty-one years of age. He must have studied 
under a private preceptor at least two years, including his course of 
instruction at the College. Attendance on two full courses of lectures in 
this institution will be required, but satisfactory evidence of having attended 
one full course of lectures in any respectable dental or medical school, will 
be considered equivalent to the first course of lectures in this College ; five 
years' practice, inclusive of the term of pupilage, will also be considered 
equivalent to the first course of lectures. The candidate for graduation 
must prepare a thesis upon some subject connected with the theory or 
pr ctice of dentistry. He must treat thoroughly some patient requiring all 
the usual dental operations, and bring such patient before the Professor of 
Operative Dentistry. He must, also, take up at least one artificial case, 
and after it is completed, bring his patient before the Professor of 
Mechanical Dentistry. He must, also, prepare a specimen case to be 
deposited in the College collection. The operations must be performed, 
and the work in the artificial cases done, at the College building. He must 
also undergo an examination by the Faculty, when, if found qualified, he 
shall be recommended to the Board of Trustees : and, if approved by them, 
shall receive the degree of Doctor of Dental Surgery. 



TEXT BOOKS AND WORKS 01 EErEEENOE. 



Wilson's, or Leidy's Sharpey & Quains' Anatomy ; Carpenter's Physi- 
ology, or Dunglison's Human Physiology ; United States Dispensatory ; 
Mitchell's Materia Medica ; Fownes' Elements of Chemistry ; E-egnault's 
Chemistry 5 Lehmann's Pysiological Chemistry ; C. J. B. Williams' Prin- 
ciples of Medicine j Wood's Practice ; Tomes' Dental Physiology and 
Surgery ; Harris' Principles and Practice ; Taft's Operative Dentistry ; 
Richardson's Mechanical Dentistry ; Paget's Surgical Pathology, or other 
standard works on the subject. 



THE 



DENTAL TIMES. 



Vol. II. PHILADELPHIA, OCTOBER, 1864. No. 2. 

lUFLAMMATIOIir. 

BY T. EMBLET OSMUX, M. D., D. D. S. 

In medicine, the term inflammation is used to designate a morbid state 
of any part of the body, which is characterized by an afflux of blood in 
the capillary vessels, increased heat, redness, swelling, and a painful ten- 
sion of the tissues. These phenomena present different degrees of inten- 
sity, depending on the structure of the part affected, its relations and the 
constitution of the individual. Inflammations are divided into two classes, 
acute and chronic^ and the phenomena that attend them particularly affect 
the circulation in the capillaries. These phenomena are characterized by, 
1st, a contraction of the radical vessels, the capillaries proper not yet 
being visibly affected ; 2d, by repletion and dilatation of the capillaries, 
accompanied by retarded and irregular circulation, (congestion;) 3d, 
by complete stasis, accompanied not only by dilatation of the capillaries, 
but also of the radical arteries and veins of the part affected. 

These phenomena may be followed, 1st, by the resolution of the inflam- 
mation, that is, by the separation of the accumulated globules, and the 
restoration of the circulation in the part, beginning at the periphery and 
proceeding towards the centre. If this resolution takes place rapidly, and 
is not accompanied by an inflammation of any other organ, the inflamma- 
tion is said to disappear by delitescence ; if, however, the resolution of an 
inflammation of one organ be accompanied by the appearance of an inflam- 
mation of another organ, then there is said to be metastasis ; in accordance 
with the opinion that once prevailed, in such cases, the morbid principle 
was transported from the one organ to the other ; 2d, they may be fol- 
lowed by induration, that is, by the formation of anatomical elements, the 
form of which may be various, between the normal tissues , 3d, they may 
be followed by suppuration, that is, by the formation of pus globules at 
the expense of the exuded liquid, accompanied by the separation or 
destruction of a portion of the inflamed tissue ; 4thj by gangrene or mor- 
tification, that is, by the cessation of the phenomena of nutrition and the 
consequent destruction of the tissues by putrefaction. 



50 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

The indirect causes of inflammation are sudden cold, contusions, 
wounds, the introduction of agents that destroy the tissues, such as acids, 
&c., or of such poisonous or virulent matter as produces syphilis, adenitis, 
&c. The direct causes are little known. Thus it is not known why, in 
a case of sudden cold, the lungs are more frequently the seat of inflam- 
mation than the pleura 5 nor is it known how these diverse causes produce 
a contraction of the blood vessels, and particularly of the capillaries, and 
subsequently their dilatation. 

The part played by the different elements of the tissues are the follow- 
ing : 1st, although the capillaries are essentially the seat of any inflam- 
mation, yet the arterial as well as the venous radicals, both play an 
important part in the various inflammatory phenomena. At first the arte- 
rial radicals contract, in consequence of which the circulation in the part 
is accelerated. This contracjiafr-mayjdiminish the diameter of the vessels, 
in exceptional cases, 9«j6<lQlh Jit^fet.^te contraction is regular, but 
soon it is confined to^rgmts hetween-whic'h' th'ere is an ampulaceous dila- 
tation. This conm^tioUi lavQa ^cofij^wes until after the intermediate 
capillaries become I gorgea witfi^ globules, and^re distended conslderabh 
beyond their normal^sijo ; tTie^ilatatlon ttejn extends first to the venous 
and afterwards to the\ijteftj^ J^4ic^s,'ln frhich the distension is proper* 
tionably greater than in tK^Trapillaries. There are, however, always 
points at which the vessels retain their normal size, or even remain con- 
tracted, while the intervals are irregularly dilated ; 2d, while the radicals 
are still contracted, the red globules accumulate in the capillaries where 
they circulate slowly, although they now approach the walls of the ves- 
sels and occupy the space which, in health, is tilled by the serum. The 
result is that the mass of globules filling the capillaries is larger than in 
the normal state, giving the vessels the appearance of being dilated before 
their diameter is in reality increased. The globules become more and 
more crowded and irregular in their movements, when coherence and stasis 
in the distended capillaries follow. If the inflammation disappears by 
resolution, then the contracted vessels in the neighborhood of the stasis 
reassume their normal diameter, which allows the blood to press more 
forcibly on the stagnant globules, receiving them in the current either 
singly or in masses, to be separated later. Thus the circulation is re-es- 
tablished ) 3d, when suppuration or gangrene takes place, both the red and 
white globules become so coherent and soldered together, that it is difiicult 
to trace their outlines in the mass, which assumes a deeper color than that 
of the blood. Complete stasis of the globules may also take place in 
those cases where the inflammation disappears by resolution. This, how- 
ever, has been denied upon the hypothesis that if there were complete 
stasis, mortification of the tissues must necessarily follow j but those who 



INFLAMMATION. 61 

held this opinion were ignorant of the fact that the globules of the blood 
can exist, for a time, without circulating or passing through the lungs, 
and that the other elements can also exist without taking anything from 
or rendering anything to the serum of the blood, by borrowing the ele- 
ments of nutrition, when they are deficient in serum, from the adjacent 
tissues. These phenomena are, nevertheless, confined within certain limits 
of time and space, and if they are exceeded, or if any contagious matter 
has been introduced into the tissues ; as, for example, that of a carbuncle, 
mortification follows ; 4th, the serum is transuded through the parietes of 
the capillaries wherever the circulation of the blood is modified, and that 
to such an extent as to leave the globules alone, accumulated and closely 
pressed into the points where there is complete stasis. This transudation 
varies in its character according to the structure of the tissue inflamed. 
The nature of the elements afifected,. their texture, the rapidity with which 
the stasis was established, have also an infl[u6)ice*oji the quantity of liquid 
exuded. In proportion as the stagnant, globules 'are deprived of their 
serum by exudation, they borrow of that liquid from the contiguous parts 
where the blood still circulates. Dilatation of the capillaries, accumula- 
tion of the globules and exudation, are the tTiree phenomena that cause 
pain, redness and tumefaction, and the pain is 'in direct ratio to the tume- 
faction, or to the pressure or contraction produced by the dilatation or 
exudation, when the part is surrounded by unyielding tissues, such as 
bone, tendon, &c. 

The exudation is the cause, 1st, of the infiltration, and according to 
the nature of the liquid exuded, its quantity, &c., of suppuration, which 
suppuration is more or less rapid, according to the nature of the tissues, 
where it takes place ; 2d, of the production of anatomic elements, whence 
induration ; 3d, of the birth of diverse morbid productions, according to 
the nature of the elements engendered, and according to the energy of 
their developing properties. 

Finally, pathologists have considered as the consequence of chronic 
inflammation, a number of changes in the glands and in the serous and 
mucous membranes, which are nothing else than the result of a multiplica- 
tion or of an accidental development of elements proper to these tissues. 

The increased heat is not caused simply by the afflux of blood in the 
dilated vessels, but also by the modifications of the phenomena of nutri- 
tion, under the influence of the sympathetic nerve ; for experiments have 
demonstrated that with this nerve divided, there is an elevation of tem- 
perature in the organ to which it leads, although the vessels are tied so as 
to cut off the supply of blood. 

Philadelphia, September, 1864, 



52 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

ALVEOLAE ABSCESS. 

BY REGINALD H. SHOEMAKER, D. D. S. 

Alveolar abscess, from the commencemeDt of a departure from the 
normal condition of the periosteum of the tooth to its JBnal cure, presents 
five distinct stages : determination, congestion, inflammation, suppuration, 
and adhesive inflammation, each of which conditions it is proposed to 
discuss. 

Determination is the first phenomenon presented, which may be defined 
as increased vascular action. Although this condition may be considered 
as abnormal in the present case, yet it cannot be said that the periosteum 
is diseased. There is an increased flow of arterial blood consequent upon 
slight irritation, caused by using the tooth unduly, as in biting off threads, 
or in a badly articulated artificial denture. In these cases, when it is 
chronic, although it may produce no noticeable uneasiness, yet it is apt to 
cause hypertrophy of the cementum of the tooth, which it nourishes. In 
such cases it is merely necessary to remove the irritant. But if the 
irritant is persistent, the periosteum passes on to the next condition, that 
is congestion, which is a true disease, and is generally called periostitis. 
It is characterized by an increased amount of dark blood, which circulates 
slowly in the distended veins and capillaries until stagnation may be 
finally produced. 

The cause of this condition is irritation, generally produced by the pulp 
of the tooth having become first inflamed, and thence through the 
foramen at the apex of the fang the periosteum becomes affected. Perios- 
titis is very liable to supervene after the treatment of a tooth of a person 
of a strumous or scrofulous diathesis. The cases of periostitis being thus 
generally connected with the pulp of the tooth, congestion, and thence 
the abscess, is nearly always at the apex of the fang ; it is, however, often 
in the bifurcation of the fangs of the molars, and sometimes even on the 
side of a fang. 

The first effect of congestion is an effort of the distended vessels to 
relieve themselves of their contents by the transudation of the watery 
constituents of the blood into the surrounding tissue, giving rise to what 
is called oedema, which is simply the Grreek word for a swelling. The 
symptoms are, at first, a sensation of uneasiness and tension. The tooth 
seems slightly elongated in consequence of its being raised in its socket, 
so that the patient feels a desire to press it back into its place, which, for 
the moment, affords relief. This sense of uneasiness is followed by a 
dull, heavy pain as inflammation supervenes. The treatment of conges- 
tion consists in local depletion and systemic antiphlogistic remedies. 

The local depletion may be accomplished by lancing or scarifying the 
gums opposite the diseased fang, or, what is better, by applying one or 



ALVEOLAR ABSCESS. 53 

two Spanish leeches. The latter plan is much more effectual on account 
of the continued bleeding after the leeches have dropped off", caused by a 
poisonous secretion left in the wound, which prevents the ready coagula- 
tion of the blood. In the first stages cold applications are useful, as ice 
held against the gums, which acts as an astringent, contracting the vessels 
and lessening the flow of blood to the part. Iodine may be applied to the 
gums with a camel's-hair brush. If the fang of the tooth is open, it may 
be filled with nitrate of potash, which acts as an arterial sedative. 
The systemic treatment consists in the administration of the ordinary 
antiphlogistic remedies, as the citrate of magnesia. 

If the congestion is not overcome, it passes on to inflammation. This 
stage of the disease is characterized by an increase of the temperature, 
pain, and swelling in the periosteum. The gums around the tooth pre- 
sent, besides the above symptoms, that of redness also. The inflammation 
spreads to all the surrounding tissues, affecting the face and cheeks so as 
sometimes to close the eyes. There is an increase in the size of the blood- 
vessels, and in the quantity and rapidity of the flow of the blood, with a 
tendency to its arrest and stagnation at points, caused by the clogging up 
of the capillaries by the red corpuscles, which are more closely packed on 
account of the draining away of the liquor sanguinis. 

The redness of the mucous membrane, next to the fang of the tooth, 
varies according to the degree of inflammation, being darkest at the centre 
of the disease, and gradually returning to the color of the healthy tissues 
as its distance from the centre increases. The redness disappears under 
pressure of the finger, the gums becoming white, but the color returns 
upon removing the pressure. The quicker the return to redness the 
greater the activity of the disease. This redness is due to the accumula- 
tion of the red corpuscles in the dilated vessels. 

The swelling is due to an increase in the size of the vessels in conse- 
quence of the excess of blood. In the more advanced stages of the 
inflammation it is due also to the effusion of lymph, and an abnormal 
growth from its organization. In consequence of the swelling at the apex 
of the fang, and the unyielding nature of its socket, the tooth is raised 
considerably. 

The pain is sometimes of a pulsating character, and is generally very 
severe as the disease advances, owing to the exalted sensibility and com- 
pression of the nerves, so that the patient cannot endure to have the tooth 
touched, as the pain is aggravated by pressure. 

The temperature of the inflamed parts rises above the normal standard, 
appearing, however, much greater to the patient than it really is. This 
increase of the temperature is due to the increase in the waste and oxyda- 
tion of the tissues. 



64 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

Two kinds of treatment may be resorted to when the disease has 
reached this stage. One plan is to induce resolution or a return to 
health, which may be accomplished by the same treatment as is used for 
congestion. Its success is, however, much less certain. The pain may 
be alleviated by the application of the tincture of aconite root to the 
gums. Care must be taken in the use of this drug, as it is very poisonous, 
five drops being a dose. After resolution, inflammation is more easily 
excited a second time than at first. 

The second kind of treatment is used after resolution is despaired of, 
to hasten suppuration. This is accomplished by means of a hot applica- 
tion to the gums, and never to the cheeks ; for, if applied to the cheek, 
it may draw the abscess to the external surface, producing a very dis- 
figuring scar after the fistula has healed. The best thing for this purpose 
is a roasted fig. A hop poultice and laudanum may be applied externally 
to the cheek as an anodjne and soporific. It should be covered with 
oiled silk to retain the active principles. Which mode of treatment is the 
better must be determined by the circumstances of the case. 

As inflammation advances there is an cfi'usion of a substance called 
lymph, of which there are two kinds, the plastic or fibrinous, and the 
aplastic or corpuscular. The first is the true lymph, and capable of 
organization when in contact with living tissue. As its name indicates, it 
is composed of fibres floating in a serous fluid. The second is incapable 
of organization, and instead of fibres is composed of what are called 
exudation corpuscles. The two kinds are generally found together. 

This lymph is susceptible of three changes : absorption, development, and 
degeneration. Lymph is absorbed when inflammation terminates by reso- 
lution. The other two changes will be considered in the fourth stage of 
the disease, namely, suppuration. As the disease reaches this condition, 
the periosteum becomes separated from the fang of the tooth, and the 
intermediate space is filled with lymph, part of which, where it is in con- 
tact with the living tissue, becomes organized by the projection of nutrient 
vessels into it in the form of loops, and thus a sack is formed. This 
development of lymph forms what was formerly called the pyogenic mem- 
brane, because it was supposed to secrete pus, but is now more properly 

called the limiting membrane, as it is now known not to be a secreting 
tissue. 

After the membrane has formed, the remaining lymph undergoes degene- 
ration, one of the exudation corpuscles becoming dead in the centre of 
the sack, and the process continuing until all the lymph has become what 
is called pus, which, when formed in a person of a healthy constitution, 
s an opaque creamy fluid, with a greenish tinge and disagreeable odor. 



ALVEOLAR ABSCESS. 55 

It consists of pus cells floating in a serous fluid called liquor puris. The 
cells are the dead exudation corpuscles. 

When pus is formed on a free surface it is called a purulent secretion ; 
when in the substance of parts, as we are now considering it, an abscess. 

The formation of pus is generally indicated by the throbbing character 
of the pain, slight fluctuation under the finger, and the mucous membrane 
becoming puffy, glazed and shining. There is often much constitutional 
disturbance, as chills and fever. When all the lymph has been changed 
into pus, the limiting membrane continues to enlarge by a deposition of 
lymph externally, and by degeneration internally, forcing itself against 
the surrounding tissues, and promoting absorption in them so as to obtain 
an outlet, which it generally eff'ects opposite the diseased fang, though 
frequently it burrows for some distance before coming to the surface. It 
sometimes follows the sutures of the superior maxillary and palate bones. 
If a molar tooth is diseased, the abscess may break into and produce 
disease of the antrum. The pus sometimes comes out around the neck of 
the tooth, separating the periosteum from the fang along its whole length. 

After the pus is once discharged, if the disease assumes a chronic cha- 
racter, the sack again fills with pus, which is again discharged through 
the same opening; this action being repeated until a cure is eff'ected. In 
a healthy state of the system it may take a good while for the sack to fill, 
but if there is any exciting constitutional cause, as a cold, it may take but a 
very short time. In this condition, the disease generally runs through 
its course with little or no pain. For the treatment of this stage there 
are three methods : first, to remove the exciting cause, as a dead pulp ; 
secondly, to lessen inflammatory action by proper antiphlogistic reme- 
dies ; and, thirdly, to facilitate the escape of pus, to arrest its forma- 
tion, and to promote absorption of the sack. This alone needs special 
attention here. If, when the patient presents himself, pus has formed 
but has not yet found an exit, and has advanced into the cheek, it should 
be lanced, if possible on the inside, but if not, the tooth should be 
extracted rather than let the abscess open externally. After the fistula 
has formed, and the pus has been discharged, the abscess should be 
treated with creosote, tincture of iodine, or nitrate of silver in solution. 
The object of the agent is to cauterize the sack and promote its absorption. 

Some prefer to pass an instrument through the fistula into the sack 
and dissect it off" the fang, and then inject the agent by means of a tent 
of cotton or floss sick, or with a hard rubber syringe with a gold nozzle. 
This mode of treatment can only be adopted where the fistula is opposite 
the fang. If, however, it is possible to treat it through the fang, I think 
it is preferable on account of its giving the patient much less pain, 
and because you are more certain of what you accomplish In employ- 



56 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

ing this method you must be sure that the fang is thoroughly cleansed, 
and that there is a free opening into the sack through the foramen 
at the apex. Then slightly serrating th^e end of a broach, and wrap- 
ping cotton tightly around it, you soak it in the agent and pump it 
into the sack through the foramen, by using the broach as a piston, until 
the drug is seen coming through the fistula, indicating that the sack has 
been completely cauterized. This treatment should be repeated every 
day or two until a cure is effected. 

The fifth and last stage, adhesive inflammation, is that condition under 
which the abscess and fistula heal, and is induced by the caustic used. 
Healthy lymph is thrown out, which becomes developed and organized, 
forming the cicatrix. The periosteum embraces the apex of the fang, 
but does not become united to it again as at first, so that this part 
of the fang is completely necrosed. When the fistula has extended 
through the cheek, the cicatrization of the fistulous canal forms a hard 
cord from the tooth to the surface of the cheek, drawing in the latter on 
account of the contraction in healing. This cord may be cut by passing 
the lance below it, and then drawing it quickly and firmly up. 

GssMANiowN^ Sept. 13, 1864. 



THE AESENIOAL PASTE. 

BY GEORGE W. CALDWELL, D. D. S. 

In the examination of this preparation I shall not only take into con- 
sideration the- properties and virtues of the "Arsenical Paste," as an 
agent for destroying the vitality of the pulp, but also of each ingredient 
of which it is composed. 

It is composed', as is well known, of three ingredients, namely, acidum 
arsenicum, morphia sulphas, and creasotum. The relative proportions of 
the arsenious acid and sulphate of morphia are varied considerably by 
different practitioners ; the formula of some being equal parts, others 
recommend twenty grains of the arsenious acid to thirty of the morphia; 
fbis by many is reversed, making thirty grains of the acid to twenty of 
the morphia. The formula of Dr. J. D. White of this city, who claims 
to be among the first to introduce the arsenious acid into a paste, is highly 
recommended. It is composed of the proportions already named, arsenious 
acid, grs. xxx. ; sulphate of morphia, grs. xx. and creasote qs. In these 
proportions the paste has a very decided eflfect, and although the quantity 
of arsenious acid used is much greater than is recommended by some, yet 
no danger, from its application, may be apprehended, if it is properly pre- 
pared, applied and attended to. The mode of its preparation is of the 
utmost importance. The arsenious acid and morphia should be well 
mixed in a mortar, the creasote being added gradually, until it becomes 



THE ARSENICAL PASTE. 57 

of the consistency of cream ; it should be triturated for not less than 
half an hour. This is considered entirely unnecessary by many, on 
the ground of the inability of creasote to dissolve and hold in solu- 
tion the arsenious acid. This is true ; but by triturating the paste 
for a sufficient length of time, it is evident that we secure an equal dis- 
tribution of the arsenious acid, and by making a paste in small quantities, 
and at frequent intervals, we overcome, in some degree, this difficulty. 
The manner and time of its application is also important. The pnlp in 
many cases needs some preparatory treatment. If it is highly inflamed, 
it has been recommended to first make an application of morphia and 
creasote, and afterwards of the paste. ,The pulp should be thoroughly 
exposed, removing all foreign bodies, in order to allow the paste to act 
directly upon it. By this mode of treatment it is destroyed in a much 
less space of time, and also with less pain to the individual, than if 
there were intervening dentine or foreign substances. The length of 
time for its application should be from twenty-four to forty-eight hours, 
and no longer. (I speak now of those formulae in which the arsenious 
acid predominates.) 

It is contended by some that no injurious effects will result in allowing 
it to remain for an indefinite period of time — some extending it even to 
weeks and months. Now we know that some medicinal remedies are 
liable and capable of being absorbed, producing all the effects of the 
medicine : this has been proved beyond a doubt by frequent and satisfac- 
tory experiments, and among these " Arsenious Acid ;" hence it follows 
that the acid having completed its office, the destruction of the vitality of 
the pulp, its action will not cease here, but will extend to the peridental 
membrane and periosteum of the alveolus, causing their inflammation and, 
perchance, death. Hence we have complete necrosis of the tooth. Espe- 
cially is this likely to occur in the bicuspid teeth, as we generally have 
the fangs much contracted, consequently a very thin layer of dentine and 
cementum existing between the pulp cavity and the peridental membrane. 

Now, since twenty-four to forty-eight hours are sufficient to destroy the 
vitality of the pulp in the majority of cases, and clinging to the old maxim 
that "an ounce of preventive is worth a pound of cure," I deem the first 
method the proper one, because the safer, and therefore prefer it. 

I now pass to the ingredients, and shall examine each separately. 
Arsenious acid being the principal, first occupies our attention. It was 
first used by Mr. Spooner, of Montreal, in 1836, for destroying the vitality 
of the pulp. He, however, simply used the dry arsenious acid, without 
combination with any other substance ; its introduction into the present paste 
being of quite recent date. Arsenic is a metallic substance, found in a 
combined state with iron, cobalt and other ores, from which it is liberated 



58 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

during the process of smelting ; it is then converted by combustion into 
arsenious acid, and after resublimation is collected in small crystalline 
masses, from this state it is frequently reduced to a powder. 

Metallic arsenic being inert, we use the oxide of arsenic, or arsenious 
acid prepared as above. The acid, in the powdered form, is very liable 
to be adulterated by the sulphate of lime and powdered chalk 5 these may 
be detected by exposing the powder to a heat sufficiently great to induce 
the evaporation of the arsenious acid ; the impurities will remain in the 
vessel used. In testing the purity of the acid in this manner, care should 
be taken not to inhale the fumes, they, of course, being poisonous. Owing 
to the adulterations in the powder, it is preferable in preparing the paste, 
to use the acid in the crystalline form, those small crystals which were 
formerly denominated the " flowers of arsenic ;" these may be reduced 
previous to making the paste, or in triturating it, they will be reduced 
sufficiently. By this, we obviate the necessity of testing the arsenious 
acid. If the acid used should be adulterated, and therefore not equally 
distributed, it is evident, that in making an application of the paste to 
the pulp, an excess or deficiency of the acid may be present, and, of 
course, the result can but be widely different. Some dentists condemn 
the use of the arsenical paste, on account of not being able to obtain a 
uniform result. Now, may it not be due to this cause? For instance : a 
dentist will purchase a quantity of arsenious acid, obtaining it in a pow- 
der, on account of being able to mix it in a less time, and with loss trou- 
ble, than if it were in small crystals ; he then prepares it in a hasty man- 
ner and makes an application to the pulp. The quantity of the paste 
usually employed is about the one-twentieth of a grain : now, if the 
arsenious acid which he used was adulterated, and consequently not 
equally distributed, it is evident that two-thirds of the one-twentieth may 
be some adulteration, perhaps chalk, and when he removes the paste, he 
finds, to his great surprise, that the pulp, instead of being dead, as he 
expected, is only more highly inflamed, and giving intense pain ; and for 
this, he condemns it. On the other hand, suppose two-thirds of the one- 
twentieth is arsenious acid, (which is too large a quantity to be used,) 
here, when he removes the paste, he not only finds the pulp dead, but ten 
to one, if the tooth is not dead also, by the action of the paste having 
extended to the periosteum of the tooth, producing complete necrosis, and 
for this reason he condemns it. Hence, I think that too much care can- 
not be exercised in obtaining a pure article, if it is desirable to use the 
powder. For the purpose of destroying vitality, arsenious acid has no 
equal, not only in its certainty of producing the desired result, but 
also causing less pain than any other substance which has been used 
for the purpose ; here lies its superiority over chloride of zinc, which, 



THE ARSENICAL PASTE. 59 

being a violent escharotic, produces intense pain. Tlie action of arse- 
nious acid, strictly speaking, is not that of the true escharotic ; the 
result of its action being the destruction of the vitality of the tissue to 
which it is applied, and not the tissue itself ; while the true escharotic 
destroys the tissue, the loss of vitality being consequent. Arsenious acid, 
like many other medicinal agents, has been subject to much undeserved 
censure on account of its being used very indiscreetly by persons claiming 
to be dentists. 

Many objections have been made against its use ; among these, and 
the principal one, is its liability to be absorbed, producing inflamma- 
tion and death of the periosteum. That it has, in some cases, been 
absorbed, producing these evils, it would be useless to deny ; but I think 
that by careful examination of the cases in which it has occurred, it will 
be found in nine out of ten, that it was either due to the improper manner 
of preparing the paste, the excess of it used, or negligence on the part of 
either the dentist or the patient, in allowing the paste to remain too great 
a length of time. Some persons are peculiarly susceptible to the action 
of arsenious acid, the smallest portion producing violent efi"ects ; as in 
persons of a scrofulous diathesis. It is the duty of the dentist to notice 
these idiosyncrasies of his patients and act accordingly, applying the paste 
with great care, allowing it to remain but a short time, without an exami- 
nation, and instantly removing it on the slightest signs of too severe an 
action, or as soon as vitality is destroyed. 

Previous to its introduction into the paste, arsenious acid was used for 
destroying the vitality of the pulp without being combined with any other 
substance. This was objectionable ; because the acid being an irritant, 
and the pulp in an inflamed condition from external exciting causes, it is 
evident that by applying an additional irritant in the form of arsenious 
acid we increase the inflammatory action, thus rendering it extremely 
difficult, if not impossible, for the acid to act; but by applying an ano- 
dyne in the form of morphia, and a styptic, and antiseptic combined in 
creasote, we reduce, in some degree, the inflammation, and allow the acid 
to act with much more facility than when alone. 

Arsenious acid has been, and still is, used by many, as an agent for 
obtunding that exalted sensibility to which the dentine is incident ; here 
it is objectionable on account of its liability to absorption by the dental 
tubuli, and, being carried to the pulp, producing inflammation and death 
of that organ. Especially is this the case in the deciduous teeth, or 
in the permanent teeth of young persons, where we find a large proportion 
of animal matter in the dentine, and, as a consequence, the tubuli much 
larger than in the adult — as the individual advances in years, this objec- 
tion becomes lessened on account of the tubuli consolidating. Cases 



60 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

have occurred, however, in persons quite old, of the death of the pulp, 
from absorption of the acid, when applied for this purpose. I now pass 
to the sulphate of morphia, and shall give it but a brief notice. 

The manner of its preparation, as given in the United States Pispen- 
satorj, is as follows : " Take of morphia, in powder, an ounce ; distilled 
water, half a pint ; diluted sulphuric acid, a sufficient quantity ; mix the 
morphia with the water, then carefully drop in the acid, constantly stirring, 
until the morphia is saturated and dissolved. Evaporate the solution by 
means of a water bath, so that it may crystallize upon cooling ; dry the 
crystals upon bibulous paper." In this process the morphia is known to 
be saturated when it is wholly dissolved by the water. To ascertain if 
the acid has been added in excess, litmus paper may be resorted to. Sul- 
phate of morphia is a narcotic and an anodyne, acting directly on the 
nervous power, diminishing the sensibility of the nervous system, allaying 
pain, inordinate action, and restlessness. In combination with a caustic, 
as arsenious acid, it diminishes the pain and irritability which would 
otherwise ensue, and by its narcotic effect, decreases the sensibility of the 
part. Having these general properties, it is admirably adapted to form 
one of the ingredients of the arsenical paste. The acetate of morphia is 
used by some in preference to the sulphate. This possesses no advantage 
over the sulphate, as the therapeutical effects of one are precisely those 
of the other. 

Sulphate of morphia is used for relieving sensitive dentine ; here it 
acts by its narcotic effects, decreasing the sensibility of the nerve fibrels 
in the tubuli. It is, perhaps, the most efficient agent that can be employed 
for this purpose, as no danger can result from its application, through 
absorption, and should this occur, it would produce the beneficial effect 
on the pulp of allaying the slight irritation which always exists when the 
dentine is affected in this manner. 

I now pass to the last ingredient of the paste, namely, creasote. This 
is a clear, oleaginous, colorless liquid, obtained by distillation from tar and 
crude pyroligaeous acid, having a burning, acrid taste, and a disagreeable 
odor resembling that of smoked meat. 

It is a styptic, narcotic, antiseptic, astringent, and slightly escharotic. 
It possesses the property of forming an insoluble compound with albumen. 
The several therapeutical properties combined in it, render it not only a 
valuable addition to the arsenical paste, but also, to the list of dental 
remedies. It is the only substance that can be advantageously used for 
the purpose of holding in combination the arsenious acid and sulphate of 
morphia, except carbolic acid, which has many of the properties of crea- 
sote 5 indeed it is considered by some to be identical with it. 

The chief objection to creasote is its disagreeable odor. To remedj 



EXTRACTING TEETH. 61 

this some have resorted to the use of the aromatic essential oils ; these 
can be added without injuring in any degree the properties of the crea- 
sote. Care should be taken in introducing it into the teeth to protect the 
lips and tongue, as it acts as an escharotic on the mucous membrane. 
Exclusive of its use in the arsenical paste, creasote is extensively employed 
in dental practice : indeed, so much importance has been ascribed to it, 
as to lead to its indiscreet and erroneous use. It has been used in a 
diluted form for injections in diseases of the maxillary sinus. The prin- 
cipal use is for the treatment of alveolar abscess ; here it is either passed 
through the fang, or the fistulous opening ; and by its escharotic and 
caustic properties it produces disorganization and disintegration of the 
sack, and prevents the further accumulation of pus. 

September, 1864. 

EXTEACTING TEETH. 

BY T. L. BUCKINGHAM, D. D. S. 

Patients dread the operation of extracting teeth, and particularly roots, 
more than, any other operation in dentistry ; therefore, any means that 
can be adopted by which they can be removed, with certainty and quickly, 
without doing more injury to the parts than is necessary, is a benefit to 
the operator and a relief to the patient. 

It is not my intention to write a long article on extracting teeth, and 
describe each class of instruments separately, but merely to call the atten- 
tion of the profession to one class, and point out the manner of using 
some of them. 

I allude to the class called elevators, and I shall not attempt to describe 
all of this class, for there is almost an endless variety of them, each 
operator having some peculiar shapes to suit his fancy. I will here 
state, (that I may not be misunderstood in recommending these instru- 
ments,) that I do not think any instrument equal to the forceps for 
extracting a large majority of teeth when their crowns are sufficiently 
strong to allow of their use, but in cases where the crowns are broken off, 
or where the teeth are situated so as to prevent the free use of the forceps, 
the elevator is the next best instrument. 

I prefer the elevator for extracting the inferior dens sapientife to any 
other instrument when all the molars are in ; or even in cases where the 
first molar is gone and the second remaining, it may be used very success- 
fully. If we examine the position of these teeth in the mouth, and the 
shape of their roots, we shall see that to extract them they must be forced 
upward and backward, as they are situated in the angle of the jaw, and 
their roots curving back towards the ramus. If an attempt is made to 
remove tkem with the forceps they are very liable to be broken j the only 



62 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

motions that can be given are inward and outward, which is rather across 
their roots than the direction to loosen them. 

The elevator I use to extract these teeth has a blade slightly curving, 
grooved on the outside of the curve and rounded on the inside, the 
point nearly like an incisor forcep point, only less grooved and much 
thinner. The handle is large so that it can be grasped firmly. 

To extract the right inferior wisdom the operator stands nearly behind 
the patient, the left arm passed around the head, and the chin grasped 
firmly with the left hand. The instrument is inserted between the tooth 
to be extracted and the second molar and forced well in, then used as a 
lever, making the molar the fulcrum, while, at the same time, a slight 
rotary motion is given to it. The crown of the tooth will be forced back, 
and, at the same time, the tooth will be raised out of its socket. 

When the crown has been broken ofi", either by decay, or in an attempt 
to extract the tooth, the roots can be removed better with this instru- 
ment than any other by forcing the point down between them and their 
sockets, giving it a rotary motion as it goes down. The point of the 
instrument being nearly the shape of the root, and thin, will separate the 
process from the root, and when sufficiently far down use it as a lever to 
pry the root up, in these cases the second molar or the process may be 
made the fulcrum. 

To extract the left inferior wisdom tooth, or its roots, when the crown is 
broken ofi*, the operator stands nearly in front of the patient, and holding 
the chin with the left hand, the instrument is used as it is for the right 
wisdom tooth. When any of the roots of the inferior molars or bicuspids 
are to be extracted, and the tooth back of them is out, I frequently use 
this instrument in the manner I have already described. 

It can be used to extract the superior dens sapientiae, but more care 
is required than for the lower teeth. The tuberosity of the superior 
maxillary is sometimes very prominent, and unless care is exercised in 
using this instrument it might be forced ofi". 

Another kind of elevator, (or punch as it is sometimes called,) can be 
used very successfully for extracting roots on the right side of the mouth 
and occasionally on the left side. The kind I prefer is bent at an angle 
of forty-five degrees, about three-quarters of an inch from the point, and 
the outside grooved with a point that will fit closely around the root, and 
with a sharp edge, so that it will cut into the root and not slip off". All of 
these instruments should be made of good steel, well tempered, and as 
sharp as a lance at the part which comes in contact with the tooth or root 
to be extracted so that they will not slip. 

To extract roots in the upper jaw, on the right side, the operator stands 



EXTRACTING TEETH. 0S 

behind and above the patient, the point of the instrument is inserted well 
up on the root, and pressure made so as to force the root in toward the 
tongue. To extract roots in the lower jaw, right side, the operator stands 
rather below the patient, so that the root can be forced up as well as in. 
When roots are to be extracted on the left side of the upper jaw, the 
instrument should be passed across the mouth so as to be applied to 
the lingual side of the root, that it may be forced out toward the cheek. 
I use this instrument to extract all the roots on the left side of the upper 
jaw as far front as the canine 5 in fact, these roots can be extracted 
better with this instrument than any other. The outer plate of the process 
being thinner and weaker than the inner, the roots can be forced outward 
easier than they can inward. To extract roots in the left side of the 
under jaw, the operator must stand nearly in front of the patient, and 
push them inward toward the tongue ; he cannot pass the instrument 
across the mouth, for these roots point upward and inward, and an 
instrument applied on the lingual side would slip down, and pressfire 
could only be made forcing them into their sockets. Great care must be 
exercised in using this instrument ; the elbow should be held close to tie 
side, and pressure made in such a way that, if it should slip off the 
root, it will not be plunged into the tongue or cheek. A little practice 
will give the operator all the confidence necessary. A knowledge of what 
can be done, and a determination to do it, assists very much in extracting 
teeth. 

There is another elevator which I use for extracting the roots of the 
superior incisors, canines and sometimes the bicuspids. It is curved like 
the first, only grooved on the inside of the curve. (I think of nothing at 
present by which I can illustrate this curve better without a cut than the 
handle of a teaspoon, which has about the same curve, but does not resem- 
ble the instrument in anything else.) This instrument is used by grasping 
it in the hand, the thumb projecting opposite the grooved side of the blade, 
the point forced well down on the labial side of the root, and the thumb 
resting on the gum on the palatine side, the force is then made by closing 
the hand and making a fulcrum of the thumb. If the operator has suffi- 
cient muscular power in his hand almost any root in the upper jaw may be 
extracted in this way. I know a dentist who acquired great notoriety in 
extracting by the use of this instrument. He had sufficient power in his 
hand to remove not only roots but teeth, and generally the tooth would 
be out before the patient knew what he was doing. 

When the crowns of the incisors, cuspids or bicuspids are broken off 
so as to not allow a sufficient hold for the forceps, this instrument may be 
used for a lancet, by passing the point up between the gum and root, 



64 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

and forcing the process away, or in cases where it is necessary to use the 
forceps to cut through the process, the usual way is to extend their beaks 
over the gum and cut through it also, which leaves a very ugly wound, 
A much better way is to use the elevator I have just described, and 
pass it up along side of the root. If the process cannot be forced away, it 
can be carried up on the outside, between the gum and the process, and by 
passing it on both the buccal and lingual sides of the root, a place can be 
made for the beaks of the forceps ; in this way a hold may be made as 
high up as necessary, and then the process can be cut through and the 
root extracted with the forceps. The wound does not present such a 
frightful appearance, and heals much sooner than when the gum has been 
cut through. A principle in surgery, where an operation is to be per- 
formed exposing the bone is, when possible, to have enough muscle to 
cover the bone, and enough skin to cover the muscle. The reason for 
doing so is very plain. When the bone is exposed it becomes necrosed, 
anpl then has to go through the tedious process of exfoliation before the 
wound heals, and where the muscle is exposed suppuration takes place ; 
but if one is covered with muscle and the other with skin, the wound may 
heal by first intention. 

I have described but three kinds of elevators. I use others, but not 
very often. Every operator has his own peculiar instruments, which, by 
practice, he can use better than any others ; but we can sooner become 
accustomed to a good instrument than a bad one. 



TOBACCO. 

BY. W. W. TOWNSEND, D. D. S. 

In reading the April number of the Times, I found an article on 
" Tobacco and Teeth," by Dr. Young. It interested me the more, as the 
views expressed in regard to the effect of tobacco on the teeth, were so 
entirely different from my own ideas and experience. Dr. Young says 
that smokers and chewers never have sensitive teeth. Within the last 
few months an intimate friend called to have his mouth put in order. I 
found his teeth in pretty good condition ; all of the cavities small, but 
very sensitive — in fact the most sensitive teeth I ever operated upon. He 
was an inveterate " chewer and smoker." The majority of my patients 
who use tobacco have very sensitive teeth. 

I do not wish to defend the practice of using tobacco in any form, but 
only desire to be enlightened upon its effects on those organs which we 
labor to preserve. 

Philadelphia, September, 1864. 



DENTAL CARIES. 65 

DENTAL OAEIES-ITS EPPEOT ON THE GENERAL HEALTH. 

BY GEO. T. BARKER, D. D. S. 
A paper read before the Pennsylvania Aasociation of Dental Surgeons. 

Before considering the above subject it may be proper to consider what 
dental caries is, and to what it is analagous. The last proposition may 
be answered by stating that it bears a striking resemblance to mortifica- 
tion, as seen on the soft parts, though differing materially from it in many 
of its phenomena. In both we see chemical affinities exerting their power, 
which previously were held in check by the life forces, but which now 
pass from the influence of physiological, to that of chemical laws ; in 
both, nature doubtless attempts to arrest the disease, but it is rarely 
successful with dental caries, though it does occur in some instances. In 
mortification the disease is arrested by the obliteration of the vessels of 
the tissue, by plastic lymph, which forms a barrier between the healthy 
and unhealthy structures, so nature, where there is a strong constitution, 
makes the same effort to arrest decay by consolidating the dentinal tubuli 
with a calcarious deposition. The correct reply as to what dental caries 
is, cannot so readily be answered, for upon this point some of the best and 
most enlightened minds differ greatly. One considering it due to chemi- 
cal agents alone, others to inflammation, while others advocate what may 
be termed the chemico vital theory. The last named theory seems to be 
the most plausible as its attribute to the tooth, a predisposition to 
decay, in consequence of the absence of a healthy balance of its constitii- 
ents, whereby the power of resisting chemical agencies is lessened, and* 
therefore, if any exciting influences are present the tooth will decay. 

A disease, let it be situated in a tissue, organ, bone, or indeed any 
structure, may arise from some disturbance or unhealthy balance of its 
own constituents. This may be seen in the teeth, and must be evident to 
every thinking dentist, for where the general health is not good, and the 
proper proportions of nutrient material are not carried to those structures, 
there will exist a predisposition to decay, which will be excited and 
developed by the presence of some foreign agent, as aoid salivary secre- 
tions, or decomposing animal or vegetable matters. 

Diseased structures have also the power of exciting disease in some 
other distant or neighboring healthy organ, by means of their vitiated 
secretions ; by changing the blood from a healthy to an unhealthy fluid ; 
by retaining foreign substances, so that their presence will excite either 
local inflammation, or by decomposition and solution create an abnormal 
secretion, which will in turn act upon the organ itself, and in several 
other ways which might be mentioned. Several examples of those above 
cited are witnessed in dental practice ; thus may be mentioned disease of 
the osseous walls of the antrum, originating from the vitiated secre- 



66 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

tion of the lining membrane. The presence of this secretion, if con- 
tinued for a length of time, will excite the inflamed membrane to throw 
out a more excessive and less healthy secretion, until by its pressure and 
presence a disease of the osseous walls will have been excited. Another 
example may be witnessed in the teeth themselves ; thus the conformation 
of a tooth may be of such a character that food will accumulate and 
decompose upon or around it. If continued for a length of time, caries 
of the tooth will probably be the result ; this is particularly noticeable in 
those teeth that are close together, decay occurring on the approximal 
surfaces. The influence that is exerted upon all the organs and struc- 
tures, when one is considerably diseased, has been recognized by all 
writers ; this is more particularly observable in some diseases than in 
others, thus we see the wasting and general loss of power in all structures 
in consumption, cancerous diseases, dyspepsia, &c. This wasting is due 
most frequently to an absence of the proper nutritive agents of the blood. 
Diseases of the teeth, and particularly when they are in a carious condi- 
tion, may induce systemic disturbances j the most frequent are dyspepsia 
and neuralgia, though several other complaints have been mentioned. 

Harris relates a case where a person was declining rapidly with con- 
sumption, the disease, in his judgment, having its origin from the carious 
teeth and vitiated secretions of the mouth. Though it has been doubted 
that a due admixture of saliva is absolutely necessary for the healthy 
process of digestion, yet it must be admitted that abnormal salivary secre-. 
tions must, sooner or later, afiect the coats of the stomach, and thus 
modify the gastric juice. When there are a number of carious teeth in 
the mouth and the gums are inflamed, there will be a greater supply of 
saliva, as the product of the salivary glands is eliminated in greater 
quantity when there is any irritation of the mouth or adjacent structures ] 
this saliva will, even when the person is not eating, pass into the aesopha- 
gus, and from thence into the stomach, where, in time, it may induce dys- 
pepsia. One fruitful cause of disease in any part of the economy is non- 
assimilation, and this is due to the fact that food is not properly prepared 
in the stomach, so that it will yield a due supply of nutrient material for 
the blood as it passes through the intestines. Diseased teeth, therefore, 
acting through the agency of abnormal secretions may afi'ect the coats of 
the stomach so that food will not be fitted for the digestive process, and, 
as a consequence, dyspepsia, consumption, or general debility may be 
established. 

The term dyspepsia is most appropriate as shown by its definition — 
" with difficulty I concoct,^' It is not usual that dyspeptic persons will seek 
advice in its early stage of either the physician or dentist, as the disagree- 
able symptoms are believed to be some temporary disarrangement which 



DENTAL CARIES. 67 

will soon pass away. The most prominent feeling is a sense of vague 
uneasiness in the epigastrium, which does not amount to positive pain, 
but is often described as more unpleasant as the person will strike him- 
self over the stomach or upon the side, in order to obtain relief by a 
change of sensation. This feeling extends over the epigastric and also 
to the hypochondriac regions, to the chest especially, to the left side, 
and to the stomach and down the arms. When the stomach is empty 
the sense of uneasiness is greatest, but after eating there will remain a 
feeling of distension, weight and fullness. Besides those mentioned, 
there is occasionally a sense of heat, or burning, or gnawing pain arising 
from vascular irritation, gastralgic pains and a sense of distension from 
flatulency or other causes. In most cases the appetite is more or less 
impaired, but in others it is craving or perverted. Eructations of wind, 
and regurgitations of food or chyme, are exceedingly common ; these 
regurgitations are of the nature of a sour, bitter, or oily liquid. In some 
cases the liquid eructated, will be of the nature of a thin, watery fluid, consti- 
tuting the disorder known as pyrosis, or water brash. There are many 
other symptoms, having their seat in other parts, dependent on derange- 
ments of the stomach ; the most prominent are perverted vision, tendency 
to low spirits, headache, giddiness, irregular pains between the shoulders, 
indisposition to exertion. These, with several other symptoms, may be 
present, but it is seldom that all occur, as they vary greatly with each 
individual. Where a person is dyspeptic the food which passes into the 
stomach remains longer than usual undissolved and sometimes is not dis- 
solved ; it then comes under the influence of chemical afiinities. New 
substances are formed, among which acid and gaseous formations are 
prominent ; these are eructated into the mouth where the undigested food 
or its ultimate chemical product act as foreign bodies, exciting the teeth 
to decay. It is probable that dyspepsia more often excites caries in the 
teeth by means of acid eructations where there is a predisposition to 
decay, or where the nutrient quality of the blood has been modified ; 
but it must also be admitted that carious teeth may first induce dyspepsia, 
which, when established, will hasten carious action by means of acid 
eructations. 

Several dental diseases, so called, may be traced to dyspepsia. Thus 
neuralgia may and often docs occur from reflex nervous action, the pain 
being referred to some of the branches of the fifth pair, while the real 
seat of irritation is in the stomach. This arises frequently from undigested 
food, and this particular kind of neuralgia is seen in persons who are apt 
to indulge in the pleasures of the table, particularly late at night. The 
cause of this seeming transfer of pain is apparent when we remember that 
the nerves of the cerebro-spinal and the great sympathetic nervous sys- 



•68 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

tem coalesce at certain points, thus accounting for the pain being trans- 
planted. No local remedies give relief while the pain is excrutiating, and 
if the overtaxed stomach is not relieved serious results may be looked for. 
The neuralgic pain is but one of the efforts of nature to awaken the 
sufferer to the importance of a knowledge and regard for natural and 
immutable laws which govern that wonderful and intricate process of 
digestion. 

The teeth may be affected in another way through the influence of 
dyspepsia which has become chronic. This has already been referred to, 
and it has been shown that, when the whole nutrient fluid is affected, the 
salivary secretions become abnormal, and the teeth prone to decay. The 
nutrition of the teeth may also be prevented or arrested at an early age, 
previous to eruption through this difficulty. This is by no means a rare 
occurrence, and is seen daily in the puny half-alive children which abound 
in the courts and alleys of our large cities, and which swell so greatly the 
list of mortality. This is due, frequently, to impaired constitutions of 
parents, but may also be induced by improper food at an early age — food 
which is unadapted to the wants of the tissues which are undergoing forma- 
tion. With the poor mother, who is obliged to labor for her daily bread, 
it is often necessary to deprive the infant of the nutrient breast milk, and 
instead of the proper substitutes, food abounding in starchy principles is 
given, and, as a consequence, impaired digestion, which is dyspepsia, is 
induced ; the child, if it lives, grows up delicate, scrofulous perhaps, but 
in either case with a dental organism weak and prone to early decay. Uut 
not alone do we find these dyspeptic children confined to the cottages and 
tenements of the poor, they are to be seen in the houses of our wealthiest 
and most aristocratic families ; for, be it known, that it is quite unfashiona- 
ble to nurse an infant, and, as a consequence, the young child is fed by a 
nurse, who is most ignorant of the imperative wants of nature that a due 
supply of nutrient material may be sent where ever and when ever it is 
demanded, and thus, in consequence of this neglect, dyspepsia is estab- 
lished, and the child's constitution is ruined. But, to pass more particu- 
larly to the subject under consideration, the effect of acid secretions on 
the teeth must be admitted by all. The influence of acid on the teeth 
has received the consideration and experimental knowledge of such men 
as Westcott, Harris and Richardson, and I had also the pleasure of pre- 
senting certain specimens, showing the effect of the different acids upon 
the teeth, at one of the former meetings of this Association, (1858.) It 
may therefore be considered that acid saliva, which, in its normal state is 
alkaline, is deleterious to tooth structure. The saliva of dyspeptic per- 
sons will usually present an acid reaction. The acid may be either lactic, 
acetic, or hydrochloric, either of which are solvents to tooth tissue. I 



DISCOLORED AND NECROSED TEETH. 69 

have thus briefly drawn attention to the influence of diseased teeth upon 
the economy, and have also shown how the same disease, when established, 
may accelerate and hasten carious action. The subject is one almost 
inexhaustible, and deserves our earnest consideration. 

Philadelphia, September, 1864. 



DISOOLOKED AND NEOEOSED TEETH. 

BY JAMES TRUMAN, D. D. S. 

The general application of the term necrosis to all discolored teeth, 
changes its signification materially from the accepted definition. We 
understand in surgery, necrosis to mean death of the bone, in whole or in 
part. In the teeth we may have extensive discoloration, while the 
principal source of nutrition remains intact. In the other bones of the 
body, the dead portion is eventually thrown off, and the recuperative 
powers of nature are at once enlisted in replacing it with new bone. In 
the teeth this is never the case ; but, if the vitality of the nutrient tissues 
be destroyed in part, there is no recuperative power to renew the dead 
portion, but the whole tooth becomes involved and must be eventually 
expelled from the alveolus as a foreign body, unless, under proper treat- 
ment, the function of the remaining tissue can be retained. 

Our profession, owing perhaps to its youth, lacks a suitable nomencla- 
ture to describe appearances ; while they possess a similarity to diseases 
in other portions of the body are sufficiently dissimilar to warrant spe- 
cific terms. 

Necrosis, as it is understood in our profession, allows of such extended 
application that it is impossible to compare it with the death of other 
portions of the bony structure, though necrosis is essentially the same in 
both cases. 

With this comprehension of the term, as it is used, we may class this 
disease under two heads, partial and true necrosis. Of the former we 
have, 

1st, Destruction of the vitality of the pulp from any of the well known 
causes, as from blows upon the tooth, attacks of caries, &c. The subse- 
quent transfusion of the decomposed nerve tissue through a portion of 
the tubuli lying near the surface of the cavity of decay, giving the tooth 
a dingy blue appearance. This may occur in carious or in teeth where 
the nerve tissue has been deprived of vitality without external evidence 
of caries. 

2d, The more aggravated cases from the same cause, where the whole 
tooth has become so much discolored as to require active treatment for its 
removal. 



70 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

And, of the latter, we have, 

3d, Teeth of a dingy yellow, with gums in an inflamed condition ; fang 
very much roughened ; tooth loose in the alveolus ; periosteum partially 
destroyed, accompanied at times with a continuous discharge of pus, 
though this is by no means always an accompaniment. 

Treatment. — The first class readily yields the dark color by cutting 
away the degenerated dentine, so that all that is requisite in such cases 
is to perform carefully this part of the operation ; fill solid with gold, and 
the slight shade of difference in color will pass unnoticed. 

The second class, the color of which runs from a light to a deep blue, 
presenting a very unsightly appearance in the mouth, requires more 
extended treatment. 

Before proceeding to give the mode I have adopted to remove the dis- 
coloration and restore the tooth, if not to its normal color, to render it, 
at least, presentable, it may be well to preface it with a word of caution. 
All this class of teeth hold disease, if I may so express it, in a latent 
form, liable at any moment from any undue excitation from a blow or the 
jarring consequent upon excavation, to arouse an inflammatory condition, 
which, if it cannot be made to yield to treatment, may result in alveolar 
abscess with its complication of difiiculties. The plan I have adopted, 
proceeding with caution, is to first cleanse the cavity of decay, if there 
be one, if not, opening with a drill into the pulp cavity, and removing all 
the devitalized tissue therefrom ; extending the operation no further the 
first sitting. Treat with creasote, allowing it to rest for twenty-four 
hours. The second sitting remove the decomposed tissue in the nerve 
canal, apply the creasote for a similar length of time, and at the next 
sitting fill the nerve canal at its junction with the foramen at the apex 
solidly with gold. The tooth is then ready for the bleaching process, 
which may be proceeded in without fear of unpleasant results. 

The practice generally adopted has been rather of a palliative, than of 
a positive bleaching treatment. Starch, magnesia, chloride of lime, &c., 
have each been recommended and used to remove the discoloration, but 
the success attending the application has not always been commensurate 
with the labor expended. The first two act more in a mechanical way to 
displace the coloring matter contained in the dentine by the white parti- 
cles of the agent used. They possess no positive bleaching properties ; 
hence their use is tedious and unsatisfactory. Chloride of lime, from its 
well known bleaching properties, was resorted to. This article depends 
for its bleaching powers upon the quantity of chlorine combined with the 
lime, which will not act upon coloring matter unless set free, rendering 
it almost as inoperative as the two articles first named. To overcome this 



DISCOLORED AND NECROSED TEETH. 71 

difficulty, several years ago I introduced into my practice in such cases 
the presentation of a weak acid in connection with chloride of lime, libe- 
rating the chlorine to some extent and giving results so satisfactory, that 
I think its general adoption will result in rendering many unsightly and 
apparently worthless teeth valuable for beauty and use. 

Chlorine is set free by all the acids, sulphuric acting with great rapidity. 
It is important in presenting an acid in connection with tooth bone, that 
it be done in a way that may not prove injurious in the hands of the 
incautious and unscrupulous. Hence I have reduced the acid used, to 
the weakest possible form that will accomplish the result of disengaging 
the chlorine. We do not, as the calico, printers in their operations, 
require a strong bleaching powder. As all the acids act readily on den- 
tine, the choice, as far as the deleterious effects of an excess of any 
of them is concerned, is not of material consequence. I prefer in 
practice, tartaric acid reduced to a sharp sour or common vinegar, (acetic 
acid.) They will either answer the end required. 

A variety of tests are used in chlorometry to ascertain the exact amount 
of chlorine present in a given quantity of bleaching powder : but as such 
exactness is unnecessary for the object aimed at in this treatment, the 
operator may rest satisfied, as a general rule, with the chloride of lime 
procurable from the shops. Should it be desired to get an approximate 
idea of the strength of the bleaching powder, the old and simple indigo 
test will be found efficient. By it the strength of the acid necessary to 
use, to evolve sufficient chlorine, may be graduated. To a solution of 
indigo, unite as much chloride of lime as it will take up, add the acid to 
be used until all color is destroyed. 

The mode used to bring these two articles together in the tooth, is not of 
much moment. The plan I adopt, is to saturate a pledget of cotton with 
the acid, dip it in the powder and apply quickly to the cavity, sealing it 
with cotton and wax combined. The latter article I prefer to sandarach 
varnish for this purpose. The varnish uniting with the cotton and chlo- 
ride of lime, hardens it into a mass and prevents the full action of the 
bleaching process. This application I renew every day until the tooth 
has reached the desired shade. The greatest change of color will be 
perceptible the first twenty-four hours, the thinness of the cutting edge 
allowing the bleaching properties to make rapid progress. The discolora- 
tion at the cervical portion of the tooth, is the most difficult to remove, 
but as it is less conspicuous, it has not been my habit to wait until that 
is thoroughly bleached before filling the tooth. That process will be con- 
tinued to a limited extent after the application of the powder has ceased. 

The time required to bleach a tooth of this character varies in propor- 



72 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

tion to its density. From one to four weeks has been my experience. 
Under the most favorable circumstances the operation is a tedious one, 
requiring great patience on the part of the operator. The remuneration, 
in a pecuniary sense, will, in the majority of cases, fall far short of the 
labor performed ; but that higher remuneration to the true professional 
artist— the daily increasing beauty, growing out of deformity, under the 
labor of hands and brain, is the sure and full reward. 

The teeth that most frequently come under our care are the lateral 
incisors, front incisors, cuspidati, and occasionally we meet with it in the 
posterior teeth. We frequently find the palatine fang of the "superior 
molars exposed its full length and deprived of vitality. Excision, where 
the tissues remain in a healthy condition around the other fangs, may, in 
this case, be used with advantage. 

I recently examined a case of the second class of partial necrosis, 
treated after the manner detailed over a year ago. The two superior 
laterals very badly discolored, of a bluish yellow tint. The disfiguration 
was of so marked a character, that the lady came with the expectation of 
having them removed. In ten days the case was dismissed with scarcely 
a shade of difference between them and the adjoining teeth. When 
examined, the teeth had improved in appearance, and were otherwise per- 
fectly healthy. 

The third class are more difficult to treat and promise poorer results* 
Their great liability to alveolar abscess and the uncertainty attending any 
attempt to restore them, render the effort one of doubtful utility ; but, 
as no tooth should be condemned until all means to save have been 
attempted, we are bound by our duty to the patient and the honor of our 
profession to make the effort. 

Where the case is not complicated with a discharge of pus,- cleansing 
out the nerve cavities and cavity of decay, external application of astrin- 
gent washes, combined with the treatment as described under class 2d, 
may be all that will be required. Where there is a constant discharge 
of pus from fistulous openings in the gum, access to the seat of disease is 
accomplished readily through the nerve canal. If the foramen is not of 
sufficient size, a small drill will quickly enlarge it. The mode usually 
adopted to inject through the fang, is to wrap a small broach with cotton, 
using it as a piston. If this does not answer, recourse must be had to a 
small syringe with a discharge tube small enough to reach some distance 
up the fang. Creasote, or iodine dissolved in creasote, will be found very 
efficacious. Nitrate of silver in solution is also very beneficial, but great 
care must be exercised not to make the applications too frequent, or the 
symptoms may be aggravated. 



CAOUTCHOUC. 73 

OAOUTOHOUO. 

ITS HISTORY, PROPERTIES ; ITS COMBINATIONS FORMING HARD RUBBER, 
AND THE MANNER OF WORKING IT FOR DENTAL PURPOSES. 

Br E. WILDMAN, M. D., D. D. S. 
[Continued from p. 153, toI. 1.] 

In forming hard rubber, it is essential that sulphur, or sulphur in com- 
bination with some other substance, should be incorporated with caout- 
chouc. To this base is frequently added earths, metallic oxides, shellac, 
resin, pitch, bitumen, saw-dust, charcoal, &c.) for purposes of utility or 
economy, for articles of commerce, and some of the compounds vended 
for dental purposes are so loaded with earths, or metallic oxides, as to 
render them unfit for the use they are ostensibly designed. 

As the manufacturers of hard rubber compound are so very reserved as 
to its composition, little information can be gleaned as to its ingredients 
or proportions, except from their specifications of patents and from experi- 
ments. During the past year, I have made numerous experiments in 
making hard rubber compounds, some of which have been successful, and 
in due time will be given to the profession. 

Nelson Goodyear, in the specification of his patent for hard rubber, 
dated May 6, 1851, says : In treating caoutchouc for this purpose, it is 
combined with sulphur, the best proportion being about equal parts, by 
weight, of each ingredient. By combining sulphur, in this proportion, 
with the caoutchouc, and subjecting the compound to the curing operation, 
a hard substance will be produced; but a still better result will be 
obtained by the introduction of magnesia, or lime, or of carbonate or sul- 
phate of magnesia, or carbonate or sulphate of lime, or calcined French 
chalk, or other magnesian earth into the composition ; which case, the fol- 
lowing proportions will be found highly advantageous, viz : 

One pound of caoutchouc ; half pound of sulphur ; half pound of mag- 
nesia, or lime, or carbonate or sulphate of magnesia, or carbonate or sul- 
phate of lime, or French chalk, or other magnesian earth. 

The proportions specified in both of these compounds may be considera- 
bly varied without materially changing the result, but in no case is it 
desirable to use a much less quantity of sulphur than four ounces to every 
pound of caoutchouc. 

With eit|;ier of these compounds just described, gum-lac or gum-shellac 
may be combined to great advantage, say in proportion of from four to 
eight ounces of gum-lac to every pound of caoutchouc. Kosin, oxides, 
or salts of lead or zinc, of all colorsf and other similar substances, both 
mineral and vegetable, may be added in small quantities to either of the 



74 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

compounds for the purpose of imparting a polish or a suitable color 
thereto, and for making the mixture work more easily ; but no precise rule 
for these additions can be given ; nor, indeed, is it necessary, as the taste 
and judgment of the operator will be his guide in this particular. 

The compounds may be mixed by a masticating machine, (or by any 
other means employed in the manufacture of India rubber compounds,) 
until the several ingredients are thoroughly incorporated. The mineral 
ingredients mixed with caoutchouc should be finely divided, and good 
results are produced by reducing them, before mixture, to an impalpable 
powder. When mixed, the compounds are either rolled into sheets, by 
means of calendering rollers, or formed by moulding or other well-known 
processes into any desired shape. 

When thus rolled or moulded, the compounds are then to be " cured." 
This is effected by exposing the compound to a high degree of artificial 
heat, using for this purpose either steam, hot water, or hot air. The 
degree of heat to which the compound is to be exposed, and the duration 
of its exposure, will depend somewhat upon the size and thickness of the 
article ; but in ordinary cases, the heat should be raised to about 260° or 
270° F., and the compound exposed to such heat for about four hours : 
as a general rule, however, it may be stated that the heat should range 
from 250° to 300° F., and the time of exposure from two to six hours. The 
compound, by undergoing this heating or curing operation, will become of 
a hard stiff character, in many respects resembling tortoise shell, horn, 
bone, ivory and jet. 

In the specification of the patent of Charles Goodyear, jr., for improve- 
ment in plates for artificial teeth, dated March 4, 1855, he says : "The 
best compound I believe to be one pound of India rubber, or gutta percha, 
or of the two combined in suitable proportions witk half a pound of sul- 
phur, together with a suitable quantity of coloring matter. To obtain a 
suitable color, I mix with the caoutchouc or gutta percha, vermillion, 
oxides of zinc or iron, or any coloring substance that will stand the neces- 
sary degree of heat with the action of the sulphur. This compound, 
after having been moulded, is to be subjected to heat for about six hours, 
and in doing so, I gradually raise the heat up to about 230° F., say in 
about half an hour, and then, unless there be a considerable quantity of 
foreign matter present, the heat may be raised, quickly as may be, to 
about 295°, otherwise I raise the heat more slowly, and retain the com- 
pound at about that temperature for the remainder of the six hours, and 
then allow the whole to cool down, when the process will be completed." 

For the edification of the admirers of pink rubber, I will give, in full, 
a specification of a patent, (copied from the English Government Patent 



CAOUTCHOUC. 75 

Kecords,) granted to Richard Archibald Brooman, Patent Agent, for 
improvement in preparing caoutchouc, adapted especially for dental pur- 
poses, (being a communication from abroad, by Corneille Lambert, Charles 
Cassinir Gobert, of Paris, France,) March 20th, 1861 : 

" For the purpose of this invention, I treat the red caoutchouc of com- 
merce, and in the following manner : 

" First. I soften the red caoutchouc bj dissolving it in sulphuret of 
carbon, ether, chloroform, or other solvent And according to the degree 
of solution to be obtained, the caoutchouc must be dissolved in a quantity 
of the solvent varying from about one quarter of the weight up to an 
equivalent weight of caoutchouc. 

^} Second. I introduce into the solution one of the following substances, 
sulphate barytes, of manganese, of strontian, oj antimony^ calcined 
alumina, calcined or precipitated silex, phosphate of lime, or carbonate of 
baryta. These agents are used alone, or mixed with oxide of zinc. The 
object of their introduction is to reduce or tone down the red in the 
caoutchouc, and to cause it to assume a flesh-color tint ) sometimes a little 
carmine is added. The decoloring agent is introduced in about equal 
quantities, by weight, to that of the red caoutchouc. The product 
obtained by the treatment is in the form of a flesh-colored paste, of a con- 
sistency suitable for moulding of dental pieces, and other articles to be 
manufactured. When the paste is required to be more supple and mallea- 
ble, a small quantity of ordinary caoutchouc in solution is added. 

" Third. The dental piece, or other article, having been moulded from 
the paste, prepared as before described, requires to be solidified. This 
operation takes place in a closed vessel, where the temperature is raised 
to from 300 to about 335^ F. After an exposure of about half an hour, 
the caoutchouc will be found hard, and at the expiration of three-quarters 
of an hour, it will be found to have acquired all the hardness necessary. 

" Caoutchouc prepared in the ordinary manner would require to attain 
an equal degree of hardness, at least one hour and a quarter. 

" The flesh color will be improved by exposing the piece, or other 
article, either directly or in an alcoholic bath, to solar rays for a period 
varying with the intensity of the light." 

Owing to the press of matter, I am unable to give, in the present num- 
ber, the results of the experiments to ascertain the quantity of solid or 
earthy matter in the difierent samples of rubber offered for dental pur- 
poses ; but rl will here remark, in all of the samples of English pink 
rubber, I have found forty-eight per cent, of earthy matter — a quantity 
sufl&cient to render it so weak as not to be reliable for dental purposes. 

TO BB COMTISflTBP. 



76 * THE DENTAL TIMES. 

DEPORMITY OF AKTIFIOIAL TEETH. 

BY C. H. ECCLESTON. 

The deformity of artificial teeth may seem to you a queer subject to 
engage the attention of any one, much less a dentist of seventeen years' 
experience, but I hope to be able to throw out a few suggestions that will 
have at least a practical bearing upon the subject, and serve to call the 
attention of abler pens to a much-needed reform in the manufacture of 
artificial teeth and their adaptation to the mouth. The great mass of 
mankind are ever eager for something better than kind Providence fovored 
them with, and attempt to reverse the laws of nature to suit their own 
fancy, and in this way create all manner of deformities and their usual 
train of misery. This may be the result of what is called refinement, but 
more probably from the lack of it, for it is certainly not very much to the 
credit of those who ought to know better to do that which gives deformity 
to the grandest work Grod ever created. We live in a world where every- 
thing we behold has the finger of decay upon it ; our own bodies, the 
noblest of all created works, have decay written on every member, and 
we are often called to battle with disease in all its varied forms, and make 
repairs to keep our frail bark afloat until the appointed day for its final 
destruction shall have come. But the manner of making these repairs is 
a subject which presents many difficulties, and the faithful dentist has his 
full share to contend with. Now in the departments of repairs, in which 
the dentist acts a prominent part, is that of supplying the loss of the 
natural teeth. To this end, it is expected, (as in other matters of his 
profession,) that he will use his best endeavors to imitate nature, and 
restore the natural expression of the face, regardless of the notion the 
patient may have. The dentist should know what class of teeth is best 
adapted to the person requiring them, yet how few have the manhood to 
do as their better judgment tells them. Were they to adopt such a course, 
and then say to the manufacturer, keep your white mechanical teeth and give 
us teeth that, are copies of God's own work, and my word for it the result 
will be satisfactory. It may be said that copies from one mouth will not 
answer for another. Yery true, there would probably be individual cases 
where a slight variation would be necessary. But I claim that there is 
variety enough in copies that can be made from nature to supply its 
defects. This can be proven by comparison. The worst deformity of 
most artificial teeth is their studied regularity and over-polished surface, 
which at once stamps them as false. This is done by the manufacturer to 
suit the eye of the dentist, whose desire for such teeth, (if they are small,) 
is only equaled by his eagerness for customers. It is not an uncommon 
thing for some dentists to buy a dozen sets of teeth, all of one shade 
and size, and use them all without regard to age or complexion, and when 



AMERICAN DENTAL ASSOCIATION. 77 

he gets them used up, gets more of the same sort. He may wish them to 
vary a little in length, but wants them small and white. 

Now I say this comes from a false taste, both of dentist and manufac- 
turer. The general public know but little of what they really want or 
need in the dental line, and if a dentist is honest, and wishes to give his 
patrons the full benefit of his art, he will find but little trouble in getting 
the great majority to concede to his views in regard to how the work 
should be done. 

Another great defect in most artificial teeth is the narrowness of the 
incisors, especially the lateral, which, by being too narrow, derange the 
articulation of the entire set, especially if it is an artificial upper one 
inserted to match natural under teeth. In most cases the cuspidati of 
the upper will ride upon the under one, when the proper position for it is 
between the under cuspidati and the first bicuspid, and unless the dentist 
takes much pains in grinding the cuspidati with small wheels, (which, I 
regret to say, few will do,) the articulation will be anything but good. I 
am satisfied, from experience, that teeth can be so made as to avoid, in a 
great measure, the difiiculties referred to, and give a more natural expres- 
sion to the face. The gums as well as the teeth add much to the general 
appearance of false teeth. In most teeth made in sections the gum is 
very smooth, and on a perfect curve, instead of being irregular as it is in 
nature. I for one am willing to take nature for my pattern. 

Oxford, New York, 

PROOEEDINaS OP DENTAL SOCIETIES. 

BY C. N. PEIRCE, D. D. S. 

American Dental Assopiation. 

The Association assembled at Grant's Hall, Niagara Falls, on Tuesday, 
July ^Cth, 1864, and was called to order, at 11 o'clock, A. M., by the 
President, Dr. W. H. Allen ; Dr. J. Taft officiating as Secretary. The 
credentials of delegates representing the following Associations were then 
received : 

Society of Dental Surgeons of the City of New York ; Massachusetts 
Association of Dental Surgeons; Pennsylvania Association of Dental 
Surgeons ; Pennsylvania College of Dental Surgery ; Brooklyn Dental 
Association ; Indiana State Dental Association ; Mississippi Valley Den- 
tal Association ; Central New York Dental Association ; Connecticut 
Valley Dental Association ; Northern Ohio Dental Association ; Western 
New York Dental Association ; Hudson Valley Dental Association ; 
Merrimac Valley Dental Association ; Odontographic Society of Penn- 
sylvania; Ohio Dental College Association; Iowa State Dental Society ; 
Philadelphia Dental College ; Western Dental Society; Chicago Dental 



78 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

Society ; New Haven Dental Society ; Pittsburg Dental Association ; St 
Louis Dental Association ; Buffalo Dental Association ; Michigan Dental 
Association • Cincinnati Dental Association j Albany Dental Association. 

The number present, including permanent members and delegates, was 
eighty-eight, (88.) 

The following gentlemen were elected to serve the Association for 
the ensuing year : 

President — Dr. J. H. McQuillen, of Philadelphia, Penna. 

1st Vice President— J)r, C. P. Fitch, of New York, N. Y. 

2d Vice President — Dr. H. Benedict, of Detroit, Michigan. 

Corresponding Secretary — Dr. Gr. W. Ellis, of Philadelphia, Penna. 

Recording Secretary — Dr. J. Taft, of Cincinnati, Ohio. 

Treasurer — Dr. I. J. Wetherbee, of Boston, Mass. 

The retiring President, as well as the President elect, made good and 
timely remarks ; after which, several letters were read from absent mem- 
bers, all indicating an interest in the Association. 

Dr. McQuillen, chairman of the Committee on Dentists in the Army, 
made a report which was adopted, and the committee continued. This 
subject, as well as those of the following papers, occupied much time 3 
many members participating in the discussions, which were extended and 
instructive. 

Papers upon " Dental Pathology and Surgery," from Drs. Atkinson 
and Flagg ; one upon " The Liability of Adult Teeth to Decay," from 
Dr. Cheesebrough ; one upon " Treatment of Sensitive Dentine," from 
Dr. Marshall ; one upon " Reosteogenesis," from Dr. Pease : one upon 
" Articulation and Articulators," from Dr. Bonuill ; one upon " Materials 
Suitable for Artificial Base," from Dr. John Allen. 

The reports of the committees were made by the folio wmg gentlemen : 
upon Dental Education, Dr. McQuillen; upon Dental Literature, Dr. 
Fitch ; upon Dental Chemistry, Dr. Buckingham j upon Local Societies, 
Dr. Taft. 

The following report, made by the Nominating Committee, was adopted : 

Committee of ^Arrangements — Drs. W. W. AUport, E. A. Bogue and 
J. C. Dean. 

Committee on Publication — Drs. J. Taft, Gr. W. Ellis, J. F. Flagg, I. 
J. Wetherbee and C. W. Spalding. 

Committee on Prize Essays — Drs. C. N. Peirce, I. Forbes, F. N. Sea- 
bury, Charles Sill and A. C. Hawes. 

Committee on Dental Physiology — Drs. W. W. Allport, C. P. Fitch 
and C. W. Spalding. 

Committee on Dental Chemistry — Drs. Geo. Watt, T. L. Buckingham 
and H. A. Smith. 



AMERICAN DENTAL CONVENTION. 79 

Commitiee on Dental Pathology and Surgery — Drs. J. F. Flagg, W. 
H. Atkinson, W. A. Pease, J. Cheesebrough and Gr. S. Allan. 

Committee on Operative Dentistry — Drs. J. F. Johnston, W. H. Allen 
and A. G. Coleman. 

Committee on Mechanical Dentistry — Drs. John Allen, B. T. Whitney, 
L. P. Haskell, E. A. Bogue and W. H. Fames. 

Committee on Dental Education — Drs. James Tajlor, L. D. Shepherd 
and Thomas Wardle. 

Committee on Dental Literature — Drs. T. P. Abell, W. P. Horton and 
J. H. McQuillen. 

Committee on Voluntary Essays — Drs. C. P. Fitch, H. Benedict and 
S. B. Palmer. 

After the transaction of much other important and interesting business, 
the Association adjourned to meet in Chicago, on Tuesday, July 25, 1865. 

American Dental Convention . 

The Convention assembled on Tuesday, August 2d, 1864, in the 
Sup"reme Court Room, Detroit, Michigan, and was organized with the Pre- 
sident, Dr. Taft, in the Chair ; after which, the gentlemen present, from the 
following States, came forward and signed the Constitution : 

Michigan, 31 ; New York, 12 ; Pennsylvania, 9 ; Illinois, 6 ; Ohio, 6 ; 
Canada, 5 ; Missouri, 3 ; Massachusetts, 2 ; Indiana, 1 5 Iowa, 1 : Ken- 
tucky, 1 ; Tennessee, 1. 

The election of officers being in order, the following gentlemen were 
chosen to serve the Convention for the ensuing year : 

President — Dr. W. W. AUport, Chicago, Illinois. 

Vice President — Dr. H. F. Bishop, Worcester, Mass. 

Recording Secretary — Dr. Gr. W. Ellis, Philadelphia, Penna. 

Corresponding Secretary — Dr. W. H. Allen, New York, N. Y. 

Treasurer — Dr. H. Benedict, Detroit, Michigan. 

The President elect, on being conducted to the Chair, made a few per- 
tinent remarks. 

The address of the retiring President was replete with interest and 
instruction. 

After the reports of the various committees, the first subject under 
discussion was " The best means of improving the practice and elevating 
the profession of dentisty." This called forth an interesting discussion, 
opened by Dr. Taft, and participated in by Drs. Atkinson, Spalding, 
Perkins, Magill, Peirce, Bishop, Robinson and McCollum. 

Papers were read from Drs. G. T. Barker and Wm. H. Atkinson on 
Anaesthetics 5 the discussion upon this was quite extended, calling forth 
remarks from Drs. Buckingham, Gerry, Spalding, Magill, Corbin, Forbes 
and Ellis. 



^ THE DENTAL TIMES. 

Upon motion, the subject of " Extracting teeth ; when it should be 
done and when not ; the best instruments for the purpose, and the subse- 
quent treatment when any is required," was taken up, and opened by Dr. 
Magill ; he was followed by Drs. Bishop, Perkins, Robinson, Taft, J. Ward 
Ellis, Peirce, Overhalser, Forbes, Gerry, Allport, Kulp and Atkinson. 

The discussion upon absorption of alveolar process, causes and treat- 
ment, filling teeth, the relative value of different materials, and the mode 
of operating in difficult causes, was quite extended, interesting and 
instructive, and participated in by many of the members present. 

Communications were read from Drs. A. Hill, S. J. Cobb and B. Wood, 
followed by interesting remarks from many present, upon mechanical 
dentistry. 

Some time was consumed with an instructive clinical demonstration 
by Dr. Atkinson. 

The following gentlemen constitute the Executive Committee for the 
ensuing year : 

Drs. Taft, Peirce, Forbes, Robinson and Atkinson. 

The following resolution, oflPered by Dr. Magill, was adopted : 

Whereas, In the opinion of this Convention, business will be more 
promptly accomplished by the preparation of papers upon regular subjects 
of discussion, than by extemporaneous effort. 

Resolved, That we request of those who intend to meet with us in the 
next Annual Convention, to examine carefully the subjects offered, and, 
to the best of their ability, prepare well-digested articles, confining them- 
selves carefully to the subject under discussion, and to forward such 
papers to be read in Convention, in case they cannot attend in person. 

The following resolutions, offered by Dr. Allport, were adopted : 

Whereas, In the opinion of the American Dental Convention, no less 
than two years' pupilage in the office of a competent dentist, and atten- 
dance upon two full courses of lectures in a Dental College, will qualify 
an individual to practice dentistry properly ; therefore, 

Resolved, That practicing dentists be requested not to receive students 
into their offices for a less time than two years ; and, under no circum- 
stances, unless they will agree to attend lectures in and be graduated 
from a Dental College, before entering upon the practice of the profes- 
sion. 

Resolved, That the people should require of all those who hereafter 
enter upon the practice of the profession, that they shall have received 
a diploma from a Dental College, as the first requsite for public confidence 
and patronage. 

Upon motion, the Convention adjourned to meet at White Sulphur 
Springs, Ohio, on Tuesday, August 1st, 1865, at 10 o'clock, A. M. 



EDITORIAL* SI 

lETrttorCal. 



I^P^ In laying before our readers a synopsis of the proceedings of tbe 
American Dental Association and American Dental Convention, we much 
regret the necessity which compels us to give so meagre a report, leaving 
out, as we have done, the discussions which should be read by every prac- 
titioner. To those who desire to see a more extended account, we would 
refer th'em to the << Dental Cosmos," to which we are indebted for our 
synopsis. In so doing, we cannot refrain from acknowledging our indebt- 
edness, in common with the profession, to the Publisher of that journal 
for his persistent efforts, regardless of expenditure, in giving to the read- 
ing dentists so full a report of the proceedings of these yearly gatherings. 
We take pleasure in acknowledging the reception of a beautiful speci- 
men of a carboniaed tooth, in which the different tissues are clearly 
traceable, from Dr. J. D. Wingate, of Bellefonte, Pa. From Dr. J, 
H. Hatch, of California, a cast of a mouth, with two well-formed bicus- 
pids turned on their axis, and standing side by side across the alveolar 
ridge. Also from Dr. E. W* Kobbins, of New Brunswick, N. J. , a well- 
calcified pulp of a cuspid tooth, some teeth representing various abnor- 
mal conditions, and a deciduous molar, prematurely extracted, with the 
crown of the permanent bicuspid lying firmly within its fangs, a condition 
which should deter every one from extracting these teeth until the presence 
of their successors shall indicate the necessity. 

We take pleasure in recognizing the interest manifested in the Den» 
TAL Times by members of the graduating Class of the Pennsylvania 
College of Dental Surgery. In the present issue, we publish communica- 
tions from three of the last year's graduates, which, we think, will well 
repay a careful perusaL 

In conversation with Dr. John Allen and his associate. Dr. Colton, 
a few days since, we learned that out of the great number of patients to whom 
they had given the nitrous oxide gas in the last six months, eight hundred 
and ninety -four (894) had, within five minutes after the operation, written 
on a roll, prepared for the purpose, their name, residence, and the number 
of teeth extracted ; most of them had also given the sensation experienced, 
which was " entirely free from all unpleasant symptoms." Query : can any 
one, familiar with the administration of ether or chloroform, give so good a 
record % 

We have received from Lindsay & Blakiston, publishers, a copy of 
their Physicians' Visiting List, for 1865. Also, their catalogue of Medi- 
cal, Dental and Scientific books. These gentlemen pay particular attention 
to this branch of business, and keep constantly on hand a full assortment of 
works in every department of Medicine, Surgery and the collateral sciences, 
which they supply to order, by mail or express, at cash prices. c. N. p. 



S$ THE pENTAL TIMES. 

PEMSYLVMU COLLEGE OF DENTIL SEML 

THE NINTH ANNUAL SESSION. 1864-^65. 



HENRY C. CAREY, President, GEORGE TRUMAN, M. D., 

W. L. ATLEE, M. D., S. DILLINGHAM, P. D. S., 

DANIEL NEALL, D. D. S., G. R. MOREHOUSE, M. D., 

ELLESLIE WALLACE, M. D., THOMAS WOOD, 

BENJAMIN MALONE, M. D., J. R. McCURDY, 

W. W. FOUCHE, D. D. S., CHARLES HAMILTON, Sec't. 



'^<0WIL1'^< 



J. D. WHITE, D. D. S., 

EMERITUS PROFESSOR. 

T. L. BUCKINGHAM, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY AND METALLURGY. 

C. N. PEIRCE, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF DENTAL PHYSIOLOGY AND OPERATIVE DENTISTRY. 

E. WILDMAN, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF MECHANICAL DENTISTRY. 

G. T. BARKER, D. D. S-, 

PROFESSOR OF PRINCIPLES OF DENTAL SURGERY AND THERAPEUTICS. 

W. S. FORBES, M. D., D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY. 

JAMES TRUMAN, D. D. S., 

DEMONSTRATOR OF OPERATIVE DENTISTRY. 

J, M. BARSTOW, 

DEMONSTRATOR OF MECHANICAL DENTISTRY* 



The Lectures to the Regular Course will commence on the 
1st of November and continue until the 1st of March. 

During the laat two weeks of October, prelimiDary Lectures are delirered 
one each day. 

The Rooms for Operative and Mechanical Dentistry are open from the 
1st of October and throughout the session, under the supervision of the 
Demonstrators. 

The Dissecting Room, under the superintendence of the Professor of 
Anatomy and Physiology, is open during the session. 

Fees for the Course, (Demonstrators' Ticket included,) - $100 
Matriculation, (paid but once,) - - - - 5 

Diploma Pee, - - - - • - 30 

O. N^. PEIROE, Dean, 

C. p. BBESS, Janitor. ' 501 Korth SSerenth St., Philadelphia* 

' p, 9. — ^^Board may be had at from $3.50 to $6.00 per week* 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 83 



PEraSYLVANIA OOLLEaE OP DENTAL SUEGERT. 
The Ninth Annual Session, 1864-1865. 

The ninth annual session of the Pennsylvania College of Dental Sur- 
gery will commence on the first of November, and continue until the first 
of March. Preliminary lectures will, however, be delivered each day 
during the latter half of the month of October. The Dispensary and 
Laboratory of the College will also be open from that time, where ample 
opportunities will be afforded for the prosecution of the practical part of 
the profession under the daily supervision of the Demonstrators, who are 
gentlemen of known integrity and thorough capability. During October, 
as well as the entire session, a clinical lecture will be delivered, and 
operations performed by one of the Professors every Saturday afternoon. 

The course is so arranged that fifteen lectures are delivered each week, 
on the various branches taught in the school. A synopsis of the manner 
in which each department is treated will be found under the head of the 
different chairs. 

These lectures occupy about the average time of three hours each day. 
In addition, four hours are daily spent by the student in actual practice. 
With this object in view, the operating rooms are furnished with twenty 
chairs, so arranged as to command the best light, and all the appliances 
necessary for comfort and use. To these chairs the students are assigned 
in classes, and certain hours are fixed for each member of the class to 
operate. 

Each student is required to provide his own instruments, (except those 
for extracting,) and to operate with them. He is expected to keep them 
in perfect order, and for that purpose is provided with a table in which 
they can be locked up when not in use. As the operations performed at 
the College are entirely gratuitous, a superabundance of patients invari- 
ably present themselves. 

In the mechanical department every process known in the profession, 
which has any value to the mechanical dentist, is fully taught ; and 
receipts of valuable compounds are freely imparted. All the conveniences 
are at hand in the Laboratory for the preparation of metals, manufacture 
of teeth, (single and in blocks,) mounting, etc. ; and the student is 
required to go through all the necessary manipulations connected with the 
insertion of artificial teeth — from taking the impression to the thorough 
construction of the denture, and proper adjustment of it in the mouth of 
the patient. 



84 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

In addition to the facilities afforded by the College for a thorough course 
of instruction in the theory and practice of Dentistry, the celebrated 
hospitals and clinics of the city constantly enable the student to witness 
various important surgical operations which are highly interesting and 
instructive. The medical and surgical clinics of the Blockley Hospital, 
in particular, one of the largest eleemosynary establishments in the world, 
are open to Medical and Dental students, free of charge. The staff of 
this institution is composed of some of the most eminent physicians and 
surgeons of Philadelphia. 



COURSE OF LEOTURES, 



CHEMISTKY AND METALLURGY. 

The course of instruction from this chair will commence with the con- 
sideration of the imponderable substances. 

The laws that govern the imponderable bodies will next claim attention, 
with some notice of symbols or chemical notations. Individual elements, 
and the compounds resulting from their combinations, will then be con- 
sidered. Organic chemistry will receive its full share of attention. 

The course will be illustrated by diagrams and such experiments as can 
be performed before the class. 



DENTAL PHYSIOLOGY AND OPERATIVE DENTISTRY. 

The lectures in this department will embrace the Physiological Ana- 
tomy of the teeth, general and microscopical, in addition to a minute and 
careful description of the various operations performed by the dental prac- 
titioner. 

The microscope, models and diagrams, will be employed in illustration. 

At the Clinic the incumbent of this chair will also demonstrate before 
the class the various operations described in his course of lectures. 



MECHANICAL DENTISTRY. 
The instruction from* this chair will embrace the entire range of manip- 
ulations legitimately connected with the laboratory, arranged in two divi- 
sions — Mechanical Dentistry proper, and that to which has been applied 
the appellation of the Plastic department. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 85 

I. Mechanical dentistry proper will include everything appertaining to 
the construction of dental substitutes, passing through the different stages 
of preparation, from taking the impression, to the completion and proper 
adjustment of the case in the ' mouth, conjointly with features, expression 
of countenance, enunciation, etc. It will likewise embrace the metallurgic 
treatment of the various metals employed, the preparation of plate and 
wire, the alloying of gold, together with the alloys used, as well as those 
designated as solders. 

II. This division will comprise all that appropriately belongs to the 
manufacture of porcelain or mineral teeth — single teeth, block-work, con- 
tinuous gum-work, vulcanite, etc. The materials, their preparation, 
compounds and uses, will be specially regarded. 

All new inventions, modifications, and improvements, in this branch of 
the art, will in place receive due attention and investigation. 



PRINCIPLES or DENTAL SURGEET AND THERAPEUTICS, 

The lectures delivered from this chair will embrace General Pathology, 
Dental Pathology, the Pathological Relations of the Teeth to other parts 
of the System, together with a minute description of all special diseases 
that have any relation to Dental Surgery, or of interest to the Dentist. 

They will also include a careful examination of therapeutic agents and 
their general application. Their indications in the medical and surgical 
treatment of diseases of the mouth, both idiopathic and symptomatic, will 
be fully illustrated, and also the general hygienic rules and principles 
which come within the province of the practitioner. 



ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY, 

The instruction in this department will embrace a plain and compre- 
hensive view of the structure and functions of the Human Economy. The 
valuable anatomical preparations of the incumbent of this chair, (consist- 
ing of Papier Mache manikins, models in wood, drawings, wet and dry 
preparations,) will enable him to fully illustrate his course. With the 
same object, vivisections on the lower animals will also be employed. 

The special relations of this branch to the wants of the dentist will be 
kept steadily in view, and such descriptions of the natural history, micro- 
scopical structure, connections, &c., of the teeth, as their importance 
demands, will be given. 

The great facilities for the study of practical anatomy, to be found in 
the city of Philadelphia, obviate the necessity of providing a dissecting- 



86 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

room in the College. For the usual fee of $10, the student can have 
access to one of several well-ordered and well-supplied dissecting-rooms. 



EEGULATIONS. 



The candidate must be twenty-one years of age. He must have studied 
under a private preceptor at least two years, including his course of 
instruction at the College. Attendance on two full courses of lectures in 
this institution will be required, but satisfactory evidence of having attended 
one full course of lectures in any respectable dental or medical school, will 
be considered equivalent to the first course of lectures in t-his College : five 
years' practice, inclusive of the term of pupilage, will also be considered 
equivalent to the first course of lectures. The candidate for graduation 
must prepare a thesis upon some subject connected with the theory or 
practice of dentistry. He must treat thoroughly some patient requiring all 
the usual dental operations, and bring such patient before the Professor of 
Operative Dentistry. He must, also, take up at least one artificial case, 
and after it is completed, bring his patient before the Professor of 
Mechanical Dentistry. He must, also, prepare a specimen case to be 
deposited in the College collection. The operations must be performed, 
and the work in the artificial cases done, at the College building. He must 
also undergo an examination by the Faculty, when, if found qualified, he 
shall be recommended to the Board of Trustees ; and, if approved by them, 
shall receive the degree of Doctor of Dental Surgery. 



TEXT BOOKS AND WOEKS OF EEFEKENOE. 



Wilson's, or Leidy's Sharpey & Quains' Anatomy; Carpenter's Physi- 
ology, or Dunglison's Human Physiology ; United States Dispensatory ; 
Mitchell's Materia Medica ; Fownes' Elements of Chemistry j Regnault's 
Chemistry; Lehmann's Pysiological Chemistry; C. J. B. Williams' Prin- 
ciples^ of Medicine ; Wood's Practice ; Tomes' Dental Physiology and 
Surgery ; Harris' Principles and Practice ; Taft's Operative Dentistry ; 
Richardson's Mechanical Dentistry ; Paget's Surgical Pathology, or other 
standard works on the subject. 



THE 



DENTAL TIMES. 



Vol. II. PHILADELPHIA, JANUARY, 1865. No. 3. 

STEAM PEESSUEE IE YULOANIZEES. 

BY A. LAWREXCE, M. D. 

In the hope that a few *' practical hints " upon the subject of steam, as 
applied in the vulcanizing process, may be acceptable to the profession, I 
will endeavor to give them. I may premise, by suggesting that, although 
the dental profession are not expected to turn engineers, en masse, yet not 
only they, but all others who attempt to generate steam, at high pressures, 
should do so with a full knowledge of the agent which they are producing. 
Presuming dentists to be uninformed upon this subject, does not, neces- 
sarily, imply a want of professional education, for until within a few years 
there has been no necessity for research, or even a thought, in this direc- 
tion. The introduction of vulcanite, however, has not only revolutionized 
mechanical dentistry, but compelled us to use steam, whether familiar 
with it or not ; and vulcanizing is now done daily at a required pressure 
doubly sufl&cient to propel the largest steamship afloat. It may be 
inferred, from what has thus far been advanced, that we have to deal 
with a monster whose persistent efforts for liberty can be held in check 
only by the strongest prison walls and the utmost vigilance. To the 
further consideration of the subject, it becomes important to inquire 
whether the vulcanizers now most in use are sufficiently strong to resist 
the force applied. From experiments made at the Franklin Institute, it 
was foand that the tensile strength of wrought copper, one inch square, 
at a temperature of 302^ is 30,872 lbs., and at 392% only 27,154 lbs. 
Now it will be found, by mathematical calculation, that at 320°, the 
usual vulcanizing point, it is about 30,000 lbs. The published tables, 
however, give 34,000 lbs. as the tensile strength of wrought copper, but 
it must be borne in mind that the latter figures are based upon experi- 
ments at a much lower temperature than that under consideration. Most 
vulcanizers are now made of sheet copper, one-sixteenth of an inch in 
thickness, and, agreeable to the foregoing facts, have a tensile strength 
of 1,875 lbs., and one of four inches in diameter will not sustain a pres- 
sure of more than 150 pounds per square inch, or a temperature of 363°. 
7 



98 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

Let US next ascertain what force of steam is exerted upon the boiler, 
within a short range of temperatures. We find, by the tables of Haswell, 
King and others, that at 320 + °, the pressure is 85 lbs. ; at 324+°, 90 
lbs. ; at 328 +°, 95 lbs. ] and at 332°, it is 100 lbs. per square inch. 
These figures I have verified by a steam gauge connected with my own 
vulcanizer, and which I now use in preference to the thermometer, as I 
consider it more convenient, safer, and less liable to accidents. Practical 
engineers concur in the opinion that a force of not over one-half the 
sustaining capacity of the boiler can be safely applied. Now, then, if the 
vulcanizers, of the diameter previously given, were made of sheet copper, 
one-eighth of an inch in thickness, they would be capable of sustaining a 
force of 298 lbs. per square inch, and at the temperatures attained in 
practice, might be regarded as comparatively safe. Of course, it must 
be understood, that the thickness of metal should increase with the 
diameter of the boiler, when designed for a given pressure. 

Having given the statistics, little remains to be said, except, pvirhaps, 
to call in question the expediency of jeopardizing our lives every day in 
the week for the paltry sum necessary to furnish a trifle more of metal to 
our vulcanizers. The cost of manufacturing, aside from the stock, would 
not be enhanced. It may be urged that vulcanizer explosions are of very 
rare occurrence. Admitted, but therein consists the wonder, for it is not 
surprising that a few are " blown up," but that more or all are not. The 
vulcanizer is nothing more or less than a small boiler for generating 
steam, and in its use we should so regard it, for the fact that it is small 
does not deprive it of liability to the same accidents, or some of them 
at least, that larger ones are. We recoil, with a certain degree of 
apprehension, from the presence of the large marine boiler, carrying from 
twenty to forty pounds of steam, while we sit down before the small 
vulcanizer with as much nonchalance as to a cup of old Hyson. The 
difference is only as between the one hundred pound Parrott gun and the 
pocket pistol. Steam is easily managed so long as it is managed, its 
control being dependent upon certain well-established principles, a 
departure from which cannot safely be indulged in, unless, indeed, one 
wishes to enjoy the extreme felicity of an aerial journey at the expense 
of all earthly ties. However agreeable it might be to others, to see their 
own heads kiteing it through the air, I must confess that I have no 
unconquerable desire to participate in any such amusement. I do not by 
any means wish to be regarded as an alarmist ; but there is, most certainly, 
a limit to the resisting capacity of the boilers we use, as is the case with 
those intended for other purposes. Suppose the bulb of the thermometer 
gets slightly fractured, and, the accident not being discovered, the 
vulcanizer is put to use, what then 1 If the damage is slight, the mercury 



CAOUTCHOUC. 99 

may still be made to rise in the tube at high temperatures, but will not 
truly indicate the full heat or force within. Some time ago I had some 
difficulty in producing a desirable shade in my vulcanite work — it was 
too dark, as is the case when over-heated — and I came to the conclusion 
that the gum had deteriorated in quality. Other samples of gum were 
tried, and at varying lengths of time, yet with the same result. No 
defect could be discovered in the thermometer by the naked eye, but a 
microscope revealed a slight crack in the bulb, and the mystery was 
solved. But what force of steam was produced during these almost 
despondent trials ? Although my vulcanizer would safely bear a pressure 
of one hundred pounds per square inch, I concluded to use a steam gauge 
for the future, and now feel a security in its use positively refreshing. 
The gauge I use is that manufactured by the American Steam Gauge Co., 
No. 44 Exchange street, Boston. 

Considering the further continuation of these remarks undesirable, at 
this time, I leave the subject to the reflection of any who may think it 
worth their attention. 



OAOUTOHOUO. 

ITS HISTORY, PROPERTIES ; ITS COMBINATIONS FOR^nNG HARD RUBBER, 
AND THE MANNER OF WORKING IT FOR DENTAL PURPOSES. 

Br B. WILDMAN, M. D., D. D. S. 
[Continued from p. 75, toI. 2.] 

In the specification of the patent of H. H. Day, for improvement in 
preparing and vulcanizing India rubber and gutta percha, dated June, 
1857, he asserts, by his process, very thick pieces of rubber may be 
vulcanized uniformly hard and solid throughout their entire substance. 
To accomplish this object, he mixes " with the matter, when prepared for 
being vulcanized, a substance which will prevent the spongy or cellular 
character, by absorbing the sulphur gases as fast as generated. The 
material which is proposed to be employed for efi'ecting this object is, by 
preference, ordinary pipe clay, (alumine,) but other substances, capable 
of absorbing the gas, may be employed. The gum may be prepared for 
vulcanizing in the following manner : One pound of purified India rubber, 
or gutta percha, having been mixed with eight ounces of sulphur, (subli- 
mate,) in the usual manner, eight ounces of alumine are added to the 
mass, taking care to have it distributed evenly throughout. This mass 
may now be vulcanized in from four to seven hours at a temperature from 
230^ to 300% F., in the ordinary manner." 

" Articles of any great thickness, and requiring to be made hard and 
equally solid throughout, can thus be produced with facility, inasmuch as 
all the gases evolved by the sulphur will be rapidly absorbed by the 



100 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

alumine, or other equivalent absorbing agent employed. In this manner, 
balls four inches in diameter, which do not expand perceptibly when taken 
out of the mould, may be made, and when cut will be found to be 
uniformly dense and compact throughout." 

In an experiment made with a mixture, compounded as above, a light 
brown-colored rubber was procured, hard and compact, but not so tough 
as when merely sulphur and caoutchouc were used. 

1 have given a few of the great number of mixtures patented for making 
hard rubber to throw some light upon their general character, although 
some of the most objectionable have not been noticed, yet they do not give 
us much information as to what are the compounds vended for dental 
purposes. To obtain a knowledge of the value of these compounds, I 
have performed numerous experiments, analytical and synthetical, some 
of which I will relate for the benefit of the profession, trusting it will 
stimulate others to enter the field of research. 

In the experiments to ascertain the quantity of fixed matter, the first 
was made by my attention being directed to a dark pink rubber by its 
great specific gravity, 2.188. Whose make it was I do not know. One 
hundred grains of this rubber was brought to a white heat to expel all 
the volatile matter ; it left a white ash weighing sixty grains. Taking 
into consideration the sulphur and vermillion which were volatilized, it 
would leave but a small percentage of caoutchouc in the composition. 

Second, Two specimens of English light pink rubber, obtained from 
different sources, the maker's name not known, each produced forty-eight 
per cent, of white earthy matter. 

Third. A specimen of English pink rubber, made by Ash & Sens, 
marked No. 1 ; this, as above, gave forty-eight per cent, of a yellowish- 
white earthy matter. The ash retained the original shape of the rubber. 
Fourth. A specimen of English deep red rubber produced six per 
cent, of a dark ash or cinder. 

Fifth. A specimen of Diffenbaugh's red rubber gave sixteen per cent, 
of dark compact cinder. 

Sixth. A specimen of the American Hard Kubber Co.'s rubber, sp. 
gr., 1.572, yielded five per cent, of dark compact cinder. 

Seventh. A specimen of dark red rubber offered in the market for 
dental uses, made by whom I do not know, as the modesty of the maker 
would not permit him to give to the public his name. This yielded four 
per cent, of dark ashes. Although this rubber had less fixed matter than 
either of the preceding, it was very inferior in quality, and contained in 
its composition a large proportion of asphaltum, and was worthless for 
dental purposes. 

To ascertain if there was any free mercury in the A. H. R. Co.'s rub- 
ber, or any evolved by the decomposition of the sulphuret during vulca- 



i 



CAOUTCHOUC. 101 

nization, in the bulb of a tube, about a foot long, was placed some rubber ; 
the tube was then bent in the form of a retort, and the open end drawn 
out upwards to a capillary point. The end of the tube containing the 
rubber was placed in a bath of paraffin and vulcanized for one hour and a 
quarter at 320^ F. : the opposite end was kept cool during the operation 
to condense the mercury should any come over. The result of this, and 
several similar experiments, as no trace of mercury could be detected, 
free sulphur was sublimed and condensed in a small quantity. 

Caoutchouc may be mixed with sulphur and the coloring matter, by 
being passed between steam heated rollers, or the caoutchouc may be 
first reduced to a pulpy state by some one of its solvents, and the sulphur 
and other substances then mixed with it -, in either case the sulphur and 
coloring matter should be ground very fine, and the whole thoroughly 
incorporated together to ensure a satisfactory result. 

For experimental purposes the latter method can be readily practiced 
by any one. Of the solvents, coal naptha, or benzine, readily reduces 
the caoutchouc to the proper consistency, but after being mixed, and the 
solvent is evaporated, the rubber is dry and does not pack well. Oil of 
turpentine leaves the rubber somewhat adhesive and in a good condition 
to pack. Therefore I have found it a better plan to soften the caout- 
chouc in oil of turpentine, or in equal parts of naptha, or benzine, and 
oil of turpentine. When the coloring matter is ground in oil, the caout- 
chouc may be softened in naptha, or benzine, and it will pack well, but I 
am inclined to believe the oil injures the hardness and polish of the 
rubber. After the materials are well mixed, they may be spread on a 
glass plate with a spatula, and allowed to remain until the solvent is 
evaporated. In these experiments the best Para rubber was used, the 
time and temperature in vulcanizing the same as for the A. H. R. Co.'s 

rubber. 

j1. — Caoutchouc, 48 grs. 

Sulphur, 24 

This gave a dark brown rubber, strong and tough, and received a good 
polish. 

B. — The same proportions as j1. In this case the caoutchouc was a 
pure article, nearly colorless and translucent. Result — color and proper- 
ties the same, showing that the natural color of hard rubber is a dark 
brown. 

C. — Caoutchouc, 48 

Sulphur, 24 

Red Oxide of Iron, (Rouge,).. .36 
This is one of the many mixtures, and the best, ta ascertain the color- 
ing efi"ect of iron. Result — color, black red, and after exposure to the 



102 THE DENTAL TIMES. / 

rays of the sun in alcohol produced a dark red, much darker than the 
Co.'s rubber. The texture was good. 

Numerous experiments were tried to ascertain the quantity of Vermil- 
lion necessary to overcome the natural brown and produce a red color 5 
the following mixture may be set down as the lowest: 

D. — Caoutchouc, 48 

Sulphur, 24 

Vermillion, 36 

This produced a good strong compact rubber, closely resembling the 
Co.'s. Some mixtures made according to this formula were darker, 
others lighter, owing to the different varieties of vermillion used. To 
bring it to a bright red it would require about equal proportions of caout- 
chouc and vermillion. 

E, — Caoutchouc, • 48 

Sulphur, 24 

White Oxide of Zinc, 30 

Vermillion, 10 

This, after being placed in alcohol and exposed to the rays of the sun, 
produced a pink similar to the English 5 texture good, but not so strong 
as D. 

To test the coloring power of white oxide of zinc, the following results 
are given : 

Gray, F. Lighter, G. Light Drab, H. 

Caoutchouc,.. . •. 48 48 48 

Sulphur, 24 24 24 

White Ox. of Zinc, 18 24 36 

The effect of the oxide of zinc was not developed until after the action 
of the sun in alcohol. 

The following formula will produce a jet black. Ivory black is pre- 
ferable to lamp black for giving a good color. 

/. — Caoutchouc, ^ 48 

Sulphur, 24 

Ivory Black, 24 

To obtain a yellow, chrome yellow was tested ; it gave a slate color, 
the chromate of lead being decomposed by the sulphur. King's yellow 
gave satisfactory results ; this being sulphuret of arsenic, it is inadmissi- 
ble for dental purposes. 

J. — Caoutchouc, 48 

Sulphur, 24 

King's Yellow, 36 

This, like all the light colors, requires to be placed in alcohol, and acted 
upon by the rays of the sun for its development ; it then gives a bright 
yellow. 



I 



I 



CAOUTCHOUC. 103 

A very pretty mottled substance for handles, &C.5 may be made 
by packing together small pieces of these different colored mixtures, and 
after being vulcanized, treating as above described to bring out the colors. 

To color rubber, three points are essential. First, the color must 
remain unchanged at the heat required for vulcanization. Second, it 
must withstand the action of sulphur at this temperature ; and third, suf- 
ficient quantity must be added to overpower the natural brown of vulcan- 
ized rubber before the effect is produced ; hence all highly colored rubber, 
or where the brown is widely departed from, must, by its being loaded 
with so much color or foreign matter, be weakened ; in proof of this, I 
have found no other mixture possessing strength and toughness equal to 
that made of simply caoutchouc and sulphur, (v^.) 

The following table gives, very nearly the percentage of caoutchouc 
contained in the preceding formula. 

Caoutchouc. Sulphur Vermillion. Parts in. 

./^.— Brown, 6Gi 33^ 100 

D.— Eed, 44. 22 33 99 

Ox. Zinc. 

i:.— Pink, 42! 21^ 9 27 100 

F.— Gray, 53^ 26f 20 100 

G.— Lighter Gray,. . .50 25 25 100 

H,— Drab, 44 22 33 99 

Iyotv Black. 

/.—Black, 30 25 25 100 

• Orpiment. 

/.—Yellow, 44 22 33 99 

White Earthy Matter. 

English Pink, 24 12 18 48. 102 

The calculation for the component parts of the English pink rubber is 
based upon the method patented for making it given on page 75, the 
quantity of fixed matter it is found to contain, and taking the formula D, 
as the composition of red rubber. It will be found, upon examination of 
this data, that if there is any error in the quantity of caoutchouc given 
to the English pink, it is in its favor. A glance at the above table will 
at once show its great inferiority to either the brown or red for dental 
purposes. 

Caoutchouc being the cement which binds the whole together, if in this 
or in other composition which contain it in a small proportion, any sub- 
stance prejudicial to the system should enter into its composition, (and in 
the patent above referred to such substances are recommended,) its weak- 
ness of texture would render it liable to produce injurious effects by its 
susceptibility to abrasion in the mouth. 

[TO BK CONTINUED.] 



104 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

MAKING ATO POINTING INSTEUMENTS. 

BY GEO. B. SNOW, D. D. S. 

In the operative department of dentistry, much depends upon the pos- 
session of instruments of the proper size, shape, and temper, and, if not 
actually indispensable, it is still of the greatest importance for the dentist 
to be thoroughly acquainted with the leading steps in their manufacture, 
and to be able to repair and alter them to suit his views. The smaller 
instruments used in dentistry are very liable to be broken, and that, too, 
at times when the accident may be a source of great inconvenience, if not 
annoyance. I think the chances of such accidents are much diminished 
if the owner tempers them himself, and is therefore better liable to judge 
of the amount of strain they will bear. My object in this essay is not to 
recount the steps in the manufacture of all kinds of instruments, but 
merely those with which every dentist ought to be acquainted. 

The first requisite in the manufacture of instruments, where great 
hardness and elasticity are expected, is that they be made of the best of 
steel. Among the varieties of this alloy, if I may so term it, that which 
is known as cast-steel stands pre-eminent for these qualities. It is also 
more homogeneous in its texture than any other variety. It is made by 
melting the crude, or blister steel, casting it into ingots, and afterwards 
hammering and rolling these ingots into bars. Grood steel should present 
a fine grain, free from flaws, when broken. That which is in bars of a 
flat or square section is better than round, from the more thorough con- 
densation which can be given to it. It is important that the square sec- 
tion be preserved in the working of steel, or any metal, under the hammer. 
While it is kept in this form, the blows of the hammer tend to condense 
it, but when it is permitted to assume any other shape, as rhomboidal, for 
instance, the tendency of a blow upon it will be to slide the particles upon 
one another, and will soon break up the texture, and fill the bar with flaws. 
In forging steel, great attention should be paid to the heat, which should 
not be permitted to go beyond a cherry red. If it is carried much beyond 
this, the steel will be overheated, or, as it is commonly called, burnt. 
The precise nature of this change is not very plain, but the change itself 
is sufiSciently obvious. If a bar of steel in this state is compared with 
one that has not been overheated, it will be found to have a larger, coarser 
grain than the other, and to have lost its tenacity in a great degree, so 
much so that it is no longer capable of keeping a good edge. Steel in 
this state may be restored in a measure by repeatedly heating and ham- 
mering until nearly cold. 

As steel comes from under the hammer it is hard enough to be 
very destructive to files, from the condensation which it has undergone 
'It is therefore best to anneal it. This is generally done by bringing it 



MAKING AND POINTING INSTRUMENTS. 105 

to a red heat, and then placing it in a bed of some non-conducting 
material, such as pulverized charcoal, lime, or plaster. It is not 
important what this material is, as its only object is to retain the heat as 
long as possible. 

There is another way, more particularly applicable to pieces of con- 
siderable size, which is known as " cold-water annealing." The article 
is brought to a red heat, then placed in some dark place, and sujffered to 
cool gradually until it ceases to be luminous ; it is then plunged into cold 
water. It will be seen at once that this way is much quicker than the 
former one, but the result may seem, at first, rather paradoxical ; but if 
we consider the process of tempering, we shall see that the explanation is 
perfectly simple. In tempering hardened steel, we gradually raise the 
heat, and cause it to pass through various gradations of color, until we 
come to the one denoting the degree of softness we require. As the 
temperature of the steel is raised, the softer does it become, but on being 
again plunged into water, the hardness is not restored, unless we have 
raised it to a red heat. If, therefore, we plunge it into water, at a tem- 
perature just below that which will just suffice to harden it, we may 
expect to find it as soft as it can be made. Again, if the extremity of a 
bar of steel is brought to a red heat, and plunged into water, the line 
between the hard and soft portions of the bar will be found very narrow. 
I might almost say the change was instantaneous. Very small articles of 
steel are annealed with difficulty in the common way, as the air abstracts 
the heat from them so quickly as to harden them. It is best to envelope 
them in some non-conducting material, and bring them to a red heat, and 
then sufi'er them to cool gradually. The next step in the manufacture of 
an instrument will be shaping it with a file ; but, after the process it has 
already been through, it will be found covered with a hard scale which is 
very destructive to files. If there are many pieces to be filed, it will be 
advisable to place them in a " pickle" of dilute acid, to remove this scale. 
They may then be filed with more ease. A coafse file may be used until 
they are nearly of the desired shape, when it should be exchanged for a 
finer one. Means should then be taken to get rid of the file marks altogether, 
and to leave the instrument perfectly smooth and bright, as it is much 
easier to discern the proper color in hardening and tempering. 

If excavators are to be made, they next require bending and bringing 
to an edge. If the bend is to be the flat way of the steel, it is best to 
flatten and then bend it, and vice versa. They should be then trimmed 
up with a file, and brought into the shape desired. 

Pluggers have almost always serrated points. In the old method of 
using gold foil, where no dependence was placed on its adhesive property, 
these serrations were useful, as they rendered the instrument less liable 



106 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

to slip, and gave it a better hold on the foil when it was to be carried to 
the bottom of the cavity. But in the method of using foil which has 
come into use within a few years past, these serrations are not only useful, 
but indispensable. It may be well, before we describe the different ways 
of serrating pluggers, to consider, for a moment, what are the requisites 
of a good instrument. It is of the greatest importance in using foil, or 
crystal gold, where dependence is placed in part, or entirely, on its adhe- 
sive properties, that the surface of the gold, as condensed, should be 
kept perfectly rough, and, on this account, the end of the instrument 
employed should contain a number of points, approaching, as near as may 
be, to mathematical exactness. It is also necessary that they be very 
acute. The importance of this may be shown in the diminished useful- 
ness of an instrument that is too soft, where the points have become 
slightly dull. 

Where the gold is very adhesive, as in using annealed gold, for instance, 
this is an important requisite to a good instrument. But where the 
foil is used without any preparation, it is also of importance, although 
perhaps not equally so, that the instrument be so formed as to condense 
the gold quickly and without cutting it to pieces. This point seems to be 
lost sight of sometimes, as we often see points formed by means of two 
series of grooves, one on each side of the instrument, and running obliquely 
towards each other, thus forming not only a row of points, but also an 
edge extending from one point to another. In such an instrument, the 
tendency will be, instead of gathering the gold together and condensing 
it, to force it apart and cut it to pieces, and though such results may not 
be so apparent, they are still produced to an extent varying with the 
adhesiveness of the gold, and the operator who succeeds well with such 
an instrument may thank the excellence of his material more than that of 
the instrument. The form of serration with which I have been most 
successful, in my rather limited experience, is that which is formed by 
bringing the instrument to an edge, then passing a file directly across the 
edge to form it into points. 

I use a " flat oval" separating file, with a safe side, almost exclusively 
in serrating instruments. As it gets dull, I grind off the edge on the 
safe side at a slight bevel. It will then form a notch which runs as near 
an angle as possible. But the great advantage of using this kind of file 
is the facility with which the serrations can be regulated, if necessary, 
I often " lay them out," as it might be termed, by rubbing the instrument 
across a rather coarse file, but I prefer to finish them with the file above 
described. 

It is generally the best way to make the serrations with the instrument 
straight, and bend it as desired afterwards. They are then ready to be 



DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DENTAL PROFESSION. 107 

tempered. It is advisable, as a preparatory step, to cover the instrument, 
as far as it is to be heated, with some flux, to protect it from oxidation. 
Soap answers the purpose perfectly, and is always at hand. Prussiate of 
potash is highly recommended for this purpose, and it is said that a lower 
heat is required to harden the steel when this is used. The instrument, 
after being so coated, is to be brought to a red heat, and then plunged 
into water. If there are many to be hardened, a bath of red hot lead is an 
excellent and quick way of doing it. Where the blow-pipe is used, the 
shank of the instrument should first be heated, then by carrying the 
instrument obliquely with the flame, the point may also be heated. Care 
should be taken not to overheat the steel. After being hardened, the 
instrument should be brightened with some fine powdered spar, flour of 
emery or emery paper, and is then ready for tempering. 

It often requires some acquaintance with the qualities of the steel of 
which the instruments are made, in order to secure the exact temper 
desired. Steel varies in hardness according to the degree of carboniza- 
tion it has undergone. As a general rule, our instruments require to be 
brought to a dark straw color at the cutting edges, the rest of the har- 
dened part of the instrument should be brought to a blue, or spring, tem- 
per. It is generally advisable to hold a piece of cold iron against the 
part of the instrument that is to be the hardest, as it will partially con- 
duct away the heat, and suff"er the blue color to come nearer the point than 
it otherwise would. Small excavators often require a spring temper for 
some distance up the shank, to prevent their bending. The best way I 
have found to temper them is first to temper the cutting part. Then 
placing a drop of water on a piece of cold iron, and holding the cutting 
part in it, the remainder of the instrument may be drawn to the temper 
required. 

Buffalo, N. T., December, 1864. 



DUTIES AND KESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DENTAL PEOFESSION. 

BY D. K. BOUTELLE. 
Read before the Merrimac Valley Dental Association November 3d, 1864. 

Were we to assert it to be the duty of every man who ofi"ers himself to 
the public as a dentist, to be properly qualified for that position, and then 
to perform all operations that come under his treatment to the best of his 
ability, and always to recommend just such as he sincerely thinks for the 
best interest of his patients, would be, simply, to affirm that every dentist 
ought to be an honest man. And that he is responsible for the efi'ect or 
non-eff"ect of his operations, will not, perhaps, be questioned by any. 

But that the dental profession is responsible for the condition of 
the teeth of the whole community, whether the individuals composing 



108 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

that community all come under our special manipulations or not, and 
that it is the duty of our profession, eventually, to do away, almost 
if not entirely, the necessity of the dentist at all, may not be so 
apparent to every mind. To these points I propose to call the attention 
of this meeting for a few moments. 

Is any one startled at the idea that we, as a profession, are responsible 
for the condition of the teeth of that part of the community who never 
call on us for our services or advice, and who seem to have very little, 
if any appreciation of the value of these organs, and quite as little idea 
of the means necessary for their preservation, let me ask him, who is 
responsible for the education, or non-education, of the rising generation 1 
Is it that generation itself, or the one preceding it, which is already 
able, in some degree, to appreciate the benefits of education ? Who is 
responsible for the health of a city or community 1 Is it the mass of the 
people, those most effected by disease when it sweeps through their ranks ? 
Or is it not rather the Board of Health, the government, and the more 
educated class, who are better able to understand the causes that produce, 
and the means that prevent disease. 

It is not enough that the physician is able to cure the specific cases of 
a contagious or epidemic disease that come under his treatment. But if 
he be a true man, a true physician, is truly imbued with the divine spirit 
of the healing art, he bends his mind to discover the specific causes, and 
then not only the means of cure bVit also the means of prevention. And 
not only will he do this, but, when he thinks he has found it, he does not put 
his light under a bushel, nor lock it up in his medicine case, nor yet alone 
in his own brain ; but he publishes it to the world. He lets his light 
shine. He not only lets it shine but he makes it shine. He enforces it 
upon the public mind by precept upon precept until he gains attention, 
and thereby educates the people on that special subject. 

What a glorious example, in point, has the world in the case of vacci- 
nation, as a prevention of small-pox ; and yet, were that left to the masses 
who are to be benefitted by it, to execute, without the continuous efforts 
of physicians, and governments and scientific men, the name of Jenner would 
be forgotten and the art of vaccination become unknown, except to a few, 
and they would keep it to themselves. Even now, when its benefit is so 
fully shown by the experience of the world, whenever that terrible scourge, 
small-pox, visits any locality, how many are surprised by its attack, not 
having availed themselves of the benefit of the great preventive. 

Now who is responsible for all this neglect 1 We say the physician, 
scientific men, the educated class, those who should, and must be the 
educators. He who, by thus educating the public mind and thereby pre- 
venting whole communities from falling victims to some fell disease, 



DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DENTAL PROFESSION. 109 

although the world at large may not even know what he has done for it, 
has really done a greater service than he who has cured a hundred specific 
cases and thereby gained for himself great renown. 

Again, the philanthropist in his labors of love and benevolence is not 
content merely to pluck here and there an individual from the fires of 
intemperance, the dens of vice and pollution, or the chains of human 
bondage, as brands from the burning, nor yet, even to save whole classes 
of erring and wrong ones 

" Who've slipped in life's too slippery paths," 

or been crushed beneath the cruel heel of oppression, and place them 
back ao-ain in society, though scathed and scarred by the burning hells 
through which they have passed ; but he studies to devise some means to 
save whole generations from the temptations, the falls and the evils which 
others have experienced, and thereby prevent the very necessity of reform 
and of reformers. When he thinks he has discovered the means which, 
if used, may accomplish the end he has at heart, he does not hoard them, 
merely to speculate upon in his own mind, or with which to regale a friend 
and help him to kill an otherwise idle hour, but he goes to work. He 
sends out a Gough and a Hawkins to preach temperance ; a Coles to 
preach and write and publish the abominations of tobacco ; a Thompson, 
a Phillips and a Douglass, to thunder in the ears of community the deep 
damnation of human slavery. And so of all the evils he attempts to 
reform. He enforces his thoughts with all the powers of reason, 
eloquence and wit which he can command. He publishes tracts, books, 
periodicals and newspaper articles, and sends them forth broadcast among 
the people, and by every means in his power he seeks to educate the 
public mind and the public heart, upon the subject he has in hand. 

Think how the Pilgrim Fathers of our own New England steadily, 
earnestly and persistently infused their thoughts into all around them, 
and thus moulded the character of our most cherished institutions. 
See how the institutions of New England are moulding the character and 
destiny of this vast republic. And ye who can discern the signs of the 
times, behold how this republic is yet to shape the character and 
destiny of the world and give it the glorious light of freedom. The 
world is ready to receive light and knowledge and freedom whenever these 
benefits are presented in sufficiently bright colors to attract its attention, 
but it never goes after them. The electricity of the universe is not per- 
ceived by the multitude except when it flashes on us in the form of light- 
ning accompanied by the reverberating thunder. The besotted inebriate 
is content to grovel in his swinish condition, with no attempt to free himself 
from the horrible pit and the miry clay of intemperance, till some friendly 
hand is stretched out to him and some kind voice whispers in his ear that 



110 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

the fire of manhood is not yet wholly extinguished. The bond slave 
mulishly toils for his oppressor without a thought that he can be anything 
better. He does not seek the knowledge which might make him free. 
But tell him he is a man and you cannot hold him longer. You must 
take your heel off his neck. All the light, intelligence and knowledge 
in the world are preserved, and increased and diffused but by the earnest, 
persistent and energetic efforts of those who possess them, to teach them 
to others. And dentistry, the art of preserving the human teeth for all 
the purposes for which they were designed, is no exception to the general 
rule. 

We are aware that there is a class of persons outside the profession 
who look upon dentists as a sort of necessary evil that must be endured, 
and dentistry as a kind of professional torture to be dreaded more than 
toothache. They think dentists a sly curious sort of genius who have 
some wonderful secret of their own which they would not divulge for 
the world, for fear people's teeth would decay no longer and their 
craft would be spoiled. They suppose the great object of the profession 
to be, to produce all the dental business possible. Consequently,- when 
driven by toothache or deformity, dreaded more, they apply to a dentist ; 
they sit down in his chair with fear and trembling, not so much for 
the operation they wish him to perform as for fear he will perform some 
operation on their teeth that shall destroy them, that he may have the 
opportunity to make them a new set some other day. They feel no con- 
fidence in him. They only employ him because compelled by circum- 
stances, and he is the only man who has the instruments and knows the 
witchery of their use. Every dentist knows how disagreeable it is to 
operate for such patients. He knows they distrust him, and knows, too, 
that they distrust him because ignorant of his true interest as well as 
their own. Why is it that so many persons get such absurd ideas of 
dentists and dentistry ? Simply because on no other subject of half so 
much public worth is there so much public ignorance as * on this : and we 
regret to be compelled to say it is not confined to the low, or those sup- 
posed to be ignorant people, but we find it in all ranks of society, even 
among scientific men. Yes, even among the medical profession there is 
only now and then a man who appreciates the subject sufficiently to realize 
that it is a matter of importance enough to attract the attention of any 
man of sufficient capacity to fit him for a doctor. 

Now who is at fault for all this ignorance and want of appreciation 
of this branch of surgery? We say the dentist. We would not be 
understood to say, that here, in the Valley of Merrimac, we find an igno- 
rant community. Far from it. Scotland's poet said that " a ploughman 
is not to be deemed an ignorant man because he knows not how to read, 



DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DENTAL PROFESSION. Ill 

if he knows how to plough." And so we would say that people are not 
to be considered ignorant because they are not versed in every profession, 
if they are well informed in their own. Yet we cannot help thinking it 
very desirable, as well as useful, that the ploughman should possess some 
intelligent ideas of a great many other things besides ploughing. And 
one of them should be the nature of his own teeth, their use and abuse. 
So that when we speak of the want of knowledge on this subject we do 
not mean to say, or imply, that we practice among an ignorant people, 
but simply that there is a great want of information relative to this branch 
of science. And why is tljis so ? Why are there so many who under- 
stand so little of their true interest, relative to dentistry and dentists'? 
Simply because the means of knowledge on this subject have never been 
presented to them. How can they learn without teachers, and who shall 
teach them if dentists will not ? 

And this brings us back to our starting point, that the dental profes- 
sion is responsible for the condition of the teeth of the whole community, 
and that it is our duty to educate the public in this branch of knowledge. 

And now, my brothers, how shall we meet this responsibility 1 Shall 
we go on content merely to patch up the defective teeth which are 
presented to us for treatment, and supply artificial substitutes in place of 
those which are entirely gone ? Shall we be content with patch-work 
and artificial appliances, without making an efibrt to regenerate society 
on this subject, with the hope that the world may one day present a 
better dental aspect, with less need of the services of the dentist than at 
present ? Every dentist well knows that a large proportion of the cases 
presented to him of defective and ruined teeth are the result of the 
patient's own carelessness and want of proper attention to those organs. 
This neglect and mismanagement is chiefly occasioned by the absence of 
the requisite information. It is true there is a vast amount of matter 
printed on the subject of dentistry, but most of it is adapted to the 
reading of dentists rather than the common reader, and, besides, is only 
published in books and journals which, from their expense, never find 
their way, to any considerable extent, into the hands of the public, and, 
if they should, they would be little better than nothing, being too 
voluminous, too much lumbered with useless speculations, too much chaflf 
for the wheat. The mass of the people will never have patience to sift it 
out. They need something by which they can get at the true grain at 
once, some concise and definite instructions. We do not propose to make 
dentists of every one, because we would have them understand some- 
thing of dentistry, any more than we would have every body preachers, 
because all should know something of religion and theology ; but we 



112 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

would simply give all sucli general information on this subject as shall 
be of practical use in directing them as to what they shall do, and 
what avoid for the preservation of their teeth. How much more agree- 
able it always is for the dentist to operate for patients who have some 
intelligent idea of what should be expected of him and his operations 
than it is for those who have sot ; and how perplexing it often is to work 
for the latter class. They simply understand that a tooth is a tooth, and 
a dentist is a fool if he cannot preserve one as well as another. They 
know toothache is toothache, and they do not think much of a dentist 
who cannot apply some medicine that will cure it, no matter from what 
cause, or what is the condition of the painful organ. They are aware 
that their teeth are decaying, but say they will " wait awhile and then 
have it all done up at once." They do not understand that a tooth filled 
at the proper time is any better for them than if delayed until but a 
fragment of it remains. When they have been to the dentist, and had 
their teeth filled, and afterwards neglected them entirely, they cannot 
understand why they are not as well preserved as those of some other 
persons whom they know, and who are particular to keep the teeth per- 
fectly clean, and the fillings bright and pure. 

One great object which it seems to us merits the attention of the dental 
profession, is to educate the public mind in dental matters. We do not 
propose, gentlemen, at the present time, to offer any definite plan for the 
accomplishment of this object. Our purpose has been simply to call 
attention to it, hoping that you will give it such thought and action as 
you may think the importance of the subject demands, rather than that 
of the feeble and bungling manner in which we have presented it may 
indicate. 

Dr. Allport, of Chicago, with the assistance of some other dentists at 
the West, contributors to his journal, is doing something in this direction, 
by publishing and distributing a little journal on popular dentistry, called 
" The Peoples' Dental Journal." To us this seems at present one of the 
best and most efficient means within our reach. We need have no fears 
that any amount of dental information possessed by the people will lessen 
the practice of any well qualified and efficient dentist while the necessity 
for his services exists ; but the opposite is true. The less intelligence 
there is, the less attention is given to the teeth, and the less credit the 
dentist receives for what he does. It is for our interest, as well as our 
patients, that all the information possible be diff"used among the people 
with whom we practice. 

Maschbstbb, N. H.^ November 3, 18C4. 



IMPORTANCE OF THE TEETH. 113 

IMPOETANOE OP THE TEETH. 

BY J. H. ALLEX. 

In reviewing the importance of those organs from which the science of 
dentistry has originated, we cannot stop short of that wide range which 
embraces the whole structure of man. 

Uy the influence of those substances which the teeth are intended to 
modifiy and render fit for nutrition, we have consequences induced of a 
serious character in proportion to the neglect of mastication, the nature 
of the substance introduced into the stomach, and the constitutional 
peculiarities of the individual. Many articles of food are of such a 
nature as to incite, when introduced into the stomach in an unprepared 
state, the severest irritation ; it is therefore necessary for the teeth to 
remain in their normal condition. From infancy, nature directs attention 
to their importance by the prominent symptoms which mark their develop- 
ment, and accompany the process of dentition through more advanced 
stages. An obvious correspondence exists between the appearance of the 
teeth and the development of the digestive powers, which is sustained by 
the immediate sympathy and dependence of the latter upon them. As 
these organs refer to a more substantial aliment than the stomach of the 
infant is capable of digesting, it is reasonable to infer that their successive 
appearance corresponds, at every period, with the condition of the stomach, 
to which they bear such an intimate relation ; any interruption, therefore, 
of their integrity must implicate the stomach, and involve consequences 
proportionate in some degree to the extent of their morbid condition, and 
the length of time such condition has existed. These organs are seldom 
referred to as the original agents in the production of morbid affections, 
yet it is but a rational inference, sustained by the laws of cause slxhI 
effect, to refer to them and improper mastication many of the complicateo 
evils which afflict mankind. 

Dyspepsia, often induced by the habit of hurried mastication, affords 
sufficient evidence of the dependence of the stomach upon the teeth, and 
the necessity of their proper use. The hasty and imperfect mastication 
of a single meal is often repelled by the stomach, and each error pro- 
claimed by symptoms most serious — errors which frequently lay the foun- 
dation of diseases which medical skill may fail to eradicate. Thus 
we have an instance of their importance, in the consequences which 
attend their imperfect employment, either through neglect, diseased con- 
dition, or total absence. Some eminent men have attributed such import- 
ance to the stomach, as to maintain its isolated agency in the origin of a 
majority of the diseases by which man is afflicted. Now, if this organ 
possesses an influence so direct, how important must be the nature of the 
substances introduced into it, also the condition of the teeth by which 
8 



114 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

such substances are rendered either pernicious or useful, and which 
are to become, by their proper or improper preparation for digestion, 
the agents of health or disease. Persons who have lost their teeth 
masticate imperfectly, causing slow digestion, the gastric juice acting 
with difficulty upon food not finely comminuted. 

The science of dental surgery claims an importance far beyond that 
associated with the personal convenience or appearance of the individual, 
in which limited view it is often regarded by the transient suffering or 
partially deformed. In its powers of reparation, it is of vast importance 
to the health, consequently the happiness of man, and it claims that 
power which rejuvenates the countenance, and secures to the individual 
immunity from many physical maladies. 



« *>^ » 



QUACK DENTISTS IN THE WEST. 

BY H. SCOTT, M. D. 

When we speak of the " West," from our sanctum in the beautiful city 
of Lancaster, our thoughts are projected over the wide prairies, rivers 
and cities from five hundred to two or three thousand miles towards sun- 
down. ** West," then, is a relative term, and we use it because, of 
course, the numerous readers of the Times, along the seaboard and 
through the trans-Alleghany States, cannot separate, in their minds, 
Ohio, Indiana, &c.,from the " West." Nevertheless, we are in the habit 
of thinking the State of Ohio to be an old State, a very great and wealthy 
State, and so it is. It has also many beautiful towns, and cities, and 
institutions, comparable with any on the continent. But to our subject. 

I cannot think that a faithful portraiture of '^ quack dentists in the 
West " will be productive of agreeable feelings in educated men of our 
profession, or profitable to any body ; yet the picture may, by contrast 
with the present status of dental science, show '^ from whence we have 
been digged,'' and reveal the advances that have been made in surgical 
and mechanical dentistry within the last quarter of a century. 

I have not the means of knowing whether the older States, lying east 
of the mountains, have been infested with that class of peddling scoundrels 
which have overrun the West within my time ; if they have, I can only 
say " Good Lord, have mercy on " their patients. But I must condense, or I 
shall exceed the limits I intended. I will select a few examples from a 
few scores of quack dentists whom I have known. 

When I settled in Lancaster, twenty-three years ago, a dentist had 
just left. He had been in the place a few months, and, being a genius, 
had done a large amount of filling. Out of some two hundred of his 



QUACK DENTISTS IN THE WEST. 115 

fillings, wliich I subsequently removed, I did not find over a dozen (and 
they were small ones) that were not two-thirds or three-fourths tin foil, 
the surface only being gold. His fillings were well enough put in to stay 
there, but the cavities were not prepared. He received the price of gold 
fillings for them all. 

A preacher, who has been dismissed from his circuit, set up dentistry 
in this county. He carried his kit in a tin box, and rode in a sulky. 
He did not leave a house in Fairfield county unvisited, and picked up a 
good deal of money by his impertinent diligence. His outfit consisted of 
an old-f\ishioned turnkey, about three pairs of iron forceps, some files and 
steel excavators, a vial of crude mercury, a pill-box filled with silver 
dust, some tin foil, and a few pivot teeth. It is sixteen years since, and 
his wake is clearly visible yet, from the wholesale destruction of human 
teeth. He finally whipped his wife and fled. 

An " accomplished " old gentlemen went from chair-making to the 
counter, and afterwards, when adversity had overtaken him, proclaimed 
himself knight of the forceps, at about the age of sixty. He plugged 
eight teeth one morning before breakfast, and, as he told me, got eight dol- 
lars for it. The same teeth were re-filled by myself one year later. This 
old man deserved no reproach for wrong intentions, he had simply under- 
taken to do that which his age and qualifications made it impossible for 
him to do ; that was all, and there are many to be found like him. But 
he is gone to his rest : peace to his ashes. As a citizen, he left a good 
name. 

An insignificant boor, who had patent rights to cure cancer, scrofula, 
syphilis, &c., carried with him also an equipment something like him of the 
sulky, and runs a career somewhat like him, except that he is still 
tolerated in the community. This fellow actually got permission, b}' calling 
at residences in the country, to fill some molars that I had long before 
refused to fill, and which the fears of the patients had not allowed me to 
extract. Twenty-four hours after his visits, in some cases, brought the 
suff'ering victims to my ofiice, when, after removing the teeth, I found the 
tin foil, or amalgam, impinging upon the exposed pulps. The lesson, 
though expensive, was salutary to the girls, in pushing them to get rid of 
some worthless teeth that should long before have been extracted. There 
is some good evoked from almost everything, whether intended right or 
wrong, but this cannot be allowed as an argument in favor of quackery 
in anything. This fellow is one of a set of unscrupulous scamps who 
stop at no means to get money, and can be found everywhere. He is, at 
this writing, " under my nose," and, by his impudence, finds daily victims. 

Finally, a man of our city, who was a good mechanic, and quite capable, 
in that line of business, of acquiring a liberal support, suddenly conceived 



116 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

the Wea that dentistry was a paying business, and at it he went, after a 
pupilage of at least six full weeks with a preceptor of the class I have been 
describing. After a trial of a few months, in the very place where he 
had for some years been making bureaus and bedsteads, and not finding 
his office crowded with patients to the extent of his imaginings, he 
actually procured, to be published in the two county papers of the place, 
the following unique advertisement : 

DENTISTRY. 

"The undersigned, surgeon dentist of Lancaster, being conscious that the 
Ijrices hitherto charged by dentists for operatiims ujjon the teeth are exorbitant 
and unjust, will, in the future, be governed by the following bill of fees : 

For setting teeth on gold plate, $125 each. 

<» '' silvvr plate, 75 

' " pivot teeth, 50 

For cleaning teeth, 50 

For filling with gold, 50 

" " tin, 25 

" " amalgam, -------- 20 

For extracting teeth, -------- 10 

W 

Although there are many persons everywhere who are easily caught 
with low prices, yet this efibrt of the doctor seems to have been laid on 
«, little too thick ; for in about one year thereafter, he was stitching shirt 
bosoms on a machine for bread, and is now a lunatic. 

And now, dear Times, I have given you a sketch, very briefly, of what 
is to be found, more or less, all over the land. I could fill your capacity 
•several times with amusing and ridiculous stories of the doings of these 
fellows, but I must not trespass upon your valuable space. 

The lessons taught by this state of things are, the ignorance of the 
people in regard to the nature and importance of dental science and 
practice, and the necessity for the general education of the masses upon 
' a subject second in importance only to the general health. We must 
have a dental literature for the million. The public mind must be 
educated up to the ability of self-protection, as in other departments of 
the affairs of life, before the world can get rid of these vampires and 
plunderers ; in no other way can they be driven from the field. Such 
men who have no higher motives than to get money, by whatever method, 
must either be frowned out of community, or compelled to qualify them- 
■fielves for so responsible a duty as that of taking charge of the health 
and repair of the teeth, upon which so many of the comforts and enjoy- 
ments of life depend. Every other useful science, that concerns the 
welfare of man, has it« popular literature and its educated professors, and 



ADVICE TO DENTAL STUDENTS. 117 

dental science is rapidly coming up to full communion. It has its colleges, 
its text books, its periodicals circulated among the profession, and it lias 
a host of talented men leading the van. Its practitioners are becoming, 
through increased and increasing facilities, equal in learning and ability 
to any set of men in the world. But the great want is a competent 
dental literature diffused among the whole people, in the form of books 
and periodicals. 



Lancaster Ohio. 



ADVICE TO DENTAL STUDEOTS. 

BY C. A. MILBANK. 

It is of the utmost importance that at the commencement of our course 
we should examine our taste and natural abilities, for " a poet is born, 
not made," and it is not every man who can make a dentist. Having 
determined to make this work the labor of our lives, let us consider 
what should be done to acquire the best possible information upon 
the subject. Upon this point too many of us have the false notion 
that if we only put ourselves under the tutelage of some good practitioner 
for a few months we may then rush into practice, full fledged, and equal 
to any emergency. But, practically, to what does this amount? Why, 
just this : one of us may go into the laboratory of an old practitioner, for 
he will see but very little of the operating room, a looker-on not being 
agreeable to the majority of patients. In the laboratory, for the first few 
weeks, by way of learning the ropes, he may clean the bowls, empty the 
plaster boxes, and his hands may become acquainted with pumice, rotten 
stone and oil, rouge, whiting, and brush wheels, and his foot with the 
lathe treadle, till his tendo achillis and tibialis anticus ache worse than 
the biceps of a blacksmith's apprentice. While resting from his labor at 
the lathe he may investigate hydrology and thermotension ; that is, he may 
watch the vulcanizer. When at this task, if he is not a bold fellow, he 
is to be pitied, for if he ever knew fear he is sure to renew its acquaint- 
ance. The poor fellow has been told to be careful to keep the thermometer 
standing at 320^ ; for if he lets the heat go below, the work will not be 
well done ; if above, he may be blown higher than — gold foil at $8 a book. 
Here, then, he is between the horns of a dilemma, and his only safety is 
to remain there ; for, take either horn, he is sure of a blow up, either 
from the vulcanizer or his preceptor, so he sits in terror with his eye on 
the thermometer and his hand upon the regulator, for under his unskillful 
hand the mercury bobs up and down like a jumping toothache, and he 
would about as leave have the one, as watch the other. 

Having stood this test of his nerves, patience, and endurance, in a few 
weeks more, if he is a good boy and takes kindly to the treadle, does not 



118 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

shirk the dirty work, and does not spill the plaster on the stairs, he may 
be permitted to take a lesson in metallurgy, melting lead and zinc ; he 
may even be allowed to make the mould into which the metal is to be cast ; 
and if he is a careful fellow and strikes square, it is not necessary to " hit 
straight from the shoulder," he may swedge up the plate. The next step is 
grinding the teeth to fit their places, and backing them up, as it is technically 
called. It will take some time to advance beyond this step ; but he must not 
expect to do all in a minute. Having accomplished it, however, which he 
will find no fool of a job, he may then interest himself in the subject of 
pneumatics; that is,, he may endeavor to breathe through his nose and 
blow through his mouth at the same time, and watch the eftect of the 
excess of oxygen, which he forces into the blaze, upon the light and heat 
of the flame. To do this without slobbering like an idiot, requires skill 
and practice. Having progressed so far, his laboratory education is about 
completed, and what can he do? Why the impression and articulation 
being given him he can make a set of teeth. ' But as for taking the 
impression or articulation, he knows nothing of either. For, as yet, he 
has not opened his oyster, only clipped the edge, and sees and feels but 
the rough outside. 

All this is important. A good Catholic must go through purgatory 
to reach Heaven. Having passed this dental Hades, let him take a 
course at one of our Dental Colleges ; for if he has a true love for the 
profession, here he can but enjoy himself. Here he can see all sorts 
of operations, and treat himself all sorts of cases under the eye of one 
who is perfect in the art, and always ready to give him most kindly aid. 
Here he will see and gain more in four months, than by four years spent 
in the private laboratory. 

While here, he must keep his " eyes and ears open," for he will find 
wisdom to fill the one, and beauties for the other. By beauties I don't 
mean the patients, though some of them are not so bad. He will listen 
to lectures such as he never heard before, and two hours each day he may 
spend in actual practice at the chair. Think of that, you poor drudges 
who mash your noses against the door in your vain attempts to get a 
glimpse through the key hole ! Here, too, the forceps are put into the 
hands of the poor trembler, and he, who once started and shivered at the 
mere sight of a lancet, soon becomes a bold and skillful operator. Here 
he may measure himself with the men around him, and by seeing what 
others can do will be stimulated to excel himself, and by the interchange 
of ideas with those around him he may learn much. Besides all this, let 
me tell you D. D. S. means Doctor of Dental Surgery, and nothing less 
— should content us. 

Philadblphia, December, 1864. 



DISEASES OF THE MAXILLARY SINUS. 119 

DISEASES OF THE MAXILLAEY SINUS. 

BY GEO. T. BARKER, D. D. S. 

The maxillary sinus, as its name indicates, is a large and important 
cavity, situated in eacli superior maxilla, extending from the floor of the 
orbit of the eye, to the palatine process which forms the roof of the 
mouth, and from the anterior to the posterior surface of the bone. It 
was first described by a celebrated anatomist, Nathaniel Highmore, and 
the cavity, in honor of him, has been denominated the antrum Highmoria- 
num, or the antrum maxillare. This cavity, in the human body, is nearly 
closed, there being but a small opening about the size of a common quill, 
which is situated at the middle part of the middle meatus of the nose, or 
that part between the lower and middle spongy bones. Besides its 
periosteal lining, it is invested with a membrane, which is known as the 
Schniderian membrane, upon which are distributed important nerves and 
vessels, also being studded with many mucous follicles, which pass 
obliquely into it, some of them being arranged in rows. 

The maxillary sinus is frequently the seat of disease, differing greatly 
in variety, extent, and duration; in the great majority of cases, howev^er, 
the disease is of a simple or non-maligaant character, but occasionally 
the disease which, in its incipient stages, was non-malignant, changes to 
the malignant type, the disorder then being impossible to overcome, 
eventually causing the death of the sufferer. At other times the disease 
will appear at the outset malignant in character, tumors and ulcers of a can- 
cerous nature presenting themselves. The secluded position of this cavity 
gives great importance to the abnormal conditions which arise within it -, 
thus a simple tumor may go on increasing in dimensions, giving but slight 
evidence of its existence or presence, and, in consequence of the secluded 
position, not revealing its true character until, perhaps, its nature is 
changed, and its destructive march caanot be arrested; the knife of the 
surgeon but temporarily giving relief, as the disease returns in a com- 
paratively short space of time. It is, therefore, imperatively necessary 
to give immediate attention to disorders of the maxillary sinus at the 
earliest possible moment ; and as the pain and inconvenience experienced 
is most frequently, and in many cases justly so, thought to be due to 
some diseased tooth or teeth, the dentist is the first to be consulted. If 
he ignorantly makes a false diagnosis, it may be fatal to the patient ; if, 
on the other hand, he recognizes and properly treats, or gives appropriate 
advice, so that it may be intelligently treated by the skillful surgeon, he 
will then have accomplished his whole duty, and will have justly per- 
formed the requirements of his profession. The lining membrane of this 
cavity is liable to all the disorders common to mucous tissue in other 
situations ; thus it may become congested, the membrane becoming engorged 
with blood, effusions of serum, lymph, or hemorrhage from the rupture of 



120 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

the weakened coats of tlie vessels taking place into the cavity. It may 
becomed inflamed, accompanied with phenomena of suppuration or the 
formation of pus, or ulceration by the production of an ulcer, or there 
may be developed within its walls certain morbid growths, having their 
origin either in the bony structures, or the fibrous tissue in the neighbor- 
hood. The presence of any one of these conditions modifies, more or 
less, the nutrition and secretion of the part, and, as a consequence, the 
abnormal secretions tend, by their presence, to aggravate and increase 
the disorder. 

I shall first direct attention to the condition last named, as it is the 
most common, and one which the dentist can treat as well, and perhaps 
better, than his brother of the medical fraternity. This disorder, in the 
books, is spoken of as dropsy, or retention of mucus, or as mucous engorge- 
ment. It diff'ers from dropsy as seen in other parts of the body, the 
effusion there being of a thin, watery character, being the serum or 
watery constituents of the blood, which engorge and distend the cellular 
tissues and important cavities. The eifusion which is seen in the antrum 
in this disorder is more of the nature of mucus, hence I consider that 
Harris appropriately termed it mucous engorgement. In the normal state, 
the secretion of this cavity either escapes into the nostril by the cavity 
previously mentioned, or evaporates from the passage of air through the 
nasal passages ; but when, from any cause, the antral opening becomes 
closed, the secretion, finding no means of exit, accumulates in the cavity, 
and undergoes degeneration. This degenerated fluid, by its presence, 
excites and irritates the lining membrane, which, in consequence, will 
pour out more than its usual quantity of secretion. The cavity will 
eventually become filled, and, as the secretion is still poured out, it will 
cause the whole of the fluid mass to act upon the bony walls which con- 
fine it, and however thick the walls, they must eventually yield, as they 
cannot withstand the pressure of the enclosed secretion, which is con- 
santly increasing in quantity and force ; hence the bones are pushed 
outwards, and an external evidence is given of the disease by the 
protrusion of the walls which generally present a rounded appearance to 
the eye. There is rarely any pain previous to the action of the fluid upon 
the bony walls, it is then due to pressure upon the delicate nerves which 
are distributed upon the Schniderian mucous membrane. The voice of 
the affected person is apt to be somewhat changed, as they will speak as if 
sufi"ering from a cold in the head ; this is due to the obstruction which 
exists in one of the nasal cavities and passages. 

The integuments externally will appear swollen and red ; but the dis- 
tension may take place in the mouth, under the orbit, or on the cheek, 
and, unless the fluid be evacuated, it will force the bones asunder. The 
diagnosis is not always easy ; but much light may be gained by seeking 



A CASE IN PRACTICE. 121 

for information from the patient, particularly, if it be an intelligent one. 
To determine whether it be a solid growth, or only an enclosed fluid, the 
patient should be questioned as to the absence or presence of pain during 
the early stages of the disorder. If it is stated that but little inconvenience 
was felt, accompanied with a sense of weight, and a feeling as if a fluid 
was present when the head is changed from side to side, it may be safely 
assumed that the disorder is a simple one and requires but simple treat- 
ment. The surest evidence of the presence of a fluid is the fact of its 
fluctuating beneath the finger ; this, however, will not occur until the 
bony walls have been pushed asunder, or perforation has been made at 
some point, so that the enclosed mass is only confined by the integuments. 
This morbid condition may arise, and frequently does, from the pre- 
sence of diseased teeth and fangs, and the first indication, in all cases, 
is to search for, and remove, any such irritants. It may also arise from 
exposure, particularly if the patient has contracted a severe cold. In 
my next, I shall consider the difierent modes of treatment with the other 
disorders of the antral cavity. 

TO DE COXTINUED. 



A CASE IN PEAOTIOE. 

BY EDWIX C. BAXTER, D. D. S. 

The patient had, about a year previous, been in charge of a practitioner 
who destroyed the nerves of the two superior first bicuspids, and without 
removing them, filled the crown cavities with amalgam. No inconvenience 
had been experienced since the operation, until quite recently an abscess 
had formed at the root of the right bicuspid, and a fistula established 
through the gum, from which quite a profuse discharge of pus was con- 
tinually flowing. The filling was removed, the canal thoroughly cleansed, 
and a fine drill passed entirely through the fang ; a broach was next 
wrapped with cotton to fit the nerve canal, making a sort of piston, which 
was saturated with creasote, and pumped back and forth in the root, until 
the agent was forced entirely through the fistula, its effects being plainly 
visible on the gum at its orifice. The tooth, after being thoroughly 
cleansed and filled, presented a much better appearance, the color being 
greatly improved, both by excavating, and the yellow tinge of the gold 
showing through the enamel. 

The nerve canal and crown cavity were immediately filled with gold, 
it being our practice to fill as soon as the creasote is forced entirely 
through a fistula. This case was successful, the abscess being cured, the 
fi.stula closed, and the color of the tooth A^ery much improved. 

The filling in the left bicuspid was next removed, the nerve canal 
thoroughly cleansed, and filled with floss silk saturated with creasote, 
over which was placed a plug of cotton and sandarach, and the patient 



122 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

directed to remove everything from the tooth, in case any inconvenience 
was experienced. A short time elapsed, and the removal of the plug was 
required, but the patient failed to follow the directions ; consequently, 
inflammation set in, and when the patient next called, there was evidently 
a collection of pus at the end of the root. 

In treating this, a fine drill was passed through the gum and alveolus 
to the sac at the end of the root, a slight discharge of pus following its 
withdrawal. A drill was now passed entirely through the foramen in the 
fang, a piston formed, and creasote forced from the nerve canal entirely 
through the opening made by the drill through the gum and alveolus, and 
the tooth filled immediately, as in the first case, and with the same happy 
result. 

Philadelphia, Pa., December, 1864. 



A CASE OP lEEEGULAEITT. 

BY n. MEREDITH WHITE, M. D., A. M. 

The following case called at the oflSce on August 23d, 1862. The 
right superior canine was inside of its proper place, the adjacent bicuspid 
and lat-eral incisor had approached considerably towards each other and 
prevented the eye tooth from inclining into its proper position. The 
patient was aged seventeen years. In the roof of the mouth, for a long 
time previous, the prominence caused by the tooth could be distinctly felt. 
The central and lateral and first bicuspid of the right side were somewhat 
out of place, as the figure will show/"; jThe main difficulty to overcome 
was the correction of the canine. It will be seen that the first bicuspid 
was too far forward. This tooth was drawn back against the second 
bicuspid by means of ligatures passing around it and the first molar ; in 
the course of a couple of weeks the tooth yielded. Then the plate repre- 
sented in the cut was placed in the mouth. It was attached to the 
bicuspids and molars of each side by means of half bands. Over the 
molars, caps were placed to prevent the jaws closing tightly so as to allow 
the point of the eye-tooth to pass over the lower teeth. A piece of wire 
was soldered to the plate next the first bicuspid of the opposite side, and 
extending across the roof of the mouth and within an eighth of an inch 
of the irregular tooth. On this wire was placed a piece of spiral spring, 
partly stretched, to make it a pushing spring, the end of which pressed 
against the canine tooth. One coil of the spring was turned over and 
made a concave surface, which adapted itself to the back part of the 
tooth and retained its place without the aid of further apparatus. The 
patient went to school in the country, and was able to visit the office but 
once in two weeks, at which times the spiral spring was stretched or a 
new and stronger one substituted. To treat the case in a proper manner 
the patient should have been seen once every three days at least. On 



MERRIMAC VALLEY DENTAL ASSOCIATION. 123 

account of the length of time between the visits, the case was not finished 
until the 16th of May, 1863. The treatment of this variety of irregularity 
is of great importance. Sometimes it may be necessary to remove the 
tooth as formerly was the general custom. It seems to be better practice 
to retain the eye-tooth and remove the lateral incisor, or bicuspid, particu- 
larly if the lateral is much decayed, or a small frail tooth, and to endeavor 
to correct the canine. If in regulating the teeth the upper jaw will 
become too large and out of proportion to the lower jaw, a tooth had 
better be removed, but only in cases of actual necessity. 

The above method was first used by Dr. J. D. White, and is most effi- 
cient and rapid in its operation. The wire within the spring prevents it 
from bending, and by turning the wire in any direction the force of the 
spring will be in that direction and will not slip oflf the tooth. It is far 
preferable to making holes or niches in the enamel to retain the point of 
wires that are to be screwed up every few days. Numerous cases have 
been treated with success by means of the spring. One in particular : 
a young man, nineteen years of age, the son of a distinguished surgeon of 
this city, who, with another one, thought it impossible to move the canine 
tooth by any power. The tooth was near the middle of the roof of the 
mouth : in about six months the case was finished, and he now has a 
complete arch of the upper jaw. The same plan can be applied to move 
a lateral, or bicuspid — any tooth, in fact, upon which the pressure can be 
directed. 



MEEEIMAO VALLEY DENTAL ASSOOIATIOK. 

BY G. A. GERRY. 

The Annual Meeting of the Merrimac Yalley Dental Association was 
held, November 3d, at the Council Room, City Hall Building, Man- 
chester, N. H. 

After transacting some unimportant business, proceeded to the election 
of officers for the ensuing year, when the following named gentlemen 
were chosen : 

President — A. Lawrence, M. D., of Lowell. 

Vice-Presidents— Dr, D. K. Boutelle, of Manchester ; Dr. E. Gr. Cum- 
mings, of Concord. 

Recording Secretary — Dr. Gr. A. Gerry, of Lowell. 

Corresponding Secretary — Dr. L. F. Locke, of Nashua. 

Treasurer — Dr. S. Lawrence, of Lowell. 

Librarian — Dr. Gr. A. Grerry, of Lowell. 

Executive Committee — Drs. C. Heath, of Manchester; D. T. Porter, 
of Lawrence ; A. Lull, of Nashua; S. L. Ward, of Lowell; E. Gr. Cum- 
mings, of Concord. 

Report of Treasurer was read and accepted. 



124 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

Dr. I. J. Wetberbee, of Boston, was unanimously elected an lionorary 
member of tbe Association. 

Drs. A. Lull, of Nashua, and AV. P. Kelly, of Franklin, were admitted 
as members. 

Dr. W. Gr. Ward, from a Committee on Dental Fees, appointed at the 
last meeting, reported, recommending the adoption, by this Association, 
of a uniform tariff of fees, and presented a list for acceptance : which, for 
want of time for proper discussion, was laid on the table until the next 
meeting. 

Dr. Locke, from a Committee appointed to take into consideration the 
matter of publishing a pamphlet, for the education of the people in regard 
to the teeth, reported : which report was accepted, and the committee dis- 
charged. 

A communication was received from B. S. Codman, of Boston, stating 
that he was in no way connected with the American Vulcanite Company, 
and that his sympathies were entirely with the Dental profession. 

A communication was read from Dr. E. G. Cummings, of Concord, and 
the thanks of the Association were tendered to him for the same. 

The following resolution, offered by Dr. Gerry, was unanimously adopted : 

Resolved, That it is the duty of every Dental practitioner to patronize 
no man or firm, who are connected in any manner with companies or in- 
dividuals who are attempting, unjustly, to claim of them remuneration for 
so-called patents. 

Dr. Wood introduced the following, which was adopted : 

Resolved, That the Merrimac Valley Association of Dental Surgeons 
heartily approve of the formation of a United States Dental Protective 
Union, and pledge it our united support; recommending it also to the 
favorable consideration of the profession generally. 

Dr. L J. Wetherbee then addressed the Association, explaining the 
objects of the Dental Protective Union, of which he is President. 

The following essay was then read : 

PROFESSIONAL EGOTISM. 

Br A. LAWRENCE, M. D. 

" Self-love never yet could look on truth, 
But with blear'd beams; sleek flattery and she 
Are twin-born sisters, and so mix their eyes, 
As if you sever one, the other dies." 

A reasonable respect for self is indispensable to the well-being and 
success of every man. Too little or too much is not beneficial in any 
proper sense, for, in either case, we regard the unfortunate victim as 
without the pale of propriety. One who has come to the conclusion, sans 
effort, that he has no qualifications, no genius or talents worth respecting, 
either by himself or others, generally acts in truthful, undisguised unison 



MERRIMAC VALLEY DENTAL ASSOCIATION. 125 

with his convictions, and is at any rate an honest man, though a fool. 
As a dentist, he will be gross in his habits and bungling in his practice. 
He will take no pains to improve either his head or his hand, for he justly 
thinks himself a mean scamp, worth neither the trouble nor the expense. 
Egotists, like other men, are possessed of difierent degrees of intelligence 
and education ; but with much of either the evil in question could not 
exist. Great men are not egotists ; per contra, egotists are not great men. 

Indigenous nowhere, egotism pervades all communities, and seems to 
spread with civilization, so that even this country bids fair to rival old 
Gascony, in that for which she was chiefly remarkable. Professional 
men, of all others, seem most susceptible to the insidious attacks of this 
dire monster. Clergymen, lawyers, physicians and dentists, are to be 
found swelling the ranks of the army under General Bombastes. 

Leaving to other professions the prerogative of looking after their own 
affairs, let us examine a representative from each class ; the ignorant, and 
the somewhat learned of our own. '* An ignorant dentist" is about the 
worst title a man ever had or can have, but when the prefix " egotistical" 
properly applies, it becomes absolutely disgusting. Delighted with the 
idea of being called " doctor," really unqualified to enter any profession, 
too lazy to pursue any laborious calling, believing dentistry to require 
very little brains, yet largely remunerative to those fortunately within its 
ranks 5 many a man has so far mistaken his true position as to undertake 
to discharge the delicate and responsible duties devolving upon the dental 
surgeon. 

Now, the very fact that an ignorant booby is found attempting the prac- 
tice of dentistry, is prima facie evidence of a large amount of concen- 
trated assurance, or egotism ; without which he would have foreseen what 
he had to encounter, and would have entered the profession only after a 
thorough preparation under the guidance of some able tutor, followed by 
the endorsement of the faculty of a Dental College. But, ignorant as he 
is, he thinks himself a genius, needing only a very little " showing" to be 
superior, or at least, equal to the best. He scorns the idea of putting 
himself under tuition for two or three years to learn so little, and then 
wasting his time and money in listening to the " stupid efforts of a set of 
stuck-up fellows, calling themselves professors," for four or eight months 
more. Three months occasional attendance in the office of some kind 
friend, who has, perhaps, "^a?ec/" his teeth, is all he needs, and he is 
ready to " locate." Of course he goes to the city, where his services are 
much needed, and where, in all probability, he will be appreciated, as 
city people know something, dress better, &c., &c. He takes rooms, and 
is prepared to render his services to those requiring a skillfuJ dentist. 
He hangs out at the door 

" A great uncouth golden tooth," 



126 



THE DENTAL TIMES. 



and a box, in which a few sets of rudely made teeth champ and clatter 
nervously together, as if for a wager. A notice, "Masticating done 
here," would make the thing complete. He heads his advertisements 
with a huge wood cut of a set of teeth, tells the public how many years 
he has been inserting teeth on vulcanized rubber ; boasts of the number 
of "■ hull" sets he has furnished ; enlarges verbosely on his " new machin- 
ery, and other extensive improvements introduced into his laboratory," as 
reasons why he can under-bid the lowest fees \ and informs the dear people 
that, " in consequence of his long experience, he is warranted in doing 
their work m the highest style of the art." How culpable must one be, 
who should have the temerity to perform a good operation in dentistry 
with a short experience, however well qualified I 

Our ignorant egotist has other ways of showing his ruling passion, 
beside advertising. His dress and manners too plainly indicate how the 
waters run. Supercilious in the extreme, his blatant conversation, alike 
disgusting to every one, invariably displays the pronoun of the first person 
singular at every word. Brutal and bungling in a practice, based upon no 
theory, he vaunts his skill; to increase the faith of hjs "customers." 
Neither inuendoes nor positive Ijing, about his more w\)rthy competitors 
for public favor, lack utterance. Their private character is assailed ; their 
public acts called in question ; their professional efforts ridiculed and 
pronounced worthless. All this, and much more, from one who is a 
nuisance anywhere ; but particularly in a profession to which he is a dis- 
grace. How long will the public tolerate and encourage such fellows ? 

Leaving, in utter disgust, the boastful character just under considera- 
tion, I turn to another, and for some reasons, more tolerable class of 



egotists, 



1. e.. 



the educated ones. Of these men, comparatively little need 



be said in derogation, as, unlike the ignorant, they strive to excel, and 
frequently do. Many of them are splendid operators. They are ambi- 
tious and fond of flattery, but their constant tribulation is, an apprehen- 
sion that all the world will fail to accord to their performances an excel- 
lence unapproachable by others. Should an operation of equal, or even 
superior merit come under their observation, no acknowledgment of such 
merit escapes them. Probably, or rather possibly, they will admit that 
" it looks well," and then sneerlngly intimate that " friend Chronas 
will shortly discourse upon the subject ;" that " time will tell," &c. 
Everything they do or say is right ; everything done or said by another 
is wrong, or at least is open to serious objection. They are loud in 
denunciation of everybody in the practice, except a few kindred spirits, 
who may chance to reside too far away to come in contact with those 

upper ten," who are exclusively their friends and patients. 

These partially educated egotists, however, do not all, nor always operate 



<( 



MERRIMAC VALLEY DENTAL ASSOCIATION. 127 

well. A gold filling, which in six weeks presents an appearance about it 
like a dirty fioger nail, they strenuously insist is " all right," if done by 
themselves, as they never, under any circumstances, do any bad work ; but 
if done by another, it is a fraud upon the patient. Of course such services 
as theirs must be paid for, yet they can never quite make the public come 
up to their notions about fees, and are therefore obliged to accept the 
miserable pittance of from twenty to one hundred and fifty dollars for filling 
a tooth, which their superior, in everything but egotism, would have done 
better for half the money, and thought himself well paid. 

An extortionate charge for an operation is not positive evidence of 
skill. This class of egotists are great experts in hobby riding, in prac- 
ticing specialties, or in doing things in some peculiar way ; great in small 
things ; in using certain materials to the exclusion of all others, and in 
condemning every instrument or appliance not made after their pattern. 

Certain choice spirits have recently appeared to dazzle the dental world, 
who insist that the mallet is the emblem, par excellence, of superior skill, 
and that those who fill teeth as well, or better, without it, are no dentists, 
simply because they do not use it. It is mallet, mallet, mallet ad infini- 
tum. Now I have only to say, that if A can fill a tooth better by its use, 
it is most certainly his duty to employ it ; but if B can do it better with- 
out such an implement, it does not necessarily follow that he is a quack, 
merely because he does not adopt A's practice. 

There are many ways in which egotism manifests itself. The M. D. is 
too apt to look down on the D. D. S., and vice versa, and both ignore 
him with neither title, while the latter despises both. This is all wrong; 
let charity prevail. Those with titles should not disgrace them, and those 
without should aim to merit them. The ignorant egotist does not know 
enough to mend the habit, (for it is nothing else,) and the discerning 
public understand it ) but there is no excuse for the educated man. 

The public do not understand why a man should " think more highly 
of himself than he ought to think," and not " soberly," especially as his 
education would seem to be sufficient to correct any such unbecoming 
manifestations. It was said by some ancient genius, that " man was born 
with a sack on his shoulders," his neighbors' faults in front, and his own 
behind. That was undoubtedly the case, and rationally accounts for most 
of our complaints and poor opinions of others, while our own imperfections 
are neither seen nor thought of, except by those about us. Let us reverse 
the sack occasionally, that we may, to some extent at least, " see our- 
selves as others see us." 

" A little learning is a dangerous thing : 
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring : 
There shallow draughts intoxicate the hrain, 
And drinking largely sobers us again." 



128 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

IStrttorCaL 



We have received from Prof. J. H. McQuillen, in a neatly bound 
volume, the transactions of tlie Odontographic Society of Pennsylvania. 
The Constitution and By-Laws of the Organization, occupying the first 
few pages, are followed by essays and discussions, showing an apprecia- 
tion of the subjects on which they treat. 

We are indebted to Messrs. Neall, McCurdy & Neall for a molar tooth 
from the mouth of a human subject, containing two comparatively large 
projections of enamel from between its fangs. 

We received some weeks since the " First Announcement of the New 
York Institute of Dental Science and Art, established by the Society of 
Dental Surgeons of the City of New York, and the Brooklyn Dental 
Association, to meet, in some degree, the demand for dental instruction 
in that city." In pursuance of this object, the following corps of instruc- 
tors was duly elected : W. H. Atkinson, M. D., D. D. S., Institutes of 
Dental Science and Art ; C. P. Fitch, M. D., Anatomy and Physiology ; 
J. S. Latimer, D. D. S., Operative Dentistry; John M. Crowell, Artificial 
Dentures and Appliances ; John Allen, D. D. S., Chemistry and Metallurgy. 

Since receiving the above announcement, we learn that they opened, as 
per advertisement, on the 1st of December, under very favorable auspices, 
having about twenty-eight matriculants. As a means of giving to the 
student opportunities for a more thorough dental education, and thereby 
elevating the standard of dental operations, we rejoice in its establish- 
ment. Those wishing to avail themselves of the advantages of this 
school, will address W. H. Atkinson, Dean, No. 109 Ninth street. New 
York City. c. N. P. 



We have received the following note from Dr. James Brown, of 
Eochester, New York, announcing the death of Dr. Marlor, and fully do 
we concur in his appreciation of our deceased friend's abilities, c. N. p. 

Rochester, December 7, 1864. 
Dear Sir : — It is with feelings of sorrow that I inform you of the 
death of Samuel Marlor, of Oldham, England, a graduate of the P. C. 
D. S., Session 1861-62. He died on the 16th of September, after an 
illness of two weeks' duration, of chronic ulceration of the stomach. Dr. 
Marlor was a gentleman, a superior operator, and an enthusiast in his 
profession ; but as we often are admonished, he was called away in the 
prime oi life, and as he was just beginning to reap the reward of years of 
industry essential to a degree of proficiency in his specialty. 

James Brown. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 



129 



PENNSYLViMl COLLEGE OF DENTAL SMGERY. 

THE NINTH ANNUAL SESSION. 1864-'65. 







HENRY C. CAREY, President, GEORGE TRUMxiN, M. D., 



W. L. ATLEE, M. D., 
DANIEL NEALL, D. D. S., 
ELLESLIE WALLACE, M. D., THOMAS WOOD, 
BENJAMIN MALONE, M. D., J. R. McCURDY, 
W. W. FOUCHE, D. D. S., 
9 



S. DILLINGHAM, D. D. S., 
G. R. MOREHOUSE, M. D., 



CHARLES HAMILTON, Sec'y. 



130 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

J. D. WHITE, D. D. S., 

EMERITUS PROFESSOR. 

T. L. BUCKINGHAM, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY AND METALLURGY. 

C. N. PEIRCE, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF DENTAL PHYSIOLOGY AND OPERATIVE DENTISTRY. 

E. WILDMAN, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF MECHANICAL DENTISTRY. 

G. T. BARKER, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF PRINCIPLES OF DENTAL SURGERY AND THERAPEUTICS. 

W. S. FORBES, M. D., D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY. 

JAMES TRUMAN, D. D. S., 

DEMONSTRATOR OF OPERATIVE DENTISTRY. 

J. M. BARSTOW, 

DEMONSTRATOR OF MECHANICAL DENTISTRY. 



The Lectures to the Regular Course will commence on the 
1st of November and continue until the 1st of March. 

DuriDg the last two weeks of October, preliminary Lectures are delivered, 
one each day. 

The Rooms for Operative and Mechanical Dentistry are open from the 
1st of October and throughout the session, under the supervision of the 
Demonstrators. 

The Dissecting Room, under the superintendence of the Professor of 
Anatomy and Physiology, is open during the session. 

Fees for the Course, (Demonstrators' Ticket included,) - $100 
Matriculation, (paid but once,) - - - - 5 

Diploma Fee, ------ 30 

O. ]Sr. PJEIROE, Dean, 

C. p. REESS, Janitor. 501 North Seventh St., Philadelphia. 

P. S.— Board may be had at from $3.50 to $6.00 per week. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OP DENTAL SURGERY. 131 



PENNSYLVAMA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SUEGEET. 

The Ninth Annual Session, 1864-1865. 

The ninth annual session of the Pennsylvania College of Dental Sur- 
gery will commence on the first of November, and continue until the first 
of March. Preliminary lectures will, however, be delivered each day 
during the latter half of the month of October. The Dispensary and 
Laboratory of the College will also be open from that time, where ample 
opportunities will be afibrded for the prosecution of the practical part of 
the profession under the daily supervision of the Demonstrators, who are 
gentlemen of known integrity and thorough capability. During October, 
as well as the entire session, a clinical lecture will be delivered, and 
operations performed by one of the Professors every Saturday afternoon. 
The course is so arranged that fifteen lectures are delivered each week, 
on the various branches taught in the school. A synopsis of the manner 
in v^ich each department is treated will be found under the head of the 
different chairs. 

These lectures occupy about the average time of three hours each day. 
In addition, four hours are daily spent by the student in actual practice. 
With this object in view, the operating rooms are furnished with twenty 
chairs, so arranged as to command the best light, and all the appliances 
necessary for comfort and use. To these chairs the students are assigned 
in classes, and certain hours are fixed for each member of the class to 
operate. 

Each student is required to provide his own instruments, (except those 
for extracting,) and to operate with them. He is expected to keep them 
in perfect order, and for that purpose is provided with a table in which 
they can be locked up when not in use. As the operations performed at 
the College are entirely gratuitous, a superabundance of patients invari- 
ably present themselves. 

In the mechanical department every process known in the profession, 
which has any value to the mechanical dentist, is fully taught ; and 
receipts of valuable compounds are freely imparted. All the conveniences 
are at hand in the Laboratory for the preparation of metals, manufacture 
of teeth, (single and in blocks,) mounting, etc. ; and the student is 
required to go through all the necessary manipulations connected with the 
insertion of artificial teeth — from taking the impression to the thorough 
construction of the denture, and proper adjustment of it in the mouth of 
the patient. 



132 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

In addition to the facilities afforded by the College for a thorough course 
of instruction in the theory and practice of Dentistry, the celebrated 
hospitals and clinics of the city constantly enable the student to witness 
various important surgical operations which are highly interesting and 
instructive. The medical and surgical clinics of the Blockley Hospital, 
in particular, one of the largest eleemosynary establishments in the world, 
are open to Medical and Dental students, free of charge. The staff of 
this institution is composed of some of the most eminent physicians and 
surgeons of Philadelphia. 



COURSE OF LECTURES. 



OHEMISTEY AND METALLUKaY. 

The course of instruction from this chair will commence with the con- 
sideration of the imponderable substances. 

The laws that govern the imponderable bodies will next claim attention, 
with some notice of symbols or chemical notations. Individual elements, 
and the compounds resulting from their combinations, will then be con- 
sidered. Organic chemistry will receive its full share of attention. 

The course will be illustrated by diagrams and such experiments as can 
be performed before the class. 



DENTAL PHYSIOLOGY AND OPERATIVE DENTISTEY. 

The lectures in this department will embrace the Physiological Ana- 
tomy of the teeth, general and microscopical, in addition to a minute and 
careful description of the various operations performed by the dental prac- 
titioner. 

The microscope, models and diagrams, will be employed in illustration. 

At the Clinic the incumbent of this chair will also demonstrate before 
the class the various operations described in his course of lectures. 



MECHANICAL DENTISTEY. 
The instruction from this chair will embrace the entire range of manip- 
ulations legitimately connected with the laboratory, arranged in two divi- 
sions — Mechanical Dentistry proper, and that to which has been applied 
the appellation of the Plastic department. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 133 

I. Mechanical dentistry proper will include everything appertaining to 
the construction of dental substitutes, passing through the different stages 
of preparation, from taking the impression, to the completion and proper 
adjustment of the case in the mouth, conjointly with features, expression 
of countenance, enunciation, etc. It will likewise embrace the metallurgic 
treatment of the various metals employed, the preparation of plate and 
wire, the alloying of gold, together with the alloys used, as well as those 
designated as solders. 

II. This division will comprise all that appropriately belongs to the 
manufacture of porcelain or mineral teeth — single teeth, block-work, con- 
tinuous gum-work, vulcanite, etc. The materials, their preparation, 
compounds and uses, will be specially regarded. 

All new inventions, modifications, and improvements, in this branch of 
the art, will in place receive due attention and investigation. 



PEINOIPLES or DENTAL SUKaEEY AND THEEAPEUTIOS. 

The lectures delivered from this chair will embrace General Pathology, 
Dental Pathology, the Pathological Relations of the Teeth to other parts 
of the System, together with a minute description of all special diseases 
that have any relation to Dental Surgery, or of interest to the Dentist. 

They will also include a carefal examination of therapeutic agents and 
their general application. , Their indications in the medical and surgical 
treatment of diseases of the mouth, both idiopathic and symptomatic, will 
be fully illustrated, and also the general hygienic rules and principles 
which come within the province of the practitioner. 



ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY. 

The instruction in this department will embrace a plain and compre- 
hensive view of the structure and functions of the Human Economy. The 
valuable anatomical preparations of the incumbent of this chair, (consist- 
ing of Papier Mache manikins, models in wood, drawings, wet and dry 
preparations,) will enable him to fully illustrate his course. With the 
same object, vivisections on the lower animals will also be employed. 

The special relations of this branch to the wants of the dentist will be 
kept steadily in view, and such descriptions of the natural history, micro- 
scopical structure, connections, &c., of the teeth, as their importance 
demands, will be given. 

The great facilities for the study of practical anatomy, to be found in 
the city of Philadelphia, obviate the necessity of providing a dissecting- 



134 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

room in the College. For the usual fee of $10, the student can have 
access to one of several well-ordered and well-supplied dissecting-rooms. 



KEGTTLATIONS. 



The candidate must be twenty-one years of age. He must have studied 

under a private preceptor at least two years, including his course of 

instruction at the College. Attendance on two full courses of lectures in 

this institution will be required, but satisfactory evidence of having attended 

one full course of lectures in any respectable dental or medical school, will 

be considered equivalent to the first course of lectures in this College -. five 

years' practice, inclusive of the term of pupilage, will also be considered 

equivalent to the first course of lectures. The candidate for graduation 

must prepare a thesis upon some subject connected with the theory or 

practice of dentistry. He must treat thoroughly some patient requiring all 

the usual dental operations, and bring such patient before the Professor of 

Operative Dentistry. He must, also, take up at least one artificial case, 

and after it is completed, bring his patient before the Professor of 

Mechanical Dentistry. He must, also, prepare a specimen case to be 

deposited in the College collection. The operations must be performed, 

and the work in the artificial cases done, at the College building. He must 

also undergo an examination by the Faculty, when, if found qualified, he 

shall be recommended to the Board of Trustees ; and, if approved by them, 

shall receive the degree of Doctor of Dental Surgery. 



TEXT BOOKS AM WOEKS OF EEFEEENOE. 



Wilson's, or Leidy's Sharpey & Quains' Anatomy ; Carpenter's Physi- 
ology, or Dunglison's Human Physiology ] United States Dispensatory ; 
Mitchell's Materia Medica ; Fownes' Elements of Chemistry ; Regnault's 
Chemistry ; Lehmann's Pysiological Chemistry ; C J. B. Williams' Prin- 
ciples of Medicine; Wood's Practice; Tomes' Dental Physiology and 
Surgery ; Harris' Principles and Practice ; Taft's Operative Dentistry ; 
Richardson's Mechanical Dentistry ; Paget's Surgical Pathology, or other 
standard works on the subject. 



THE 



DENTAL TIMES. 



Vol. it. PHILADELPHIA, APRIL, 1865. No. 4. 

DISEASES OF THE MAXILLAEY SOUS. 

BY GEO. T. BARKER, D. D. S. 
[Continued from p. 119.] 

Having, in a previous communication, considered the disease of the 
sinus known as mucous engorgement, or dropsy of the antrum, the present 
article will be devoted to the diflferent modes of surgical and therapeutical 
treatment. The surgeon having determined, by the diagnostic signs 
previously mentioned, that it is a fluid, and not a solid mass which is 
enclosed in the sinus, recognizes the importance of immediately forming 
such an artificial opening as will allow the escape of the retained mucus, 
and also to make such applications to the lining membrane as will restore 
its normal healthy secretion. The first indication, therefore, in the treat- 
ment of this disorder, is to make an artificial opening into the maxillary 
sinus ; this is readily accomplished, as it is accessible at many points, 
and perforation may be performed at almost any without danger. Dif- 
ferent points have been selected ; thus Jourdain, an eminent writer on 
disease of the sinus, recommends that the natural opening into the naries 
be selected, and he invented a peculiar instrument, which was to be 
inserted into the nostril, and was then pressed into the natural opening 
of the antrum. This mode of operating was found to be exceedingly 
difficult, and has been generally abandoned. The best point of perfora- 
tion is at the apex of one of the fangs of the first or second molar teeth, 
but if these teeth are sound, and either of the bicuspid teeth are carious, 
they should be removed, and perforation made at that point in preference 
to extracting a sound molar. Surgeons, as a general thing, do not observe 
this rule, and we have had, in many instances, patients sent with the 
request that sound molar teeth might be extracted that an artificial 
opening might be made into the antrum, where bicuspid teeth, just in 
advance, were carious or absent. There are, however, honorable excep- 
tions to the above ; surgeons who recognize the great importance of 
masticating organs, and use every effort to preserve them to the patient. 
There are some advantages to be gained by having the opening made 



146 ^ THE DENTAL TIMES. 

througli the fang of one of the molar teeth ; one is, that in some cases 
these fangs enter the sinus, thus ohviating the use of a perforating 
instrument, but the most decided advantage to be gained is due to the 
fact that the floor of the sinus at this point is more depending; hence the 
secretion is more apt to drain out of the cavity than where the opening is 
made at some other point. Some operators object to the extraction of 
any teeth that can possibly be preserved, recommending instead that 
perforation be made between the teeth, or on, what dentists would term, 
the buccal surface of the jaw. Where extraction is performed of the 
molar tooth, and one or more of the fangs enter into the antrum, mucus 
will immediately escape, but where they do not enter the cavity, it 
becomes necessary to make an opening with an instrument 5 this should 
be performed with a straight trocar, care being taken not to wound the 
opposite sides of the cavity when it enters. The opening should be large 
enough to allow the free escape of the abnormal secretion, and it is some- 
times necessary, to prevent its closing up by adhesive inflammation, that 
a canula of lead or silver be introduced, which is retained in position by 
being secured to the adjoining teeth. Having evacuated the contents of 
the cavity, which varies greatly in quantity in diff"erent cases, the next 
step in the treatment is to select an appropriate fluid, to inject into the 
sinus for the purpose of cleansing the membranes, and at the same time 
to produce an astringent influence. There are two diff'erent modes of 
practice recommended by certain writers on this subject. One class 
advise that strong injections be used ; for instance, a wash, composed of 
at least ten grains of nitrate of silver to the ounce of water, introduced 
twice a day, until there is unequivocal evidence of a complete change in 
the nature of the morbid action. 1 allude to this mode of practice for 
the purpose of condemning it, having been satisfied that, though it may 
succeed in some instances, in the vaet majority it either completely fails, 
or what is worse, only aggravates the existing trouble, increasing the 
discharge, and protracting the disease. A much more rational, and, in my 
judgment, a safer and better plan, is to use the mildest possible injections, 
consisting of weak solutions of sulphate of zinc or acetate of lead, the quan- 
tity of the salt not exceeding the third or half a grain to the ounce, or, at the 
most, a grain to the ounce of water ; this may be used three or four times 
daily, and often exercises a wonderful controlling influence over the 
disease. Or, instead of this, some of the vegetable astringents may be 
selected, tannic acid for instance, which, in the proportion of two grains 
to the ounce of water, employed several times during the day, is exceed- 
ingly useful. Finally, I frequently use, with excellent results, simple 
bland astringent injections, as green table tea, weak solutions of alum, or 
any mucilaginous fluid, with which a few drops of laudanum have been 



DISEASES OP THE MAXILLARY SINUS. 147 

mixed. At the suggestion of a professioDal friend, I was induced to try, 
in a case that gave considerable trouble, an injection of pure cider vinegar, 
commencing its use in the strength of one part in eight of water, gradually 
increasing its strength until the patient could use the vinegar undiluted and 
I found it to be of exceeding value. Injections of port wine and water 
are, in some cases, quite useful. For this condition of the maxillary 
sinus, however, astringents seem to be particularly adapted, as they act 
upon the lining membrane in two or three ways : by union with the tissues 
they condense and consolidate them, thus preventing the secretion from 
passing through the membrane as readily ; and, by union with certain 
constituents of the blood, favor a cessation and diminution of the discharge. 
Many of these cases of dropsy of the antrum are exceedingly trying, both 
to patient and practitioner, as they will apparently be cured, and in a few 
days will reappear, the discharge being more offensive than at first ; this 
foetid condition may be readily removed by using injections of table salt 
and water, and, indeed, in the treatment of this disorder, one of the most 
imperative demands for successful treatment is strict attention to cleanli- 
ness, frequent injections being demanded to remove the abnormal secretion. 
I will detail a single case which recently occurred in my practice, for 
the purpose of showing how careful we should be in the formation of a 
diagnosis. A lady presented for treatment with dropsy of the antrum. 
An artificial opening was made for the evacuation of the fluid secretion, 
though the natural opening into the naries was unclosed, and the discharge 
had been taking place, for some time, into the nose. After the fluid had 
passed into the mouth, a mild astringent solution was thrown into the 
antrum. I was much surprised to notice that the injected fluid passed 
out of the nostril on the opposite side of the diseased sinus. This phe- 
nomena was repeated at every subsequent visit, and I was forced to the 
conclusion that there was a hole in the vomer, through which the fluid 
passed. An eminent surgeon was called in, who also was led to believe 
that there must be some lesion to allow the fluid to pass out in the manner 
described, but a careful examination failed to detect any abnormal condi- 
tion. At last we discovered the cause, and found it to be due to the 
position of the head ; when the patient would sit in a nearly erect posi- 
tion in my dental chair, the fluid would pass backwards along the posterior 
naries on the affected side to the soft palate ; thence around the vomer on 
the soft palate to the opposite nostril. When the patient was directed to 
throw the head forward over the spittoon, and the injection was thrown 
into the antrum, it was found that it passed out of the nostril on the 
affected side. This case is detailed for the purpose of showing the care 
requisite in determining the nature and extent of the disorder and the 
requisite treatment. 

[TO BE CONTINUED.] 



148 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

AMALGAM PILLINGS. 

BY H. A. ROBINSON, POXCROFT, MAINE. 

We all find it necessary, especially in country practice, to make an 
occasional amalgam plug, and as we use this material as we do other, for 
the purpose of preserving, as long as possible, the health and usefulness 
of the tooth treated, it is necessary to success that the cavity be thoroughly 
and carefully prepared. The materials, after being mixed into a stiff 
paste, should be washed well with a spoonful of alcohol, the mass should 
then be taken from the alcohol, which will be found to be very dark- 
colored and impure, and all moisture absorbed in a napkin ; press out the 
superabundant mercury by any means preferred, and it is ready for intro- 
duction. I use for this purpose a piece of heavy buckskin, twisting it 
between my thumb and fingers. Care should be taken in introducing the 
filling that it be pressed firmly, with suitable instruments, into all parts 
of the cavity, so closely, that although it has been made as dry of mercury 
as possible, yet, when the plug is finished, it will present a smooth glossy 
surface. Finish up with a suitable burnisher, working from the centre 
towards the edges of the cavity as with " Wood's metal." After hardening 
one day, the surface should be burnished. The materials should be the 
best and purest that can be obtained ; of mercury, use the " redistilled ;" 
for a base, use that which experience teaches is the best. My experience 
is this, my preceptor, when he wished to make an amalgam filling, (fol- 
lowing in the old path in which his preceptor had walked,) would sit 
down to the bench, file in hand, and from an old " Spanish quarter," 
prepare sufficient for the occasion. This I thought was wasting precious 
time, besides, I noticed these fillings would, in a short time, become quite 
black, often coloring the tooth very much. When I commenced prac- 
tice, I bought and used precipitated silver ; soon, by the advice of a 
friend, added a little tin foil, this improved the color, but diminished 
their strength. I soon found, to my sorrow and chagrin, that some of 
my amalgam fillings were wearing away very fast, others were crumb- 
ling out — the material did not make a strong filling My next step 
was to send to a dental depot for a little of Townsend's and Lawrence's 
amalgam, to see if either of these were better than what I had been 
using. 1 found the Townsend's so coarsely prepared, that it required 
considerable time to fit it properly for use, and the plugs, when made, 
were not hard enough nor fitrong enough ; the color was good. The 
Lawrence's I found was evidently an entirely different composition ; it 
was fine, could be quickly and easily prepared for the cavity, works 
well, is very dense, hard as adamant, and retains its original color well. 
If you would make a good amalgam plug, follow these simple directions, 
and use Lawrence's amalgam, and you cannot fail. 



THE STEAM GATTGIE IN VtrLCANIZING. 149 

I hope that no one will construe the tenor of this article as advocating 
amalgam to the exclusion of better material. My object is to show that 
there is a higher standard of excellence even in this direction than many 
in the profession have attained to, and to show what I was once ignorant 
of, and what many do not seem yet to have found out, that a good amal- 
gam filling, and one that "will not turn black," can be made by proper 
manipulation, and the use of the right materials. 



THE STEAM GAUGE IN VULCANIZING-. 

BY A. LAWRENCE. 

In a short article of mine on Steam Pressure in Vulcanizers, which 
appeared in the January number of this journal, among other things I 
alluded to the fact that I had dispensed with the thermometer, usicg a 
steam gauge instead, and stated some of the advantages secured, as I 
think, by the change. I am induced to offer what follows, from a belief 
that the article named was not sufficiently explicit so far as relates to the 
use of the gauge ; this impression being strengthened by the receipt of 
letters of inquiry from several members of the profession in different parts 
of the country. That solutions to such queries as, **.Will the gauge fit 
vulcanizers of different manufactures 1 How do you ascertain the tempe- 
rature in degrees 1 What does it look Irke, and what is the price ?" &c., 
&c., are invited, does not surprise or annoy me in the least, for dentists 
as a general thing have had nothing to do with such an instrument, nor, 
until vulcanite came into use, with a thermometer even, except as the 
indicator of calorific fluctuation. Without further regard to prelimi- 
naries, permit me to say to all interested that the gauge most suitable 
for the purpose in question somewhat resembles a small circular 
clock, is about six inches in diameter, and marked to register 140 or 160 
pounds pressure, with pound dots near the outer circle of the dial ; a 
pointer indicates the force which moves it. This size is better than a 
smaller one, because the spring inside, not being crowded to its utmost 
capacity in vulcanizing, will, of course, retain its working integrity longer j 
in fact, as long as any dentist now living will be personally interested in 
the matter. The price of such a gauge at this time is $18, and though 
more expensive ones can unquestionably be made, they are no more reliable, 
the difference consisting in mere " outward show and adorning." They 
can be used with all vulcanizers generating steam, connecting by means 
of three or four feet, or as much more as may be convenient, of small pipe, 
having a U-shaped bend, or a single coil, near and under the gauge to 
receive the condensed steam, as water alone should enter that instrument'. 

The following table exhibits a range of pressures sufficient for vulcan- 
izing purposes, with the temperatures necessary to produce the same : 



150 



THE DENTAL TIMES, 



a 

00 a 

S o 






Pi 
S 

6H 


a 
2 « 

00 r< 
<» 5 

70 
71 
72 
73 
74 


6 

-♦J 

a 

u 
a> 
p. 

a 


.5 

o> to 

t. -« 

to 3 

ll 


a 
t 
p* 

a 


a 

«i 00 

P P 
" d 

"1 

u P< 

80 
81 


0> 

u 

s 

a> 

Pi 

s 

EH 


Pressure in 
pounds 


u 

S 

P< 

a 


a 

« 00 

tl P< 


08 
Vi 

« 
p< 

a 


60 


295f 


65 


301+ 


306+ 
307+ 


75 
76 


311+ 
312+ 


315+ 
316+ 


85 


320+ 


110 


339+ 


61 

62 


296+ 
298+ 


66 


302+ 


90 


324+ 


115 


342+ 


67 


303+ 


308+ 


77 
78 
79 


313+ 

314 

314+ 


82 
83 


317+ 


95 


328+ 


120 


345+ 


63 


299+ 


68 


304+ 


309+ 


318+ 


100 


332+ 


125 


349+ 


64 


300+ 


69 


305+ 


310+ 


84 


319+ 


105 


335+ 


130 


352+ 



It will readily be seen by the above that a pressure of 60 pounds 
requires a temperature of 295 degrees, by Fahrenheit's scale, to produce 
it, and 85 pounds, 320 degrees, at which latter pressure I vulcanize, 
running one hour, and with the most satisfactory results. The manner 
of putting up and using the gauge is very simple. All that is required 
ifi to secure it, by screws passing through the flange on the back j in some 
conspicuous and convenient place, attach a pipe and carry it down ten or 
twelve inches, give it a bend or curve upward about half its length, or 
five or six inches, thence at right angles or otherwise, and in any con- 
venient length not less than three feet to the vulcanizer. 

The annexed cut is from a photograph of a Whitney vulcanizer, with 
the gauge attached, but is by no means the only arrangement which can 
be made, as, in some cases, convenience may require more pipe or a 
different distribution. 



J..J 




\S5Bs.1Jwuj: 



A, table or work-bench ) B, vulcanizer } C, side outlet pendant cock, 
screwed on in place of the thermometer scale 5 D, coupling joint \ E, angle 
in the pipe j F, iron pipe, 3-16 inside j Gr, U-shaped curve, five or six 
inches in depth ; H, cock to the gauge ; I, gauge. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 151 

The fitting, putting up and arranging the apparatus can be done 
in an hour's time by any gas-fitter ; or, to those residing away from cities 
or towns where such mechanics are employed, can be furnished to order 
by them, or by the parties furnishing the gauge* All the joints from the 
vulcanizer to the gauge, except the coupling, should be "leaded" with 
very thick lead paint, and screwed together steam-tight. In using the 
apparatus, the cocks C and H must be turned straight with the pipe ; for, 
if shut oft' at either point, the gauge cannot be acted upon by the steam. 

I generally heat the water in the vulcanizer nearly or quite to the 
boiling point, and let off" the heated air by turning, or allowing to remain 
open, the cock C, then connect at the coupling D, turning the nut tight, 
(not too tight,) with a wrench. So soon as the steam begins to form, it is 
condensed by contact with the cold part of the pipe, and falls into and 
fills the curve, or coil, with water, which is then forced into the gauge 
with a power indicated by the pointer on the dial. The pipe should 
descend a trifle from the angle E to the commencement of the curve, to 
facilitate the passage of the condensed steam to that point. Although 
vulcanizing one hour at 85 pounds affords results satisfactory to me, 
others may prefer a different time, with more or less heat. The table 
will be found a sufficient guide in such cases. When the time is up, dis- 
continue the fire, and shut off the steam by turning the cock C. Tura 
the cock H in the same manner to prevent a too sudden reverse movement 
of the machinery of the gauge, the pressure on which should be gradually 
relieved at any convenient time. Now disconnect by unscrewing the 
coupling, and dispose of the steam in the vulcanizer by blowing off^, or 
any other means preferred. Further remarks would seem unnecessary to 
a full understanding of the subject. Having used the gauge almost every 
day for about six months, I am fully satisfied that it is a decided improve- 
ment in vulcanizing, and am so delighted with it that no reasonable sum 
would induce me to substitute the thermometer. 

Before closing, I may be permitted, in justice to the American Steam 
Grange Company, of which Mr. H. K. Moore is Superintendent, to correct 
an error in my former communication, in locating their office at No. 44 
Exchange, instead of No. 44 Congress street, Boston^ 



» ••^ > 



NINTH ANNUAL COMMENCEMENT OP THE PENNSYLVANIA 
COLLEGE OP DENTAL SUKGEEY. 

BY JAMES TRUMAN, D. D- S. 

The Ninth Annual Commencement of tliis Institution was held at 
Musical Fund Hall, on the evening of February 25, 1865. Notwith- 
standing the unpropitious character of the evening, a large and attentive 
audience was present to add interest to the occasion. We were pleased 



152 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

to notice many eminent members of the profession on the platform ; and 
were this interest felt by a still larger number, it would not only add to 
the character of the proceedings, but would strengthen the hands of those 
who occupy the arduous positions of educators in the profession. We 
hope this interest may grow, and as each returning year brings with it 
the commencements of the different colleges, we may find members of the 
profession everywhere throwing aside the care and toil of daily duty for 
a short relaxation in a pleasant reunion with old friends, and together 
give the young aspirant for professional success all the encouragement 
possible at the opening struggle for future excellence. 

The order of exercises consisted of music by the Germania Orchestra, 
prayer by Rev. Mr. Washburne, conferring the degrees, and the valedic- 
tory address by Dr. E. Wildman, Professor of Mechanical Dentistry. 

The Degree of Doctor of Dental Surgery was conferred upon the 
lollowing named gentlemen by the Henry C. Carey, President of the 
Loard of Trustees. 

GRADUATES, 1864-65j 
Gasper A. Betancourt,.Cuba, . .Filling Pulp Cavities and Roots of Teeth. 
Samuel A. Beecher,. . .Mo., . . .Sulphuric Ether. 
Howard Bassett,..., , . .N. J.,. .Diseases Incident to First Dentition. 

Benj. J. Bing, , .Md., . . .Dentistry, a Science. 

J. Wesley Clemson,. . .Pa.,. . . .Predisposing Causes to Dental Caries. 
August Culman, M. D., Bavaria, Neuralgia of the Trigeminus. 

Edwin T. Darby, N. Y.,.. Dentistry, a Profession. 

Horace Enos, Pa.,. . ..Vulcanizer Rubber. 

Simon Frau, Cuba, . .Ether. 

Michele Fichera, Sicily,. .Filling Teeth. 

J. N. Farrar, Mass.,. .Intermittent and Hysterical Neuralgia^. 

Simeon H. Guilford,. ..Pa.,. . . .Vascularity of Dentine. 
James 0. A. Johnson, .N. J.,. .Extraction of Teeth. 
John Lyman, M. D.,. . Ireland, .Military Dentistry. 

C. A. Milbank, N. Y.,. .Diseases Attending First Dentition. 

Chas. B. McGrath,. . . .Pa.,. . ..Hysteria. 

Wm. A. Newland, . . . ,Pa.,. . .Fractures of the Teeth. 

Abram Pratt, Pa.,. , ..Odontology. 

S. G. Perry, N. Y.,.. Inflammation. 

P. Preterre, M. D., . . .N. Y.,.. Development of Teeth. 

Jared A. Perkins, Mass.,. .Cause of Dental Caries. 

Thos. Robinson, Del.,. ...Irregularities of the Permanent Teeth. 

Thos. Robson, Jr.,. . . ,Pa.,. . ..Rubber. 

Hewlett C. Rockwell,.. N.Y.,. .Nitrous Oxide. 

A. Emory Street, N. J.,. .Entire Artificial Dentures. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 



153 



W. H. Scholl, Pa., Indurated Rubber. 

Geo. B. Sanford, N. Y.,. .Teeth and their Diseases. 

J. B. R. Wriggins,.. . .Y. J.,, .Caries of the Teeth. 

J. A. Woodward, Pa.,. . ..Treatment of Exposed Dental Pulp. 

The Honorary Degree of Doctor of Dental Surgery was conferred up( c 
the following gentlemen : 

Theodore S. Evans,. Paris. 

J. M. B^rstow, Philadelphia. 

Jesse C. Green, West Chester, Fa 

J. D. Wingate, Bellefonte, Pa. 

Mahlon Kirk, Philadelphia. 

The following comprises the full list of Matriculants for the Session oi 
1864-65 : 



Robert J as. Adams, N. Y. 

Benjamin J. Bing, Md. 

Samuel A. Beecher, Mo. 

Henry Blakeney, N. Y. 

Howard Bassett, N. J. 

Jose Bertram, Cuba. 

Gasper A. Betancourt,. ... '< 

John R. Buckingham, Pa. 

Edwin C. Baxter, D. D. S., .Maine. 

J. Wesley Clemson, Pa. 

August Culman, M. D.,. . .Bavaria. 

P. M.Christie, Pa. 

Frederick K. Crosby, Conn. 

Edwin T. Darby, N. Y. 

E. S. Davenport, " 

Horace Enos, Pa. 

Michele Fichera, Sicily. 

Simon Frau, Cuba. 

John N. Farrar, Mass. 

Enoch S. Fogg, Pa. 

John Frasier, Md. 

Simeon H. Guilford, Pa. 

Jesse C. Green, " 

Canby Hatheway, " 

James 0. A. Johnson,. . .N. J. 

Jonas Y. Kern, Pa. 

Daniel J. Lally, N. Y. 

Wash. R. Lineaweaver, , .Pa. 
John Lynam, M. D., Ireland. 



C. B. McGrath, Pa. 

Francis Mignotte, Cuba. 

Charles A. Milbank, N. Y. 

William A. Newland, Jr.,. Pa. 

P. Preterre, M. D., N. Y. 

James Parsons, Wis. 

Abram Pratt, Pa. 

S. G.Perry, N. Y. 

Jared A. Perkins, Mass. 

James R. Roney, Pa. 

Thomas Robinson, Del. 

Thomas Robson, Jr., Pa. 

Hewlett C. Rockwell, N. Y. 

H. P. Roberts, 111. 

H. C. Register, Md. 

A. Emory Street, N. J. 

John Sheldon, N. Y. 

C. S. Stockton, .N. J. 

William Smedley, Pa. 

George B. Sanford, N. Y. 

Wm. H.Scholl, Pa, 

Wm. H. Trueman, " 

A. P. Tompkins, " 

J. J. Yanderford, Md. 

Carlos Del Villar, Cuba. 

Augustin De Yarona, " 

J. A. Woodward, Pa. 

J. B. R. Wriggins, N. J. 



154 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

The Demonstrators report the following number of operations performed 
in their departments during the past session. 

DEMONSTRATORS' REPORT, SESSION OF 1864-'65. 

OPERATIVE DEPARTMENT. 

Number of Patients yisiting the Clinic,. . » 2,600 

Number for whom the following operations were performed, 1,487 

Gold Fillings, 627 

Tin « 696 

Wood's Metal, 9 

Hill's Stopping, 14 

Amalgam, 12 

Treatment and Filling Pulp Cavities, 176 

Superficial Caries Removed, 6 

Removal of Salivary Calculi, 57 

Treatment of Periostitis, 28 

" Alveolar Abscess, 10 

" Inflammation of the Gums, 5 

" Partial Necrosis, 15 

'* Irregularities, 10 

Pivot Teeth inserted, 2 

Extraction of Teeth and Roots, 2,010 

Total, 3,677 

James Truman, Demonstrator, 

MECHANICAL DEPARTMENT. 
154 Patients were supplied with the following Artificial Dentures : 

Whole sets of Teeth, 31 

Full Upper Sets, 48 

" Lower Sets, 2 

" Upper Set Blocks, 1 

Partial Upper Sets, 76 

" Lower Sets, 4 

Obturators,* 2 

Teeth Mounted on Metal Plates, 528 

" Hard Rubber Base, 1,481 

Whole number of Gum Teeth, 902 

« " Plain Teeth, 1,107 

Whole number of Teeth Mounted, 2,009 

J. M. Barstow, Demonstrator, 

* These were made for soldiers having lost their teeth and adjacent bones from gunshot wounds. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEOK OF DENTAL SURGERY. 155 

These reports give to those unaequainted with the operations of the 
two departments, but a limited idea of the character of the work performed. 
Mere numbers will not express it, hence the general feeling is one of sur- 
prise, that with 60 large a class, the operations, in a numerical point of 
view, should occupy so limited a space. 

Id the Operative Department, two hours each day are devoted either 
to practical effort, or to observation of cases in the hands of others. The 
character of a large number of the fillings inserted during the past winter, 
is a gratifying assurance to those who have defended this mode of educa- 
tion through good and evil reports, that their labor to elevate the standard 
of professional ability is beginning to bring its full reward. Young men 
are now going forth, to take their places in the great army of laborers in 
our specialty, who, while they possess the requisite theoretical knowledge 
necessary to enable them honorably to fill the position they may in the 
future occupy, have combined with it that degree of manipulative skill, 
that must leave its impression upon every community in which they may 
locate. 

The ceremony of conferring the Degrees, was followed by Dr. Wildman, 
in the closing charge to the graduates, which was delivered in a peculiarly 
feeling and impressive manner. A full report of which we append. 

VALEDICTORY. 

(jrENTLEMEN : — In times past, in looking around you among the varied pur- 
suits by which man gains a livelihood in his pilgrimage through life, you then 
selected our profession as the one most congenial to your tastes, and with 
a, laudable ambition ycu determined to qualify yourselves for the position 
of your choice ; disdaining to go forth in the world as, I regret to say, 
too many have done, palming themselves upon the community as profi- 
cients, when they were devoid of even the first principles, theoretically or 
practically, thereby bringing discredit upon the profession. 

After a course of study, under the care and instruction of your private 
preceptors, you enrolled yourselves as students of the Pennsylvania Col- 
lege of Dental Surgery, wherein are taught the various branches of science 
relating to dentistry. 

By the Chair of Anatomy, you were instructed in the wondrous mechan- 
ism of the human frame, a portion of which, it will now be your province 
to treat professionally ; the function of each organ, the perfect symmetry 
and adaptation of each and every part to perform its office in harmony 
and in co-operation with the others, all working for the common good, 
naught made in vain, displaying in the design and perfection of its 
intricate organism the master-piece of His handiwork. 

By the Chair of Chemistry, the laws governing the elementary sub- 



156 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

stances were unfolded to you, their affinities, their combinations, and the 
effect of such combinations upon each other, whether organic or inorganic, 
whereby the laws and properties of matter were revealed to you, enabling 
you to select your remedial and other agents with judgment and discre- 
tion. 

By the Chair of Therapeutics and Principles of Dental Surgery, you 
were instructed in the properties of the medicinal agents used in our prac- 
tice; general pathology, the pathological relations of the teeth to the 
other parts of the system, and the general hygenic rules and principles 
which come within the province of the practitioner of surgical dentistry. 
The Chair of Dental Physiology and Operative Dentistry fully exem- 
plified the physiological and special anatomy of the teeth, and the various 
operations upon them. 

By the Chair of Mechanical Dentistry, you were instructed in the his- 
tory and properties of all the substances and combinations used, or likely 
to be called into requisition in the construction of dental substitutes, and 
their proper application. 

In addition to all this, you were required, under the guidance and 
supervision of able and efficient demonstrators, to make practical applica- 
tion of the principles taught by the various chairs. And the benefits 
thus conferred, by your labors upon hundreds of patients who sought 
relief at our dispensatory, (whose means would not permit them giving 
any pecuniary reward for such service,) will be long remembered with 
grateful acknowledgments. 

And now, at the close of the session, your practical operative and 
mechanical operations having met with the approval of the proper authori- 
ties ; and then, after having passed an examination by the faculty, by 
their united recommendation of your ability and merit, the Board of 
Trustees have this evening conferred upon you the Degree of Doctor of 
Dental Surgery. This is no idle compliment, no unmerited reward j but 
one which, by diligent application and study you have honorably acquired. 
And now, gentlemen, in behalf of the faculty of the Pennsylvania Col- 
lege of Dental Surgery, it is my pleasing duty to extend to you our con- 
gratulations for the happy result of your labors, and bid you a hearty 
welcome to the ranks of our profession. 

Although your course of studies has been completed, your connection 
with the college severed, and you have been esteemed worthy to assume 
a position with us \ do not deceive yourselves with the idea that your 
labors in the pursuit of science are ended. You are now placed upon 
a basis which, by your diligence and application, will be a stepping-stone 
to future eminence. 

The profession which you are now entering is not of recent origin, on the 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 157 

contrary, we have ample proof of its great antiquity. The knowledge of, 
when and by whom dentistry was first practiced, is lost in the mists of 
time ; we occasionally catch glimpses of it in the writings of the ancients, 
and in the relics of past ages. 

Abraham, a wanderer from Mesopotamia, where, as yet, no great 
monarchy had arisen, found Egypt already ruled by a Pharoah, and in 
all probability as far advanced in social improvements as we know it to 
have been in the days of his great grandson Joseph. This people, it is 
conceded, were the first to establish civilization and law, to cultivate 
science, letters and art. From Egypt civilization came to G-reece, from 
G-reece to Rome, from Rome to the remoter regions of the West, whence 
it has been carried throughout the globe. 

In the fragmentary history of this country, we find the first record 
extant of dentistry. Herodotus, in speaking of ancient Egypt, says, 
" every place is full of physicians. They are required to practice accord- 
ing to certain precepts, established by men of high reputation, and handed 
down from ancient times in the sacred books. Six of these are enume- 
rated by Clemens Alexandrinus, one treating of the structure of the 
body, another on disease, a third on medical and surgical instruments, a 
fourth on drugs, a fifth on the eyes, and the sixth on female diseases. This 
division and arrangement, comprehending anatomy, physiology, pathology, 
pharmaceutics and surgery, indicates an advanced state of the science. 
The different branches of practice were minutely subdivided, and each 
practitioner confined himself to one. Some were occulists, some dentists, 
some treated diseases of the head, some of the bowels, and some of uncer- 
tain seat. Such appears to be the natural tendency of medical practice 
when carried to a high degree of experimental skill, and exercised among 
a numerous population." " Their system was prophylactic. Attention 
to diet was a leading principle in it, they considered food as the great 
source of disease, and endeavored to counteract its ill effects by frequent 
fasts, as well as by medicine." Herodotus further observes, " that 
except the Libyans, the Egyptians were the healthiest race with whom 
he was acquainted, and he attributes this to the absence of those extremes 
which, in other countries, make the changes of the seasons dangerous." 

You will thereby perceive that the Ancient Egyptians were provided 
with dentists, by a system of medical practice, handed down to them from 
ancient times. This extreme subdivision of the profession, unless counter- 
acted by a comprehensive education, must have tended to reduce the 
medical practice to a mechanical art. 

As a further proof of dental operations in those days. Sir J. Gardiner 
Wilkinson, in his work on the Ancient Egyptians, remarks, that " it is a 
singular fact that dentists adopted a method not very long practiced in 
11 



158 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

Europe, of stopping teeth with gold, proofs of which have been obtained 
from some mummies of Thebes." And further, Belzoni and others, dis- 
covered rudely manufactured teeth in the sarcophagi of the Egyptians. 

As to the state of advancement of the dental art by the Ancient Egypt- 
ians, we have little or no information. The destruction of the Alexan- 
drian library, that vandalism, has blotted out of existence, and forever 
hidden from our view the written records of their history, their knowledge 
of science and the arts, which was treasured in that great storehouse of 
ancient learning. Yet, judging by comparison, when we take into con- 
sideration the manner in which they excelled the after ages in many of 
the arts, (and some are now just being re-discovered;.) they were more 
proficient in this specialty than those who followed them. The Israelites, 
immediately after their exodus, are known to have had great skill and 
proficiency in the working of metals, in cutting and setting precious 
stones, making and coloring fabrics for the tabernacle, and for the priest 
Aaron and his sons, as is recorded in holy writ, which could only have 
been acquired by them in the country they so recently left. "And 
Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians." 

Much has been said and written respecting the antiquity of medicine ; 
but these facts, and numerous others which might be cited, prove con- 
clusively that dentistry claims nearly, if not quite, the same antiquity. 

Dr. Dickerson, of Mississippi, states that in penetrating the mounds of 
the South Western States, he found interesting relics, such as mica mir- 
rors, silver and copper ornaments, beads of jasper, agate, &c., similar to 
those found in Mexico } and several pearls of great beauty and lustre of an 
inch in diameter. By examination of Ihe skulls, he discovered that den- 
tistry had been extensively practiced by this ancient people, as fillings in 
teeth and artificial ones were frequently met with. This is not only 
another evidence of the antiquity of dentistry, but it is strong corrobora- 
tive testimony that this country, at some remote period, was peopled by a 
race far advanced in civilization. 

Albucases, an Arabian physician, who lived in the early part of the 
eleventh century, wrote on the diseases of the teeth, and gave drawings 
of a number of instruments then in use for extracting, scraping, and other 
dental operations \ he refers to filing teeth, and fastening loose ones with 
gold thread. 

It was not until the end of the sixteenth century that the dental art 
began to receive the attention to which its importance and utility so 
eminently entitled it. About thi& time numerous treatises were published 
upon this subject, and, though superceded by more recent discoveries and 
improvements, yet they are interesting evidence that the importance of 
dental surgery was duly appreciated. 



PENNSTLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY, 159 

Since that date, many eminent men have devoted their pens and their 
energies to the investigation of the anatomy, physiology and pathology 
of the dental organs, and the light of science now shines where darkness 
and empiricism formerly prevailed. 

Within the last quarter of a century rapid strides have been made in 
the elevation of the standard of the dental profession, and in its proper 
appreciation by the mass of the community : and now, as the study of it 
is cultivated upon liberal principles, as a science, we may look forward to 
the future with a well-grounded hope for its still greater advancement 
and appreciation. 

Within this time, most valuable improvements and discoveries have 
been made in the operative and mechanical departments ; yet this alone 
could not have produced this happy change ; this state of affairs may be 
mainly attributed to the position the profession has placed itself in, by 
uniting together in societies for the free interchange of sentiment, the 
establishment of dental colleges for the more perfect education of those 
who desire to practice, and a diffusion of dental literature. 

A common error prevails, even in this day, that to be a dentist, it is 
only necessary to be able to extract a tooth, fill a cavity in one, and solder 
an artificial one on a plate. Yet to practice dentistry skillfully in its 
details, to be truly what he professes, requires a much more comprehen- 
sive knowledge ; he must be versed in anatomy, physiology, pathology, 
therapeutics, chemistry and metallurgy. 

The natural inclination and talent of some men enable them to excel in 
one branch, some in another, and some again in another, so, by a free 
interchange of knowledge, all are mutually benefitted. 

This points out to you, gentlemen, the proper course for your observ- 
ance in your onward career ; you have taken the proper initiatory step, 
by studiously educating yourselves in a dental college, and now, when 
you go forth to take the station to which you are justly entitled, connect 
yourselves with some district dental society ; if none exists where you are 
located, bestir yourselves to form one. These local societies or associa- 
tions, being brought together under one general head, or representation of 
all, will concentrate the united wisdom and experience of the whole, which, 
in return, will be reflected back to the benefit of each individual member, 
and thereby elevate our profession. This is a duty you owe to your- 
selves, to dental science, and more especially to your patients, who con- 
fidingly place themselves under your charge, and it is your bounden duty 
that that confidence shall not be misplaced. Ever remember that, in the 
onward march of science, he who halts retrogrades. 

In your intercourse with those who may seek advice or relief by your 
counsel or aid, be courteous, kind and gentle ; soothe the timid, with the 



160 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

assurance that you will give no unnecessary pain j deceive no one, more 
especially a child, as your words and acts will be engraved upon its simple 
and confiding heart as a lasting record for or against you. Let your 
words be true words. Let not the entreaties, or the timidity of your 
patients, or pecuniary remuneration, ever induce you to perform any 
operation at variance with your clear convictions of duty. 

And now, in taking your station in the body politic, do not isolate 
yourselves, nor allow the accumulation of wealth to become a ruling 
principle. It is truly written, " the laborer is worthy of his hire," and, 
" he that provideth not for his own household is worse than an infidel." 
But also remember that we are not such independent beings that we can 
disregard the claims for aid and sympathy of those around us, as the day 
and hour may come, and we know not how soon, when we shall claim such 
aid and sympathy from others. 

We all call upon the great supreme Being as our father, and hence we 
acknowledge our common brotherhood in the family of mankind, and in 
our pursuits of life, for the purpose of gain or pleasure, we should never 
forget our duty to our fellow-man and brother. This great Being has 
given us certain immutable laws for our observance, for our individual 
and the common good, which cannot be disregarded or disobeyed, either 
by men or nations, without incurring a penalty. Look at the avaricious 
man, he may, and most probably will, accumulate the coveted wealth by 
sacrificing his principles, by oppressing the poor and needy, and in old 
age will cling to his treasured idol, devoid of the friendship and sympathy 
•of any to cheer his declining years. Like a barren tree, offering no fruit, 
with no one to water its roots — he ends his miserable existence, leaving 
no trace of the good that he has done, and departs regretted by none. 
And again, he who becomes a slave to his appetites, ruins his health, 
impoverishes his substance, and dies a premature death. 

True happiness and contentment, which all men strive for, come, not 
from the indulgence of our appetites, the accumulation of wealth, or its 
ostentatious display. It is not indigenous to the gorgeous palace, or the 
humble cot, wealth cannot purchase it, the absence of wealth cannot 
deprive us of it, but it springs from a higher and nobler source — the 
conviction of our having done our duty to our fellow-man and to 
Ood. 

History pictures the rise, progress, prosperity and downfall of nations. 
They, too, have their days of usefulness, and having performed their 
mission, or having disregarded that true law essential to their being, close 
their career and are succeeded by others. I trust this will not be the 
fate of ours. In its early days, our forefathers struggled long and suc- 
cessfully to establish a government founded upon equal rights and human 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OP DENTAL SURGERY. 161 

justice. Upon this basis, from its humble beginning, our nation increased 
in strength and might to be surpassed by none upon the face of the globe. 
Blessed with the most perfect government, a varied and congenial climate, 
a most fruitful and productive country, the asylum for the oppressed of 
all nations. Yet, in the midst of all this prosperity and greatness, the 
demon of fratricidal war was let loose among us ; the hand of brother was 
raised against brother, father against son, and son against father 5 strug- 
gling for existence, our nation is bleeding at every pore. But there is 
still hope, and now, after a long period of storm and desolation, a ray of 
light breaks in upon us, and, I trust, in the providence of God this dark 
cloud is passing away, and we shall come out of this ordeal as gold from 
the refiner's fire, and that the principles of our government, based upon 
human rights and justice, may strike deep their roots, and spread wide 
their towering branches, until the whole human race may repose beneath 
their shade. 

The integrity and efiieiency of a community or a nation, depends upon 
the purity of its integral parts. This self-evident fact shows us that a 
responsibility rests upon each and every one of its members, and that 
each and every one must perform his duty to ensure the perfection of the 
whole, all must labor for the common good, none stand listless or idle, 
fearing lest his feeble efforts will be lost, but they will be like the pebble 
dropped into a placid lake, causing wave to succeed encircling wave, until 
they reach its remotest borders. 

And now, gentlemen, in bidding you adieu, I tender you my heartfelt 
wishes, that your days may be long and prosperous, that your career of 
duty, professionally and as citizens, wherever you may be placed, will 
ever be of an exhalted character. And when the scene closes, as the 
summer cloud in the western horizon is gilded by the rays of the setting 
sun, so in the setting swi of your lives, when the panorama of the past 
flits before you, may the visions of the future be gilded by the bright 
emanations from a better world. 

The ceremonies of the evening were closed by the performance of the 
National airs by the orchestra, at the conclusion of which the audience 
were dismissed by benediction. 

Thus ended another of those annual gatherings that mark an era in the 
life history of each student. While the hour has its prospective hopes 
and fears, it is to all, teachers and students alike, one freighted with sad- 
ness. The routine of daily study together is over. In the great busy 
world conflicting duties will separate many of them forever. The hurried 
shake of the hand, the cheerful good-bye, and the session of 1864-5 has 
passed into memory. 



162 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

A LITTLE THING. 

BY C. A. MILBANK, D. D. S. 

When considering our profession in its relation to the public, it is most 
deplorable to reflect upon the mortal dread and terror with which it is 
regarded by so many. This dread all will admit is much more to their 
detriment than to ours. That we give pain, sometimes severe pain, is not 
to be denied, neither can it be denied that this unmanly fear is cause for 
a vast amount of unnecessary suffering. Many a timid person puts off the 
dreaded day till he comes to us at last with his face so swollen that his 
own friends can scarcely recognize him. For such a poor coward 
what can be done but to at once relieve him of his torment, and at 
the same time despoil him of that which, by the exercise of a little 
care and courage at the proper time, might have remained to him a 
blessing, and never have given cause or excuse for the opposite. It is a 
matter of serious regret to our profession that so few can enter a house 
labled " Dentist," without a shiver. That this is true, " 'tis pity and 
pity 'tis, 'tis true, " and more pity 'tis that we can do so little to allay 
this fear ; for as yet, to the attainment of perfect work, pain must some- 
times be given and endured. But having a nervous, timid patient, it is 
not well to make a display of instruments. We have seen an operator 
stand before his patient, for whom he was about to extract, and with all 
the coolness imaginable, wrap a napkin around the handle of his forceps 
as if preparing for a most tremendous exertion, and meanwhile he bore a 
most self-satisfied air, smiling, cheerful and confident as the Benecia Boy 
after the tenth round. 

We remember, most distinctly, the case of a child, who had made up 
his mind to have a tooth out, but who suddenly changed his determination 
upon seeing the Doctor pick up the largest pair of forceps that were upon 
the table. Once, while in a friend's office, a poor boy came in to be rid 
of a troublesome grinder. The Doctor, not being quite ready to attend 
to him, enlivened the time by telling a story of a rough old friend of his 
who, when about to extract for a young lady, was asked by the fair trem- 
bler, " Doctor, will it hurt ?" « Hurt," said he, turning back his cuff, 

" Hurt ; yes, it will hurt like h 1." That is a hard story, but it is 

an " o'er true tale told as it was told to me." It is all very well, doubt- 
less, to go about a disagreeable operation with a certain sangfroid, and 
fiven to make light of it, for the purpose of giving confidence to the 
patient ; but when this verges upon hardheartedness, the patient is sure 
to see it, to the detriment of the operator. This little thing is of import- 
ance, and though remissness is more often the result of thoughtlessness 
than hardheartedness, yet the effect is the same. It is much better to 



AMALGAM. 163 

bear the small inconvenience of the bare forcep handle than to make a 
display before the patient. 



Nbw London. 



AMALGAM. 

BY A. T. JOHNSON. 

For several years I have read with interest the discussions that have 
taken place at the Dental Conventions and Associations. Among the 
various subjects discussed, the use of amalgam, for iSUing teeth has, at times, 
occupied a prominent place ; many object to its use, while it has strenuous 
advocates in its favor. Some object to its use in toto, saying, that any 
tooth that can be, or is worth preserving, should be filled with gold, to 
the exclusion of every other material. 

While I deprecate the use of anything but gold, for filling front teeth, 
I would ask, what shall we do with the molars and bicuspids of a very 
large class of individuals, whose means will not permit them to pay the 
price of a gold plug ; particularly when the cavities are of large size, and 
the charge, per plug, could not be less than ^5, and upwards, even at the 
old quotation of gold. Shall we turn them away in their inability to pay 
the price demanded for gold, telling them that it is the only safe and 
reliable preservative of carious teeth, especially when, in every commu- 
nity, thousands of instances can be cited, of teeth that have been filled 
15 or 20 years with other material, and are still in a good state of pre- 
servation ; which, to say the least, is a tolerable argument in their favor. 

Notwithstanding all that has been said against the use of amalgam, 
about its producing salivation, &c., &c., it is extensively used by a large 
majority of the profession ] a portion of whom, at least, occupy a high 
rank as practitioners. 

The question then arises, which of the various compositions for amalgam 
that have been offered to the profession, is the best. Having been in 
practice between 19 and 20 years, and during that period having made 
thorough trial of many preparations, I have never, as yet, found any that 
will compare favorably with the amalgam prepared by Dr. A. Lawrence, 
of this city. Having used it for several years, I find it uniform in its 
results, neither expanding or contracting, producing no discoloration of 
the teeth, (if properly used;) and in many cases, no change of color on 
the surface of the filling. 

One little item in passing is worthy of notice, which falsifies the old 
proverb, " A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country ;" in 
the fact, that every member of the profession in this city, is in the daily 
use of it. The demand is increasing largely, I learn, which is due to its 



164 * THE DENTAL TIMES. 

good qualities, as it is not extensively advertised. From personal know- 
ledge, I know that the inventor and proprietor supervises the preparation 
of his amalgam from the incipient stages, until it is reduced to powder. 

Having used this amalgam for several years, with the happiest results, 
and having adopted a method of using it, particularly in the finishing of 
the filling, that in some respects may be original ; and thinking, perhaps, 
that a description of my manner of so doing might not be unacceptable 
to those of the profession who use, or may use this amalgam, I will state 
the method in as brief and explicit language as possible. 

After the cavity or cavities to be filled are excavated, I put a sufficient 
quantity of amalgam in a small mortar, add quicksilver, triturate well 
with pestle, then fill the mortar partially full of alcohol, and rub the paste 
with the pestle thoroughly. If the alcohol. is discolored, pour it ofi', and 
put in more, until no discoloration is apparent. Then put the paste in 
linen, or cotton cloth, press out the superfluous quicksilver, rub dry, and 
it is ready for use. In filling crown cavities, I pack them more than full, 
wait a short time for it to harden ; in the meantime, pouring a few drops 
of a preparation called " sozodont," (which acts as a lubricator,) into a 
tumbler of soft water. I then take a small pellet of fine cotton in the 
tweezers, wet the same in the contents of the tumbler, touch ifc to pow- 
dered pumice stone, and then pass it lightly backwards and forwards 
across the filling. I do this at intervals, (using more strength as it 
hardens,) sometimes with pumice, and at others without ; the result is, a 
beautiful filling, flush with and about as smooth as the enamel. For 
approximal and buccal cavities, 1 use for packing the filling, an instru- 
ment similar in shape to a flat burnisher, but much thinner, the end and 
edges being sharp enough to shave off" the surplus material. I then wet 
the end of a thin, wedge-shaped stick, touch it to pumice, and pass it 
gently between the teeth ; after which, I take a thin wisp of cotton, twisted 
slightly, or a bit of narrow tape, wet the same, and add pumice, and pass 
it over the surface of the filling. I do this at intervals, and the result is, 
a filling satisfactory both to the operator and patient. It requires more 
time than the usual manner of finishing such fillings with a burnisher ; 
but, in my estimation, the time is well spent, most certainly as far as the 
patient is concerned, as well as satisfaction to the operator, in the pleas- 
ing results of his manipulations. 

Trusting that I may have uttered no treason against the art preserva- 
tive of the masticating organs, in the above communication, I offer it for 
the consideration of your readers, if you should deem it worthy a place in 
the pages of your journal. Hoping that a perusal of the same may, at 
least, be productive of no harm. 

LowKLL, March, 1865. 






PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION. 165 

PKOFESSIONAL EDUCATION. 

BY T. L. BUCKINGHAM, D. D. S. 

The following extract is taken from the Dental Review, a most excellent quarterly Journal 

published in London. 

" Considering that only a few years have passed since the practitioners 
of Dental Surgery commenced their praiseworthy efforts to elevate the 
standard of the Profession, it is surprising that so much has been accom- 
plished in England. The first agitation, the following separation, and 
final union of active members of our calling have actually produced a 
state of things in advance of any country in the world, not excepting 
America. In the latter country, it is true, a curriculum of study had 
been marked out for the aspirant to professional distinction for a period 
many years anterior to the Dental movement in Great Britain; but, 
with every desire to give credit to the examinations of the several 
licensed Dental Colleges in America, we fear that the number of these 
institutions tends to thwart the very object for which they were estab- 
lished, and that, in consequence, the standard of professional education, 
is tending downward rather than upward. Competition is all very well 
up to a certain point, but in the matter of Dental Colleges in America it 
is carried to excess ; and the legalized institution offering easy means 
towards obtaining the D. D. S. degree is more likely to obtain candidates 
than one which confers the same degree at greater cost of time, trouble 
and expense. Nevertheless, the Profession in America is justly entitled 
to praise for the spirit it has long possessed, and still possesses : and we 
trust a like spirit will permeate the British dentists : but, having delibe- 
rately acknowledged the College of Surgeons as our head, we cannot but 
feel that there is greater security than if there were a chance of compe- 
tition in examinations in so small, comparatively speaking, a body as ours. 
It was either one thing or another — a single independent college or a 
union with the College of Surgeons. The Profession, after ample oppor- 
tunity of discussion, chose the latter ; and to it let us loyally adhere." 

Is the standard of dental education tending downwards rather than 
upwards ? This is a question that should interest every intelligent dentist. 
We do not intend to argue the point whether a student can be as well 
qualified in a private ojQBce to practice, as he can in a dental college ; the 
time for such arguments is past, and settled, we think, in favor of 
colleges ; but whether the multiplicity of colleges tend to raise or lower 
" the standard of professional education" is now the question. While there 
were but three dental colleges in the United States — the Baltimore, Ohio and 
Pennsylvania — there is no question but they tended to strengthen each other, 
and perhaps several others, located in various parts of the country, might 
have been a benefit. But when two are located very near to each other, 



166 



THE DENTAL TIMES. 



SO that the students, before they enter, can go from one to the other, and 
see with which they can make the easiest terms, it becomes a question 
whether they are not rather an injury tiian a benefit. 

If we refer to the medical colleges, some information may probably be 
derived, and we refer to them more freely as they have been held up as 
examples by those who advocate the increased number of dental colleges. 
But we do not admit that one is a fair representation of the other. No 
person attempts to practice medicine in this country without a diploma — 
the profession would not recognize him, nor would the community encou- 
rage him. 

What is the case with dentists'? The community does not require 
them to have a diploma, nor do those who have graduated refuse to asso- 
ciate with those who do not ; they are admitted to all our conventions 
and associations as readily without as they are with a diploma, so that 
there is no distinction between those who attend colleges and those who 
do not. But, waiving the distinctions between the two professions, we 
will accept them as fair representatives of each other, and confine our- 
selves to the colleges of our own city, excluding the Eclectic, Homoeo- 
pathic and Female Colleges, as they have peculiarities which cannot be 
fairly brought in. 

The first college established in this city was the University of Penn- 
sylvania. It was not only the first, but was, for a long time, the only 
medical college in this country. It has just held its one hundred and 
fifteenth commencement ; for over sixty years it has occupied a magnifi- 
cent building ; it has the largest medical museum in the country, and all 
the appliances necessary for teaching, with a very large fund invested for 
its benefit. 

" Such has been the prosperity of this medical institution, the first 
founded in our country, that from the most accurate calculations that can 
be made up to 1830, it is computed that between seven and eight thou- 
sand young men have received instruction within its walls since its estab- 
lishment, and from this source the remotest parts of our Union have been 
furnished with learned physicians, who are ornaments to their profession." 
The class numbered yearly from three to six hundred students. I have 
been particular in stating the advantages of this school for reasons which 
will be given hereafter. 

The second college we refer to is the Jefferson Medical College, which 
was opened in November of 1825. The faculty was composed of men of 
reputation and perseverence. It struggled along for fifteen years before 
any one could tell whether it would live or not. It has now, by the 
perseverence of the faculty, attained a position equal to the first in every- 
thing except age. But now let us notice what effect these colleges have 



PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION. 167 

had on eacli other. The first, until recently, held its sessions from nearly 
the first of October to April, or nearly six months, while the sessions at 
the Jefferson commenced about the same time and closed by the first of 
March. The fees were also much higher at the University than they 
were at the Jefferson. The University has since reduced their fees and 
shortened the term to correspond with the Jefferson. Why was this 
change made ? Was six months longer than was necessary to teach medi- 
cine, or was it because the one that offered the shortest term and the lowest 
fees began to have as many or more students than the other. Certainly 
the session was not too long, for the Professors had to condense their lectures 
to get them into the course. The students were compelled to attend six 
or seven lectures each day, or, what was equivalent, attend the Hospital 
or a clinic, and also the examinations and dissections at night, so that 
there was little or no time left for reading and reviewing the lectures. If 
the sessions had been extended to eight months, instead of shortened, the 
student would have been much benefitted. 

We have selected these two colleges, that some delight to hold up as 
examples, to show that where two schools are located near each other, 
the one offering the greatest inducements, either in time or money, 
will compel the other to come to its standard, providing they are both 
of equal reputation. 

But what has become of the four or five other colleges that have been 
established here ? If the increased number of colleges is a benefit to 
each other by attracting and increasing the number of stddents, as some 
persons contend they do, surely in a city where there are nearly one thou- 
sand medical students, who pay at least one hundred thousand dollars 
annually for medical instruction, more than two colleges should be 
sustained. 

But they were not sustained ; the class was often so small that it did 
not pay the expense of teaching. Some of them closed their doors 
honorably ; while others struggled on for a number of years resorting to 
such means to attract students as rendered them a reproach to the name 
of colleges, and some others even went so far as to sell diplomas to per- 
sons who had never heard a lecture in their rooms. It would not take a 
lengthy argument to prove that such colleges do not tend to elevate a 
profession. We will not now attempt to compare the dental colleges that 
are now in operation, with each other, but leave that to some person who 
has no connection with them. Still we must say that the standard of 
dental education in them is rather tending downwards than upwards^ 
Cases could be pointed to where students have graduated in two months' 
instruction ; and, in other cases, they have entered on the express con- 
dition that they should graduate at the next commencement. 



168 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

The number of medical students attending colleges in this city, in 
1862, was nine hundred and eighty-two, (982.) 

The number of dental students, the same year attending college, was 
forty-one, (41.) 

If nine hundred and eighty-two students would not sustain more than 
two medical colleges, what inducements could there have been to establish 
two dental schools 1 Certainly it could not have been that the number of 
students required it. It may have been that those who wanted to teach, 
required some place to show their talents ; or some one who could not rule 
would not submit to be governed, or for some other cause not yet made 
public. But let the object have been what it would, we think the profes- 
sion, if they have thought on the subject, must see that it was not that 
the two colleges should work together harmoniously and act and re-act 
upon each other so that one might be a benefit to the other. 

Let the standard of dental education in the colleges tend upwards or 
downwards, we are satisfied, in the profession at large, it is on the advance. 
The dental periodicals, the frequent meeting together of the members, 
and at these meetings the desire to show and explain every mode of ope- 
rating ', the comparing of operations as they come into the ofiice, and 
last, though not least, the knowledge of the public on dental operations, 
all tend to advance the profession. We think it can safely be said that 
the profession stands higher now than it has at any other period. 



OAOUTOHOUO. 

ITS HISTORY, PROPERTIES J ITS COMBINATIONS FORMING HARD RUBBER, 

AND THE MANNER OF WORKING IT FOR DENTAL PURPOSES. 

BY E. WILDMAN, M. D., D. D. S. 

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 303, VOL. 11. 

In addition to the experiments given to ascertain the amount of fixed 
matter in rubber offered for dental purposes, I will add two more. 

Eighth. — A specimen of brown or uncolored rubber, manufactured by 
American II. R. Company, yielded four per cent, of dark cinder. 

Jfinth. — A specimen of my own make, composed of fine Para caou- 
tchouc two parts, and sulphur one, (formula A,) produced three per cent, 
of dark cinder. 

These results, compared with experiment sixth, page 100, are so nearly 
similar that they make it evident that the American H. R. Company's 
rubber is not loaded with any fixed matter ; the small disparity in the 
results may arise from the different qualities, or state of purity of the 
caoutchouc used. 

There can be no earthy matter, oxide of zinc or oxide of lead in the 
specimens of the Company's rubber that were examined, for had there been 



MODELS FOR VULCANITE WORK. 169 

earthy matter added, it would have produced more than five per cent, of - 
fixed residue ; oxide of zinc not being volatile, would have produced a 
similar result ; oxide of lead would have shown itself by its reduction, and 
also a greatea* weight of residue. 

These experiments corroborate the position taken in the calculation of 
the value of pink rubber, given in the table on page 103. Many specula- 
tions afe to the composition of red rubber, and the reticence of the manu- 
facturers of it, led me to make the foregoing experiments, to throw some 
light upon the subject ; and now, after repeated trials, I have found that 
the mixture, made according to formula D, (page 102,) gives results in 
working, texture, and external appearance, so near the American H. R. 
Company's rubber, that if not identical with this formula, approximates 
very closely to it. 

As to the propriety of introducing into the mouth rubber colored with 
sulphuret of mercury, I shall reserve my remarks until at the conclusion 
of this article 5 in the meanwhile, I would advise those who have seen 
injurious effects resulting from its use to discard it ; to those who are in 
doubt upon this subject, let them consult the best medical authorities 
upon the eff'ect of this substance upon the animal economy, and ascertain 
why its internal use has been discarded by medical practitioners ; also, its 
volatility at the temperature of the mouth, and the extent of the abrasion 
of a piece of vulcanite work in a given time, say one year's wear. This 
investigation will give data from which the doubting can satisfy themselves 
as to the fitness of rubber colored with vermillion for dental purposes. 

This brings to a close for the present the subject of rubber composi- 
tions, and next in order will be taken up the manner of working them. 
Owing to the press of matter for this number, this has been unavoidably 
postponed until the next. 



TO STRENGTHEN MODELS TOR VULCANITE WOEK. 

I have frequently been very greatly benefitted by a single thought 
or suggestion gleaned from the Times, or some other dental journal ; 
therefore, by your permission, I will give to the profession, through 
the columns of your excellent journal, an expedient that suggested 
itself to my mind, and which has been of great importance to me. 
Whether others have resorted to the same I cannot say. In making 
the vulcanite models, they are frequently, along the anterior portion, so 
thin as to be insufficient to sustain the pressure necessarily brought upon 
them in closing the flask. The result is that the model breaks, and the 
work is spoiled. I have succeeded in overcoming that difficulty by the 



170 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

following expedient. After taking the impression, if I observe points 
liable to the above difficulty, I take pieces of wire, about three-quarters 
of an inch in length, file them to a very fine point, and stick a sufficient 
number of them in the impression, at the points liable to break, then 
proceed to make the model as usual. The points of the wires will be 
found protruding above the surface of the model, and may be dressed off 
with a file. I am well pleased with the Dental Times. 

Israel Williams. 

New Philadblphii., Ohio. 



A CASE OP ALVEOLAR ABSCESS. 

BY S. C. RICHARDSON, D. D. S., MATTOON, ILLINOIS. 

Mr. Gr., a native of East Tennessee, aged twenty-six years, (com- 
plexion fair, light hair and blue eyes,) applied to me, September 24th, 
1864, complaining of a discharge, which had been taking place below 
and one inch anterior to the right tuberosity of the superior maxil- 
lary bone, for a period of eleven months, at irregular periods. Upon 
examination, I found the roots of the first and second right superior 
molars remaining. Suspected that they had some connection with the 
case, and advised their extraction. He declined for a few weeks, but 
returned, complaining of a slight soreness in them whenever the pus caused 
a tenseness of the abscess. Stated that he had been treated for scrofula ; 
but one physician of several who examined the case, intimated that the 
roots might have something to do in produeing the trouble. I removed the 
roots, and in three weeks the discharge entirely ceased, leaving but a 
large- cicatrix to mark its former locality. The patient called on me 
to-day, (March 11th,) and I see no indications of a recurrence of the 
abscess. 

CEMENT FOE PLASTER CASTS. 

BY ALEX, O'CALLAGHAN, D. D. S., PHILADELPHIA. 

As we are all liable through accident to break one or more teeth off 
of our plaster casts, and sometimes to break the casts themselves, I 
think it is an object with the dentist to have some article on hand in 
the laboratory with which to repair them. 1 have lately tried the " liquid 
silex," and find it preferable to any other cement. It makes a very 
strong and most perfect union of the broken parts. I am satisfied, that 
after one trial no dentist will be without it. My method is to moisten 
the broken parts with the preparation, and to press them firmly together 
for a minute of so, then to place the cast on the stove for about half an 
hour. 



DENTAL REGISTER OF THE WEST. 171 



In THE editorial department of the December number of the Denial 
Register of the West, (which has been received since our last number was 
issued,) is published the " Reminiscence — Valedictory" of Dr. George 
Watt, who, " nearly nine years ago became editorially connected with " 
that periodical. We are sorry to see that the Doctor has found it neces- 
sary to make this change. But that there must have been good reasons 
for doing so is evident from the tone of his valedictory, in which he says, 
" Taking up the editorial pen was the occasion of much anxiety ; laying 
it down again stirs the 'fount of feeling' still deeper. But now, as then, 
the matter has been carefully weighed before the responsibility is taken. 
Does the reader doubt it ? Then listen to what is involved in the step. 
Personally, to the writer is lost a great portion of his interest in the 
profession, and a much greater portion of the profession's interest in him. 
Persons who seldom meet and converse together cease to be warmly 
interested in each other. The monthly conversation of the Register with 
its readers no longer forms a tie between the writer and his brethern. 
Now they are brethren of a scattered household, and he is to them as a 
stranger." We can scarce think it can be as he says in one part of the 
above quotation, that he has " lost a great portion of his interest in the 
profession," and we certainly know that the other part of the sentence is 
not correct, " a much greater portion of the profession's interest in him," 
for there was no writer in the dental profession whose articles were read 
with more interest than his, and although sometimes they were quite 
caustic, (as we can bear testimony more than once,) still they were like 
applying the actual cautery to an indolent ulcer — they either stimulated 
the parts to a more vigorous action, or they caused them to die and slough 
off; in either case the body was benefitted. But as the Doctor has only 
put off the editorial harness, we hope that he will continue to contribute 
to the journals, for we cannot afford to loose so able a writer. He must 
remember that the time allotted to man to do his work in is " three score 
and. ten years," and he has over twenty of that time to make up. But, 
whether the Doctor contributes to the dental literature or remains silent, 
he will always be gratefully remembered, for socially he was one of the 
pleasantest companions we ever met with. T. L. b. 



We are sure that the readers of the Dental Times will regret to hear, 
that Prof. C. N. Peirce has found it necessary to resign his active duties 
in the Faculty that edit this Journal, on account of the amount of busi- 
ness requiring his personal attention. He has been compelled to give up 
his position in the college ; but although he retires from the active duties 



172 THE DENTAIi TIMES. 

in the Faculty, still he will take part in their proceedings. The Trustees 
of the College, in consideration of the valuable services rendered while in 
the Faculty, unanimously elected him Emeritus Professor of Operative 
Dentistry. 

The chair vacated by the resignation of Prof. Peirce, will hereafter be 
filled by Dr. James Truman, who has for a number of years been Demon- 
strator of Operative Dentistry, one of the most responsible positions in 
the college, as the occupant is expected to demonstrate in practice the 
principle taught by the various chairs. He is every day called upon to 
diagnose the most obscure cases, as well as to assist in all diflGicult opera- 
tions ; and these he must do at a moment's notice, surrounded by the 
whole class. How well he has performed these arduous duties, we can 
confidently refer to the different classes that have had the benefit of his 
instructions. t. l. b. 



Donations to College Museum. — From Dr. George B. Snow, of 
Buff'alo, N. Y., a blow-pipe and burner of novel construction. It is so 
arranged that the atmospheric air combines with the gas before the 
current of air from the blow-pipe strikes the gas, and thereby ensures 
complete combustion, consequently evolves a great amount of heat. It 
is a very ingenious and eff'ective instrument. We cannot give an intelli- 
gible description of it without an engraving. 

From Dr. John Q. Birkey, of Philadelphia, a dens sapientise, with 
abnormal roots ; also, human teeth from a necklace of a Cannibal Chief. 

e. w. 



PUBLISHEKS' NOTICE. 

The present number closes the second volume of the Dental Times. 
The simple announcement of this fact will suggest to our friends the 
advantage of an early renewal of their subscriptions. The general 
character of the journal will be continued as heretofore, but we expect to 
make such improvements in the next volume as may have been suggested 
by past experience. We have endeavored to make the Times worthy a 
place in the library of every practitioner of dentistry, and to this end 
have earnestly requested articles from any one having an original thought 
to communicate. We return our thanks to those who have given us 
valuable aid in this respect in the past, and hope to have the circle of 
contributors enlarged in succeeding numbers. 

We would call attention to the important changes in the Faculty of the 
College, made necessary by the retirement of Prof. C. N. Peirce. All 
communications for this journal, or relating to the business of the College, 
should be addressed hereafter to 

Dr. T. L. Buckingham, Dean, 243 North Ninth Street, Phila. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 



173 



PENNSYLVlNll COLLEGE OF DENTIL SURGERY. 

THE TENTH ANNUAL SESSION, 1865"'66. 




^?)5?5^(^'gDr|r|g^ 



HENRY C. CAREY, President, GEORGE TRUMAN, M. D., 

W. L. ATLEE, M. D., S. DILLINGHAM, D. D. S., 

DANIEL NEALL, D. D. S., G. R. MOREHOUSE, M. D., 

ELLESLIE WALLACE, M. D., THOMAS WOOD, 

BENJAMIN MALONE, M. D., J. R. McCURDY, 

W. W. FOUCHE, D. D. S., CHARLES HAMILTON, Sb Y. 
12 



174 THE DENTAL TIMES. 



J. D. WHITE, D. D. S., 

EMERITUS PROFESSOR. • 

0. N. PEIRCE, D. D. S., 

EMERITUS PROFESSOR OF OPERATIVE DENTISTRY. 

T. L. BUCKINGHAM, D. P. S., 

PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY AND METALLURGY. 

E. WILPMAN, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF MECHANICAL DENTISTRY. 

G. T. BARKER, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF PRINCIPLES OF DENTAL SURGERY AND THERAPEUTICS. 

W. S. FORBES, M. D., D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY. 

JAMES TRUMAN, D. D. S., 

PROFESSOR OF DENTAL PHYSIOLOGY AND OPERATIVE DENTISTRY. 

EDWIN T. DARBY, D. D. S., 

DEMONSTRATOR OF OPERATIVE DENTISTRY. 

J. M. BARSTOW, 

DEMONSTRATOR OF MECHANICAL DENTISTRY. 



The Lectures to the Eegular Course will commence on the 
1st of November and continue until the 1st of March. 

During the last two weeks of October, preliminary Lectures are delivered, 
one each day. 

The Rooms for Operative and Mechanical Dentistry are open from the 
1st of October and throughout the session, under the supervision of the 
Demonstrators. 

The Dissecting Room, under the superintendence of the Professor of 
Anatomy and Physiology, is open during the session. 

Fees for the Course, (Demonstrators' Ticket included,) - $100 
Matriculation, (paid but once,) - - . - 5 

Diploma Fee, ---.-. 30 

T. L. BUCKINGHAM, Dean, 

C. p. REESS, Janitor. 243 North Ninth St., Philadelphia. 

p, s, — Board may be had at from $3.50 to $6.00 per week. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 175 



PEraSYLTANIA COLLEGE OP DENTAL SURaEKY. 

The Tenth Annual Session, l865-'66. 

The tenth annual session of the Pennsylvania College of Dental Sur- 
gery will commence on the first of November, and continue until the first 
of March. Preliminary lectures will, however, be delivered each day 
during the latter half of the month of October. The Dispensary and 
Laboratory of the College will also be open from that time, where ample 
opportunities will be afforded for the prosecution of the practical part of 
the profession under the daily supervision of the Demonstrators, who are 
gentlemen of known integrity and thorough capability. During October, 
as well as the entire session, a clinical lecture will be delivered, and 
operations performed by one of the Professors every Saturday afternoon. 

The course is so arranged that fifteen lectures are delivered each week, 
on the various branches taught in the school. A synopsis of the manner 
in which each department is treated will be found under the head of the 
different chairs. 

These lectures occupy about the average time of three hours each day. 
In addition, four hours are daily spent by the student in actual practice. 
With this object in view, the operating rooms are furnished with twenty 
chairs, so arranged as to command the best light, and all the appliances 
necessary for comfort and use. To these chairs the students are assigned 
in classes, and certain hours are fixed for each member of the class to 
operate. 

Each student is required to provide his own instruments, (except those 
for extracting,) and to operate with them. He is expected to keep them 
in perfect order, and for that purpose is provided with a table in which 
they can be locked up when not in use. As the operations performed at 
the College are entirely gratuitous, a superabundance of patients invari- 
ably present themselves. 

In the mechanical department every process known in the profession, 
which has any value to the mechanical dentist, is fully taught ; and 
receipts of valuable compounds are freely imparted. All the conveniences 
are at hand in the Laboratory for the preparation of metals, manufacture 
of teeth, (single and in blocks,) mounting, etc. 5 and the student is 
required to go through all the necessary manipulations connected with the 
insertion of artificial teeth — from taking the impression to the thorough 
construction of the denture, and proper adjustment of it in the mouth of 
the patient. 



1T6 THE DENTAL TIMES, 

In addition to the facilities afforded by the College for a thorough course 
of instruction in the theory and practice of Dentistry, the celebrated 
hospitals and clinics of the city constantly enable the student to witness 
various important surgical operations which are highly interejiting and 
instructive. The medical and surgical clinics of the Blockley Hospital, 
in particular, one of the largest eleemosynary establishments in the world, 
are open to Medical and Dental students, free of charge. The staif of 
this institution is composed of some of the most eminent physicians and 
surgeons of Philadelphia. 



COURSE OF LEOTXJEES. 



CHEMISTET AM METALLUEGY. 

The course of instruction from this chair will commence with the con- 
sideration of the imponderable substances. 

The laws that govern the imponderable bodies will next claim attention, 
with some notice of symbols or chemical notations. Individual elements, 
and the compounds resulting from their combinations, will then be con- 
sidered. Organic chemistry will receive its full share of attention. 

The course will be illustrated by diagrams and such experiments as can 
be performed before the class. 



DENTAL PHYSIOLOGY AUD OPEEATIVE DENTISTEY. 

The lectures in this department will embrace the Physiological Ana- 
tomy of the teeth, general and microscopical, in addition to a minute and 
careful description of the various operations performed by the dental prac* 
titioner. 

The microscope, models and diagrams, will be employed in illustration. 

At the Clinic the incumbent of this chair will also demonstrate before 
the class the various operations described in his course of lectures. 



MECHANICAL DENTISTEY. 
The instruction from this chair will embrace the entire range of manip- 
ulations legitimately connected with the laboratory, arranged in two divi- 
sions — Mechanical Dentistry proper, and that to which has been applied 
the appellation of the Plastic department. 



PENNSYLVANIA COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 177 

I. Mechanical dentistry proper will include everything appertaining to 
the construction of dental substitutes, passing through the different stages 
of preparation, from taking the impression, to the completion and proper 
adjustment of the ease in the mouth, conjointly with features, expression 
of countenance, enunciation, etc. It will likewise embrace the metallurgic 
treatment of the various metals employed, the preparation of plate and 
wire, the alloying of gold, together with the alloys used, as well as those 
designated as solders. 

II. This division will comprise all that appropriately belongs to the 
manufacture of porcelain or mineral teeth — single teeth, block- work, con- 
tinuous gum-work, vulcanite, etc. The materials, their preparation, 
compounds and uses, will be specially regarded. 

All new inventions, modifications, and improvements, in this branch of 
the art, will in place receive due attention and investigation. 



PRIITOIPLES OF DENTAL SUKGEET AND THERAPEUTICS. 

The lectures delivered from this chair will embrace General Pathology, 
Dental Pathology, the Pathological Relations of the Teeth to other parts 
of the System, together with a minute description of all special diseases 
that have any relation to Dental Surgery, or of interest to the Dentist. 

They will also include a careful examination of therapeutic agents and 
their general application. Their indications in the medical and surgical 
treatment of diseases of the mouth, both idiopathic and symptomatic, will 
be fully illustrated, and also the general hygienic rules and principles 
which come within the province of the practitioner. 



ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY. 

The instruction in this department will embrace a plain and compre- 
hensive view of the structure and functions of the Human Economy. The 
valuable anatomical preparations of the incumbent of this chair, (consist- 
ing of Papier Mache manikins, models in wood, drawings, wet and dry 
preparations,) will enable him to fully illustrate his course. With the 
same object, vivisections on the lower animals will also be employed. 

The special relations of this branch to the wants of the dentist will be 
kept steadily in view, and such descriptions of the natural history, micro- 
scopical structure, connections, &c., of the teeth, as their importance 
demands, will be given. 

The great facilities for the study of practical anatomy, to be found in 
the city of Philadelphia, obviate the necessity of providing a dissecting- 



178 THE DENTAL TIMES. 

room in the College. For the usual fee of $10, the student can have 
access to one of several well-ordered and well-supplied dissecting-rooms. 



EEGULATIONS. 



The candidate must be twenty-one years of age. He must have studied 
under a private preceptor at least two years, including his course of 
iustruction at the College. Attendance on two full courses of lectures in 
this institution will be required, but satisfactory evidence of having attended 
one full course of lectures in any respectable dental or medical school, will 
be considered equivalent to the first course of lectures in this College : five 
years' practice, inclusive of the term of pupilage, will also be considered 
equivalent to the first course of lectures. The candidate for graduation 
must prepare a thesis upon some subject connected with the theory or 
pr ctice of dentistry. He must treat thoroughly some patient requiring all 
the usual dental operations, and bring such patient before the Professor of 
Operative Dentistry. He must, also, take up at least one artificial case, 
and after it is completed, bring his patient before the Professor of 
Mechanical Dentistry. He must, also, prepare a specimen case to be 
deposited in the College collection. The operations must be performed, 
and the work in the artificial cases done, at the College building. He must 
also undergo an examination by the Faculty, when, if found qualified, he 
shall be recommended to the Board of Trustees : and, if approved by them, 
shall receive the degree of Doctor of Dental Surgery. 

TEXT BOOKS AND WOEKS OF EEPEKEITOE. 



Wilson's, or Leidy's Sharpey & Quains' Anatomy ; Carpenter's Physi- 
ology, or Dun'glison's Human Physiology ; United States Dispensatory j 
Mitchell's Materia Medica ; Fownes' Elements of Chemistry ; Regnault's 
Chemistry ; Lehmann's Pysiological Chemistry j C. J. B. Williams' Prin- 
ciples of Medicine ; Wood's Practice ; Tomes' Dental Physiology and 
Surgery ; Harris' Principles and Practice ; Taft's Operative Dentistry ; 
Richardson's Mechanical Dentistry ; Paget's Surgical Pathology, or other 
standard works on the subject. 




VOL. I. 



JULY, i863. 



NO. 1. 




THE 



DENTAL TIMES, 



A 



aUARTERLY JOURNAL 



OP 



DENTAL SCIENCE. 



EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 



THE FJ^OULTY 



OP TUB 



Gi 



V 



'/ViV/viyiV' iUiy ^ 



PHILADELPHIA. 




PRICE 81.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE. 




OOlSTTElsTTS. 



FACE. 
1 



Prospectus, ------------ 

Matter and its Properties, by T. L. Buckingham, D.D.S., - - - - 1 

The Phosphates in Dental Hygiene, by Edward Parrish, - - - - 6 

Alloys of Gold, by E. Wildman, M. D., D. D. S., - - ^ - - 9 

Dental Education, by J. Marcelin, D. D. S., - - - - - - - 15 

The Dental Clinic, by James Truman, D. D. S., - - - - - • 17 

Astringents, by George T. Barker, D. D. S., - - 21 

Mouth "Washes and Dentifrices, by Wm. C. Bakes, ----- 26 

A Case in Practice, by J. W. Vandevort, D. D. S., 29 

Clasps on Rubber Work, by E. N. Bailey, D.D.S., 30 

Comparatire Anatomy of the Teeth, by C. N. Peirce, D. D. S., - - - 31 

Dental Therapeutics, by George T. Barker, D.D.S., - - - - - 33 

Announcement of Pennsylvania College of Dental Surgery, - - - - 36 

Demonstrators' Report, ----------40 

Matriculants and Graduates of 1862-63, -------41 



TO THE PKOPESSION. 

In issuing the " Dental Times," we desire to make it of interest to 
the mass of practitioners. In furthering this end we would earnestly 
solicit from our professional friends, communications on any branch of our 
specialty. Let no one hesitate because they have nothing rare, or of 
particular interest, nor from the fear of being unable to clothe their ideas 
in language that will please the most fastidious j give us the facts, and 
the method, and we will lay them before our readers so that all will under- 
stand and many be instructed. 

We send the first number of the periodical to all whose names are 
known to us; those who meet with this notice, and have not received it, 
will confer a favor by sending their name and address to C. N. Peirce, 
501 North Seventh street ; also notify us when changiug their location, 
for we desire to obtain, and keep a corrected list, of the dentists in the 
United States. 

The price of the " Dental Times" is one dollar per annum, in advance. 
Those who inclose the amount with their name and address will be sure to 
receive it punctually, and without delay. We regret the absence of an 
article from Professor Forbes, but he is at present with the army in front 
of Yicksburg, rendering aid to the sick and wounded, therefore has not 
the time ; but the readers of subsequent numbers will have the pleasure of 
communications from his ready pen. 



DENTAL MEETINaS. 

The Ninth Annual Session of the American Dental Convention will be 
held at Saratoga Springs, N. Y., on Tuesday, August 4th, 1863. 

The Annual Meeting of the American Dental Association will be held 
at Philadelphia, on Tuesday, July 28th, 1863. 



OHIO COLLEGE OF DENTAL SURGERY. 

SESSION OF 1863-64. 

The regular course of Lectures in this Institution, will commence on the first 
Monday of November, and close on the 20th of February, 

JAS. TAYLOR, D. D. S.,<171 Race Street,) Institutes of Dental Science. 

J. TAFT, D. D. S., (172 Race Street,) Operative Dentistry. 

GEO. EDWIN JONES, M. D., (431 West Seventh St.,) Anatomy and Physiology. 

11. R. SMITH, D. D. S., (13 West Fourth Street,) Mechanical Dentistry. 

•H. A. SMITH, D. D. S., (118 West Sixth Street,) Chemistry and Metallurgy. 

E. COLLINS, D. D. S., Adjunct Prof, of Operative and Mechanical Dentistry. 

Text Books. — Gray's and Williams' Anatomy; Carpenter's, Todd's and 
Boman's Physiology; Williams' Pathology; Fown's, Turner's, Graham's, or Brand 
and Taylor's Chemistry; Taft's Operative Dentistry; Richardson's Mechanical 
Dentistry; Harris' Principles and Practice of Dental Science. 

Terms of J\-d.m.ission. 

Tickets must be procured at the beginning of the session. 
Tickets for the course, - - $100 00 
Matriculation Fee, - - - 5 00 

Diploma Fee, - - - - 30 00 

Terms of Grraduation. 

Two courses with a dental pupilage. 

Four years reputable practice will be received as equal to one course. 

An acceptable thesis upon a subject on Dental Science. 

Must possess a ^od moral character, and be twenty-one years old. 

For further information, address J. TAYLOR, Dean, or 

J. TAFT, Secretary. 

TO 33 E!n>a-Tis;TS- 



THE CHEAPEST DENTAL DEPOT IN THE CITY 

FOB THE 



OP ALL KIKDS, 

FORCEPS, PLUGGERS, SCALERS, EXCAVATORS, BURRS, 
CHAIRS, SPITTOONS, LATHES, 

Together with a General Assortment of all kinds of 

DENTAL INSTRUMENTS, MATERIALS, &C. 

WHOLESALE AND RETAIL, AT 

JOHN" KLEIN'S 
No. 22 North Eighth St., Philadelphia. " 

N. B. — Que price, and all goods warranted as represented. Cash 
orders promptly filled. 



^^JOHNSON ^ LUND, 



MANUFACTURERS OP 



IMPHOV^ED 



Acknowledged by a large share of the 

AMERICAN PEOFESSION 




» 



10 BE 



UPERIOE TO ill OTHER 

NOW MADE. 

DEALERS IN ALL ARTICLES ^ 



RELATIVE EITHER TO THE 



Read Testimoiiials oil next Page. 



ALSO, 



DENTAL QUARTERLY 

Devoted to the interests of Dental Science. 



EDITED BY 



DR. ^]sj:bi.er tees. 



AND 



E. N. JOHNSON". 
r>Ei»ox, 

No. 27 North Seventh Street, 



TESTIMONlALS.juo 



This is to certify that I have used the various and most of the different manu- 
facturers' teeth for the last eight years, and now give to Johnson & Lund's the 
choice ; deeming them as combining the most desirable qualities looked for in arti- 
ficial teeth ; such as naturalness of color, shape, symmetry and beauty of ar- 
rangement, COMELINESS OF EXPRESSION in the mouth, and strength and firmness 
for use. R. WALKER, Owego, New York. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund ; — 

Gents : — I have had an opportunity of using some of your beautiful teeth, and 
can pronounce them Excelsior. They stand the fire well, and are in every respect 
worthy. S. J. BRACKETT, St. Louis, Mo. 



Having within the last thirteen years used teeth from nearly every establishment 
in the Union, I have no hesitation in saying that Johnson & Lund's teeth, as lately 
improved, present a greater combination of desirable qualities than do those of any 
other one establishment ; and I cheerfully recommend them to the profession as a 
decidedly superior article. F. O. HYATT, Cortlandville, New York. 



If there is such a thing as perfection in the manufacture of artificial teeth, 
Johnson & Lund have certainly attained it. E.J. LARASON, Philadelphia. 

Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Gentlemen — Having used your teeth in my practice for the past year, and 
finding them superior to all others in beauty, natural appearance, and dura- 
bility, I hereby add my humble testimony in their favor. 

Yours, respectfully, B. F. CLARK, Flint, Michigan. 



I have used Teeth from the different manufacturers for ten years, and have 
discovered in none those qualities which so nearly approach a desideratum as the 
productions of Johnson & Lund. Their resemblance to nature in shape, shade and 
transparency is unsurpassed ; and their freedom from brittleness under the hammer, 
and unequalled endurance under the blow-pipe, show that the proportion of their 
ingredients effect such a happy combination as to leave little room for improvement 
in respect to general strength. S. H. COSTEJN", Philadelphia. 



I use Johnson & Lund's make of Artificial Teeth, and can recommend them as 
being perfect in every particular ; they give complete satisfaction, and leave nothing 
further to be desired. J. M. BARRETT, Wilkesbarre, Pa. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Dear Sirs : — I take pkasure in adding my certificate in favor of your teeth. 
They are without a fault. A. H. FOWLER, Ithica, New York. 



Messrs. Johnson &Lund: — 

Gentlemen — You ask me how I like your teeth. I must say that I prefer them 
to those of any other manufacturer. The beautiful shape, the life-like and natural 
shades, and their strength under the blow-pipe and hammer, render them all that the 
dentist could desire. The perfection you have attained in the manufacture of 
artificial teeth, deserves the thanks and substantial support of the dental profession. 
Wishing you success, I remain. Yours, truly, M. LUKENS LONG, Phila. 

Having used Johnson & Lund's Teeth to my perfect satisfaction, I would earn- 
estly recommend them to Dentists in search of a superior article, and one that will 
always please. S. F. TREMAIN, (Of the Firm Tremain Bro.'s,) Rome, N. Y. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Having during the past year used five hundred dollars worth of your teeth, we 
have come to the conclusion to use none other now manufactured. 

HOLBROOK, BUTLER & HUNTINGTON. 
Watertown, N. Y., March 23, 1863. 



ORUM & ARMSTRONG-, 

N^O. 520 ^ROH STREET^ 

PHILADELPHIA, 

MANUFACTURERS OF THE 

Most Improved Gum Sections and Plain Teeth, 

FOI^ THE "V^XJi:^O.A.3SriTE B-A.SE. 

ALSO, 

GUM & PLAIN TEETH FOR PLATE WORK, 

With all otber Articles used in Dentistry. 

CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

MANUFACTURERS OF 

DENTISTS' FINE GOLD AND TIN FOIL, 

l^OS- SS8 Sc SSO ]PEu^Pt STPIEET, 
PHII^ADErPHIA, 

The attention of Dentists is invited to our FIRIE GOLO FOIL, which is 
prepared under our constant personal supervision. Our Nos. are 4, 5, 6, 8 
and 10. 

We are also manufacturing an ADQESITE FIIVE OOL.D FOIL, 

Nos. 4, 5 and 6. 

f 
Alil. our Gold Foil is manufactured from ABSOI.UTEL.Y PURE 

GOLD, prepared expressly for the purpose, with great care, by ourselves. 

DENTISTS' REFINED TIN FOIL CONSTANTLY ON HAND. 

Address CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

Philadelphia. 



HORATIO C. KERIM, 



MANUPACTUKER OP 



SURGICiL & D[IIT1L INSIflOMEmS, FIIEUC. 



The subscriber would again remind the profession that he still continues 
to manufacture all kinds of Instruments, Dental Files, &c. 

From the flattering testimonials he has received, (of which a few are 
appended,) of the superior quality of his Instruments and Files, he feela 
confidence in his ability to produce an article fully equal to any made. 

Assiduous attention to the details of the business, (with an experience 
of thirty years,) has enabled him to make many improvements in the 
adaptation to the specific purpose ; and, as the success of an operation 
depends, in some degree, on the adaptation of the instruments to the par- 
ticular character of the operation, it needs no argument to convince those 
wishing to procure instruments, of the importance of purchasing the manu- 
facture of those of long and well established reputation. Any orders ten- 
dered him will be promptly attended to. Illustrated catalogues will be 
furnished on application. 

HORATIO G. KERN, 
No. 25 North Sixth Street, Philadelphia 



501 North Seventh Street, Philadelphia, June Sth, 1863. 
H. G. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators which you handed me some 
days since I have had in constant use, and take great pleasure in stating 
that I believe them to be a superior article, both in their ability to retain a 
sharp cutting edge, and withstand the force essential to the operation. 
Yours, &c. C. N. Pierce, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. G. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators recently manufactured 
by you have been used with the utmost satisfaction. I can give them an 
unqualified recommendation. Yours, respectfull}^, 

June 26th, 1863. Geo. T. Barker, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. G. Kern — Dear Sir — The last excavators obtained from you 
are of a very superior quality. I can recommend them as being equal to 
any I have ever used. T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S. 

June 25th, 1863. 



mm 



m 



A substitute for Amalgam in filling badly decayed teeth ; and used 
for resetting Pivot Teeth in badly decayed roots ; also for filling over 
Sensitive Dentine to destroy sensibility, and as a non-conductor of 
heat, and for many other Dental Purposes. 

For sale by all dealers in Dental Materials and by the undersigned. 

One fourth ounce packages, with directions, sent by mail free of post- 
age, on receipt of $1. 

O. H. ROBERTS, M. D., 

POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y. 



HIGH PRESSUKE 



YULCANIZING OYEN. 



ALSO, 




liiLii. 



Steam Joint secured by means of a Screw Collar and Set Screws. JVb 
Bolts — no JVuts — no Friction on the Rubber Packing. 

These machines Vulcanize in 40 minutes at 320°j make the best quality 

of work; consume but one fluid ounce of alcohol, and 

produce no smell of sulphur in the rooms. 



3F" ILI O E! 

^11 complete, ^vitla FnrnitTire. 

For one case, oven copper, .$11 00 

For two cases, oven copper 12 00 

For three cases, boiler copper, 13 00 

Pamphlets sent, on application, gratis. 

For testimonials see advertisement in Dental Cosmos, January num- 
ber, 1862. Address . 

QEORQE E. EE^YS, 

BUFFALO, N. Y. 
D^ For sale at the Dental Depots. 



C4 

o 



a 

u 



» 
O 

O 
Q 

O 



I— I 
W 



1^ 



8 

o 

■ 

M 
1^ 














S0 





^ 




^ 




i2! 



%Mi^ _^ 



o® 



PUBLISHED BY 

LINDSAY & BLAKISTON, 

1. 
Harris's Principles and Practice of Dental Surgery. 

The Eighth Revised and Enlarged Edition, with 250 Ilhistrations, u'i7Z be rmdu 
m Jugust. Price, $5.00. 

2. 

System of Dental Surgery, 

By John Tomes, F. R. S., author of « Tomes' Dental Physiology," &c. &c. 
With 208 beautifully executed Illustrations. One Volume. Price, $3.50. 

3. 

Richardson's Practical Treatise on Mechanical Dentistry. 

By Joseph Richardson, D. D. S., Professor of Mechanical Dentistry in the 
Ohio College of Dental Surgery, &c. One Volume, with over 100 Illustra- 
tions. Price, $3.50. 

4. 

Taft's Practical Treatise on Operative Dentistry. 

By Jonathan Taft, D.D. S., Professor of Operative Dentistry in the Ohio 
Oolloge of Dental Surgery, &c. With eighty well-executed Illustrations. One 
Volume. Price, $3.00. 

5. 

Bond's Practical Treatise on Dental Medicine ; 

As connected with the Study of Dental Surgery. By Thomas E. Bond, M. D., 
1 rotessor ol Special Pathology and Therapeutics in the Baltimore College of 
Dental Surgery. The Third Enlarged Edition. One Volume. Price, $3.00. 

6. 

Handy's Text-Book of Anatomy, 

And Guide to Dissections. For the use of Students of Medicine and Dental 
Surgery. By Washington R. Handy, M. D., late Professor of Anatomy and 
Physiology in the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery. With 312 Illustra- 
tions. One Volume. Price, $3.00. 

7. 

Piggot's Dental Chemistry and Metallurgy. 

Containing Physiological Chemistry, as applied to Dentistry, &c. By A. 
Snowden Piggot, M. D., Professor of Practical and Analytical Chemistry, &c. 
One Volume. Price, $3.00. 

8. 

Fox and Harris on |he Human Teeth : 

Their Natural History and Structure, Treatment, &c. One Volume, with 250 
Illustrations. Price, $3.00. 

9, 

Robertson's Manual for Extracting Teeth, 

With Illustrations, preparing. 

10. 
A Complete Descriptive and Priced Catalogue of 

MEDICAI., DEiVTAL. AND SCIEIHTIFIC BOOKS 

Furnished gratis, upon application to 

LINDSAY & BLAKISTON, Publishers, 

25 South Sixth Street, above Chestnut, Philadelphia. 



if 




VOL. I. 



OCTOBER, 1863. 



NO. 2. 




O 



-- g»\ iV, |., -Lv 



o 



Tn-EC SEP10 18«9 



DENTAL T 




^ 



r.3 iV V (- ■•: 




aUARTERLY JOURNAL 



OF 



DENTAL SCIENCE. 



EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 



THE FACULTY 



OP THE 



|mj^|toai:ii MUp $i §mM f iwgii?| 



PHILADELPHIA. 




PRICE Sl.OO A YEAR, IN ADVANCE. 




CO IsT T E ISr T S- 



PAGE 



Alloys Of GoM, by E.Wildman,M.D.,D. D. S., 49 

Dentifrices, &c., by Charles E. Francis, - - - - - - - 50 

Fractures of Lower Law, by Dr. L. C. "Whiting, - 58 

Supernumerary Teeth, by James Truman, D. D. S., - - - - - 50 

Astringents, by Geo. T. Barker, D. D. S., 62 

Matter and its Properties, by T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S., - - - 68 

Quack Advertisements, by John W. Vandevort, D. D. S., - - - - 70 

WewBooks, by C.N. Pierce, D. D. S., 72 

Immobility of the Jaw, by C. N. Peirce, D. D. S., . ^ . - - 78 

Mineral and Osseous Phosphates, by J. L. Peirce, M. D., - - - - 73 

Maxillary Periostitis, by E. Harvey, M. D., 74 

Proceedings of the American Dental Association and Convention, by C. -N. 

Peirce, D. D. S., - - - - 75 



«i*»» > 



TO THE PKOrESSION. 

In issuing the " Dental Times," we desire to make it of interest to 
the mass of practitioners. In furthering this end we would earnestly 
solicit from our professional friends, communications on any branch of our 
specialty. Let no one hesitate because they have nothing rare, or of 
particular interest, nor from the fear of being unable to clothe their ideas 
in language that will please the most fastidious ; give us the facts, and 
the method, and we will lay them before our readers so that all will under- 
stand and many be instructed. 

We send the first number of the periodical to all whose names are 
known to us; those who meet with this notice, and have not received it, 
will confer a favor by sending their name and address -to C, N. Peirce, 
501 North Seventh street : also notify us when changing their location, 
for we desire to obtain, and keep a corrected list, of the dentists in the 
United States. 

The price of the " Dental Times" is one dollar per annum, in advance. 
Those who inclose the amount with their name and address will be sure to 
receive it punctually, and without delay. 



OHIO COLLEGI] OF DENTAL SURGERY. 

SESSION OF 1863-64. 

The regular course of Lectures in this Institution, will commence on the first 
Monday of November, and close on the 2yth of February. 

JAS. TAYLOR, D. D. S., (171 Race Street,) Institutes of Dental Science. 

J. TAFT, D. D. S., (172 Race Street,) Operative Dentistry. 

GEO. EDWIN JONES, M. D., (431 West Seventh St.,) Anatomy and Physiology. 

H. R. SMITH, D. D. S., (13 West Fourth Street,) Mechanical Dentistry. 

H. A. SMITH, D. D. S., (118 West Sixth Street,) Chemistry and Metallurgy. 

E. COLLINS, D. D. S., Adjunct Prof, of Operative and Mechanical Dentistry. 

Xext Books — Gray's and Williams' Anatomy; Carpenter's, Todd's and 
Boman's Physiology; Williams' Pathology; Fown's, Turner's, Graham's, or Brand 
and Taylor's Chemistry; Taft's Operative Dentistry; Richardson's Mechanical 
Dentistry; Harris' Principles and Practice of Dental Science. 

Terms of A-d-missioii.. 

Tickets must be procured at the beginning of the session. 

Tickets for the course, - - $100 00 
Matriculation Fee, - . - 5 00 

Diploma Fee, - - - - 30 00 

Terms of Grrad. nation. 

Two courses with a dental pupilage. 

Four years reputable practice will be received as equal to one course. 

An acceptable thesis upon a subject on Dental Science. 

Must possess a good moral character, and be twenty-one years old. 

For further information, address J. TAYLOR, Dean, or 

J. TAFT, Secretary. 

THE CHEAPEST DENTAL DEPOT IN THE CITY 




OF ALL KINDS, 

FORCEPS, PLUGGERS, SCALERS, EXCAVATORS, BURRS, 
CHAIRS, SPITTOONS, LATHES, 

Together with a General Assortment of all kinds of 

DENTAL INSTRUMENTS, MATERIALS, &C. 

WHOLESALE AND RETAIL, AT 

JOHISr KLEIN'S 

No. 22 North Eighth St., Philadelphia. 

N. B. — One price, and all goods warranted as represented. Cash 
orders promptly filled. 



JOHNSON ^ LUND, 



MANUFACTURERS OP 



IMPROV^ED 



Acknowledged by a large share of the 

AMERICAN PROFESSION 




TO BE 



m 



ERIOR TO ALL OTHER 



NOW MADE. 

DEALBKS IN ALL AETICLES 

RELATIVE EITHER TO THE 



^F* Read Testimoiiials on next Pa^e, 



ALSO, 



I^XTBILiISKEIiS OF THEE 

DENTAL QUARTERLY 

Devoled to the interests of Dental Science. 



EDITED BY 



DR. A.]S£BLER TEES, 



AND 



F. N. JOHNSOISr. 

DEPOT, 

No. 27 North Seventh Street, 



t>:ej:xXjJ^jd:bil,:e>:ej:tj^. 



TESTIMONIALS. 



This is to certify that I have used the various and most of the different manu- 
facturers' teeth for the last eight years, and now give to Johnson & Lund's the 
choice ; deeming them as combining the most desirable qualities looked for in arti- 
ficial teeth; such as naturalness of color, shape, symmetry and beauty of ar- 
rangement, COMELINESS OF EXPRESSION in the mouth, and strength and firmness 
lor use. R. WALKER, Owego, New York. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Gents : — I have had an opportunity of using some of your beautiful teeth, and 
can pronounce them Excelsior. They stand the fire well, and are in every respect 
worthy. S. J. BRACKETT, St. Louis, Mo. 



Having within the last thirteen years used teeth from nearly every establishment 
in the Union, I have no hesitation in saying that Johnson & Lund's teeth, as lately 
improved, present a greater combination of desirable qualities than do those of any 
other one establishment ; and I cheerfully recommend them to the profession as a 
decidedly superior article. F. O. HYATT, Cortlandville, New York. 



If there is such a thing as perfection in the manufacture of artificial teeth, 
Johnson & Lund have certainly attained it. E.J. LARASON, Philadelphia. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Gentlemen — Having used your teeth in my practice for the past year, and 
finding them superior to all others in beauty, natural appearance, and dura- 
bility, I hereby add my humble testimony in their favor. 

Yours, res^jectfully, B. F. CLARK, Flint, Michigan. 



I have used Teeth from the different manufacturers for ten years, and have 
discovered in none those qualities which so nearly approach a desideratum as the 
l)roductions of Johnson & Lund. Their resemblance to nature in shape, shade and 
transparency is unsurpassed ; and their freedom from brittleness under the hammer, 
and unequalled endurance under the blow-pipe, show that the proportion of their 
ingredients effect such a happy combination as to leave little room for improvement 
in respect to general strength. S. H. COSTEN, Philadelphia. 



I use Johnson & Lund's make of Artificial Teeth, and can recommend them as 
being perfect in every particular ; they give complete satisfaction, and leave nothing 
further to be desired. J. M. BARRETT, Wilkesbarre, Pa. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Dear Sirs: — I take pleasure in adding my certificate in favor of your teeth. 
They are without a fault. A.* H. FOWLER, Ithica, New York. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund: — 

Gentlemen — You ask me howl like your teeth. 1 must say that I prefer them 
to those of any other manufacturer. The beautiful shape, the life-like and natural 
shades, and their strength under the blow-pipe and hammer, render them all that the 
dentist could desire The perfection you have attained in the manufacture of 
artificial teeth, deserves the thanks and substantial support of the dental profession. 
Wishing you success, I remain, Yours, truly, M. LITKENS LONG, Phila. 



Having used Johnson & Lund's Teeth to my perfect satisftiction, I Avould earn- 
estly recommend them to Dentists in search of a superior article, and one that will 
always please. S. F. TREMAIN. (Of the Firm Tremain Bru.'s,) Rome, N. Y. 



Messrs Johnson & Lund : — 

Having during the past year used five hundred dollars worth of your teeth, we 
have come to the conclusion to use none other now manufactured. 

HOLBROOK, butler & HUNTINGTON. 
Watertown, N. Y., March 23, 1863. 



ORUM & ARMSTRONG-, 
NO. 520 ^RCKE STREET, 

PHILADELPHIA, 

MANUFACTUKERS OF THE 

Most Improved Gum Sections and Plain Teeth, 

FOI^ THE "V^XJIjC-A.lsriTE B.A.SE. 

ALSO, 

GUVI & PLAIN TEETH FOU PLATE WORK, 

With all other Articles uaed in Dciiti«try. 



CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

MANUFACTUKERS OF 

DENTISTS' FINE GOLD AND TIN FOIL, 

isros. SS8 sc sso ip:ei.a^ti street, 

PHIIiADEtPHIA. 

The attention of Dentists is invited to our Vl^^ GOL.D FOIL., which is 
prepared under our constant personal supervision. Our Nos. are 4, 5, 6, 8 
and 10. 

We are also manufacturing an ADHESIVE FItVE GOLD FOIL, 
Nos. 4, 5 and 6. 

ALL our Gold Foil is manufactured from ABSOLUTELY PURE 
GOLD, prepared expressly for the purpose, with great care, by ourselves. 

DENTISTS' REFINED TIN FOIL CONSTANTLY ON HAND. 

Address CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

Philadelphia. 



HORATIO C. KERN, 



MANUFACTURER OF 



$ORi;iCiL&D[liTUINSTRUM[NT$,FILEUC. 



The subscriber would again remind the profession that he still continues 
to manufacture all kinds of Instruments, Dental Files, &c. 

From the flattering testimonials he has received, (of which a few are 
^appended,) of the superior quality of his Instruments and Files, he feeln 
confidence in his ability to produce an article fully equal to any made. 

Assiduous attention to the details of the business, (with an experience 
of thirty years,) has enabled him to make many improvements in the 
adaptation to the specific purpose ; and, as the success of an operation 
depends, in some degree, on the adaptation of the instruments to the par- 
ticular character of the operation, it needs no argument to convince those 
wishing to procure instruments, of the importance of purchasing the manu* 
facture of those of long and well established reputation. Any orders ten- 
dered him will be promptly attended to. Illustrated catalogues will be 
furnished on application. 

HORATIO G KERN, 
No. 25 North Sixth Street, Philadelphia. 



T E S T I IvI O nsr I .A. IL, s . 

501 North Seventh Street, Philadelphia^ June Sth, 1868. 

H. Gr. Kern — Dear iS?V— The excavators which you handed me some 
days since I have had in constant use, and take great pleasure in stating 
that I believe them to be a superior article, both in their ability to retain a 
sharp cutting edge, and withstand the force essential to the operation. 
Yours, &c. C. N. Pierce, D. D. S. 

Mr. H. Gr. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators recently manufactured 
by you have been used with the utmost satisfaction. I can give them an 
unqualified recommendation. Yours, respectfully, 

June 26th, 1863. Geo. T. Barker, D. D, S. 



Mr. H. G. Kern— Dear Sir— ^The last excavators obtained from you 
are of a very superior quality. I can recommend them as- being equal t© 
any I have ever used. T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S. 

June -JSth, 1863. 



W. A. DUFF & CO. 






A 



^=^=l ^wm 












No. 516 



A^ROH STREET, 
PHILADELPHIA. 



« <<» » 



EMPLOYING THE 



BEST SKILL, 



USING THE 



BEST MATERIAL, 



WE ARRIVE AT THE 



BEiST RESULT, 



W. A. BUFF, 

Dr. J. J. GRIFFITH, 

J. W. WATT. 



ft* 

o 

» 

U 
H 

Q 

> 



» 
O 

CO 

o 

Q 

Pi 

O 



h5 



h*- 



1^ 

9 

S 



8 

O 

■ 

M 














PS 



69 






J^ 








PUBLISHED BY 
LINDSAY & BLAKISTON, 



1. 
Harris's Principles and Practice of Dental Surgery. 

The Eighth Revised and Enlarged Edition, with 250 Illustrations, will be ready 
in August. Price, $5.00. 

2. 

System of Dental Surgery, 

By John Tomes, F. R. S., author of "Tomes' Dental Physiology," &c. &c. 
With 208 beautifully executed Illustrations. One Volume. Price, $3.50. 

3. 

Richardson's Practical Treatise on Mechanical Dentistry. 

By Joseph Richardson, D. D. S., Professor of Mechanical Dentistry in the 
Ohio College of Dental Surgery, &c. One Volume, with over 100 lllustra- 
• tions. Price, $8.50. 

4. 

Taft's Practical Treatise on Operative Dentistry. 

By Jonathan Taft, D. D. S., Profe'ssor of Operative Dentistry in the Ohio 
College of Dental Surgery, &c. With eighty well-executed Illustrations. One 
Volume. Price, $3.00. 

__ . 5. . ■ ' 

Bond's Practical Treatise' on Dental Medicine; 

As connected witlv'tlre Study of Dentil-S.uVgery. By Thomas E. Bond, M. D., 
Professor of Special Pathology and Tlia^apeutics in the Baltimore College of 
Dental Surgery. The Third Enlarged Ei^tion. One Volume. Price, $3.00. 

0. :; 

Handy 's Text-Book of Anatomy, 

And Guide to Diss€>eitions. For the use of Students of Medicine and Dental 
Surgery. By WASHnTcfrbN R. Handy, M. D., late Professor of Anatomy and 
Physiology in the BaftTrhbre- College of Dental Surgery. With 312 Illustra- 
tions. One Volume. Price, $3.00. 

7. 

Piggot's Dental Chemistry and Metallurgy. 

Containing Physiological Chemistry, as applied to Dentistry, &c. By A. 
Snowden Piggot^ M. D., Professor of Practical and Analytical Chemistry, &c. 
One Volume. Price, $8.00. 

8. 

Fox and Harris on the Human Teeth: 

Their Natural History and Structure, Treatment, &c. One Volume, with 250 
Illustrations. Price, $3.00. 

9, 

Robertson's Manual for Extracting Teeth, 

With Illustrations, preparing. 

10. 
A Complete Descriptive and Priced Catalogue of 

MEDICAL., DEIVTAL. AJVD SCIEIVTIFIC BOOHS 

Furnished gratis, upon application to 

LINDSAY & BLAKISTON, Publishers, 

25 South Sixth Street, above Chestnut, Philadelphia. 




VOL. I. 



JANUARY, 1864. 



NO. 3. 




THE 



DENTAL TIMES, 



PROPERTY 



OF- 



DENTAL SOCIETY. 



Presented by 



ITERLY JOURNAL 



OF 



DENT 



EDITE 




CE. 



THE FA.CXJLTY 



OP THB 



mmmi 



P H I L A D E ^. P fl I A 




PRICE Sl.OO A YEAR, Tn ADVANCE. 



DR. B. "WOOD'S 
PLASTIC METALLIC FILLING, 

A Substitute for Gold vrbere economy is an object, and for 

Inferior Material. 

PROTECTED BY LETTERS PATENT. 

The Plastic Metallic Filling possesses advantages above every other material but 
gold for filling teeth, while it can be successfully employed in many cases where gold can- 
not. By ordinary skill and a little practice it can be introduced with facility, or built out 
from defective teeth, so as to restore their natural contour. It moulds closely to the walls 
of the cavity without recession or shrinkage. It forms a perfect plug, solid throughout, 
that effectually excludes air and moisture. 

The metal is of close, compact texture, like solid silver or gold, and cannot absorb the 
buccal secretions, as do the earthy and metallic pastes in use, and also gold and tin foils 
when not well condensed; it therefore does not, like these, become tainted, but always 
remains clean and pure. It is the best non-conductor of any metallic substance employed. 

At a temperature but little higher than that of ordinary hot drinks, and yet not low 
enough to be effected by them, it is rendered soft and plastic, suitable for application, while 
at a heat liable to do harm it becomes too fluid to work : by this guage it is within control, 
and is, indeed, its own thermoscope. As it solidifies upon introduction, it is of immediate 
service for mastication, and not liable, like amalgam and other cements, to wear off or 
crumble out. 

It contains no mercury, nor is it in any way allied to amalgams, and it is free from their 
objections. Being of silver-white color that does not darken the tooth, it is suitable for 
front teeth as well as raolars. 

In hardness, it is nearly equal to pure gold cast in bars, and will outwear plugs of gold 
foil imperfectly consolidated, as well as tin plugs, however perfect. It requires no force of 
pressure for its introduction. 

Dentists once skilled in the use of this material, find it better for the effectual preserva- 
tion of teeth than any other yet employed, except gold, thoroughly impacted at every point, 
and far superior to indifferent gold fillings; while the community willingly pay more for 
operations performed with it than for anything else but gold. 

The Plastic Metallic Filling is made into thin ignots or bars, of three-fourths of an 
ounce in weight, avoir., each stamped with the name of the Patentee and date of the patent. 

Price $2 an ignot, or package of | ounce weight, with directions for using. Put up for 
mailing to all parts of the United States. Postage 6 cents. 

Improved instruments for manipulating the Filling, furnished by mail or express. A 
description, with cuts, sent on application. 

N. B. — Grants to use the Plastic Metallic Filling will be issued to purchasers gratuitously 
only until the first of February, 1864, and to secure them, applicants must send in their 
orders and address to this ofl&ce by that date. But the sale of material will not be restricted 
to those having grants or licenses, until the first of May following, thereby affording addi- 
tional time for others to try their success with it ; the assignment of Territorial Rights being 
postponed for the present. 

TERMS FOR LICENSE AFTER THE FIRST OF FEBRUARY, 1864. 

Individual Rights to use the Material in office practice $25 

" to use and make for one's own use in office practice 50 

For Materia], License and Agencies, Address, 

DR. B. IVOOD, Dentist, 




[tH ^--^^^^-.— 

unpleasantTl^i^Toras oWM^I^soni^ 

produces the same insensibility to pain ; this insensibility is, howevisr, ot "ghorier Qurauroi 
not followed by the least degree of physical prostration, which causes the Nitrous Oxide Gas to be 
the very best aa£Esthetic for dental or other operations of minor surgery, requiring but little time. 

" P. H. VANDER WEYDE, M. D., 
" Prof, of Chemistry in N. Y. Medical College, also in Cooper Institute." 
'* Cooper Institute Laboratory, New York, Oct. 23, 1863." 

"lam daily administering the Nitrous Oxide Gas prepared by the American Teeth Company, 
with the most gratifying success, in the painless extraction of teeth, and I cheerfully certify that 
I find the Gas very pure, leaving no after effects whatever. 

New York, Oct. 22, 1863. "E. WILSON, M. D., Dentist, 44 Bond Street." 

" To all whom it may concern : I hereby freely certify that I have examined the apparatus of 
the American Teeth Company, Dentists, 384 Bowery, N. Y., for fabricating and purifying the 
Nitrous Oxide Gas, and satisfied myself that, as prepared by their apparatus, the Gas must be quite 
pure; since which I have inhaled it, and while under its momentary influence they extracted for 
me two teeth, without my feeling the least sensation of pain. 

" New York, Oct. 20, 1863. " E. D. PAPE, M. D., 1132 Broadway. 

We will furnish wood cuts exhibiting our apparatus, with complete explanations and 
instruotions to enable dentists in any part ot the country, with the assistance of a plumber, 
to construct it at a slight expense ; and also, full instructions for the successful administra- 
tion of the Gas, which our experience with it, as practical dentists, enables us to do. 

Bent by mail on receipt of $10 by us, or S. S. White. 

AMERICAN ARTIFICIAL TEETH COMPANY, DENTISTS, 

384: Bowery, New York* 




MANUFACTURERS OF AND DEALERS IN 

EYERY DESCRIPTION OE 



il 



I 




il 



ALSO, 



Importers €f and Wholesale and Reiail Dealers in 



PLATINA PLATE AND WIRE. 



THE CHEAPEST DENTAL DEPOT IN THE CITY 

FOB THE 




OP ALL KINDS, 

FORCEPS, PLUGGERS, SCALERS, EXCAVATORS, BURRS, 
CHAIRS, SPITTOONS, LATHES, 

Together with a General Assortment of all kinds of 

DENTAL INSTRUMENTS, MATERIALS, &C. 

WHOLESALE AND BET AIL, AT 

JOHN klei:n"'s 

No. 22 North. Eighth St., Philadelphia. 

N. B. — One price, and all goods warranted as represented. Cash 
orders promptly filled. 

NEALL, McCURDY & NEALL, 

SUCCESSORS TO 

IIFACTIERS DF FDRCEIMN TSITH 

AND 

DENTISTS' MATERIALS. 



534 Arch St., south-east corner of Sixth, 

PHILADELPHIA, PENNA. 



JOHNSON tc LUND, 



MANUFACTURERS OF 



IMPROV^ED 



Acknowledged by a large share of the 

AMERICAN PROFESSION 



TO BE 



UPEEIOR TO m OTHER 

NOW MADE. 

DEALERS IN ALL ARTICLES 



RELATIVE EITHER TO THE 



^^ Read Testimouials on next Page. 



ALSO, 

I^TJBIjISHEI^S (DIP THE 

DENTAL QUARTERLY 

Devoted to the interests of Dental Science. 



EDITED BY 



DR. ^MiBLER TEES, 



AND 



E. N". JOHNSON". 

No. 27 North Seventh Street, 



I^ia:iX..A.IDE3LiI>HI-A.. 



TESTIMONIALS. 



This is to certify, that I have used the various and most of the different manu- 
facturers' teeth for the last eight years, and now give to Johnson & Lund's the 
choice ; deeming them as combining the most desirable qualities looked for in arti- 
ficial teeth; such as naturalness of color, shape, symmetry and beauty of ar- 
rangement, COMELINESS OF EXPRESSION in the mouth, and strength and firmness 
for use. R. WALKER, Owego, New York. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Gents : — I have had an opportunity of using some of your beautiful teeth, and 
can pronounce them Excelsior. They stand the fire well, and are in every respect 
worthy. S. J. BRACKETT, St. Louis, Mo. 



Having within the last thirteen years used teeth from nearly every establishment 
in the Union, I have no hesitation in saying that Johnson & Lund's teeth, as lately 
improved, present a greater combination of desirable qualities than do those of any 
otlier one establishment ; and I cheerfully recommend them to the profession as a 
decidedly superior article. F. O. HYATT, Cortlandville, New York. 



If there is such a thing as perfection in the manufacture of artificial teeth, 
Johnson & Lund have certainly attained it. E.J. LARASON, Philadelphia. 

Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Gentlemen — Having used your teeth in my practice for the past year, and 
finding them superior to all others in beauty, natural appearance, and dura- 
bility, I hereby add my humble testimony in their favor. 

Yours, respectfully, B. F. CLARK, Flint, Michigan. 



I have used Teeth from the different manufacturers for ten years, and have 
discovered in none those qualities which so nearly approach a desideratum as the 
productions of Johnson & Lund. Their resemblance to nature in shape, shade and 
transparency is unsurpassed ; and their freedom from brittleness under the hammer, 
and unequalled endurance under the blow-pipe, show that the proportion of their 
ingredients effect such a happy combination as to leave little room for improvement 
in respect to general strength. S. H. COSTEJST, Philadelphia. 



I use Johnson & Lund's make of Artificial Teeth, and can recommend them as 
being perfect in every particular ; they give complete satisfaction, and leave nothing 
further to be desired. J. M. BARRETT, Wilkesbarre, Pa. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Dear Sirs : — I take pleasure in adding my certificate in favor of your teeth. 
They are without a fault. A. H. FOWLER, Ithica, New York. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund: — 

Gentlemen — You ask me how I like your teeth. I must say that I prefer them 
to those of any other manufacturer. The beautiful shape, the life-like and natural 
shades, and their strength under the blow-pipe and hammer, render them all that the 
dentist could desire. The perfection you have attained in the manufacture of 
artificial teeth, deserves the thanks and substantial support of the dental profession. 
Wishing you success, I remain. Yours, truly, M. LUKENS LONG, Phila. 



Having used Johnson & Lund's Teeth to my perfect satisfaction, I would earn- 
estly recommend them to Dentists in search of a superior article, and one that will 
always please. S. F. TREMAIN. (Of the Firm Tremain Bro.'s,) Rome, N. Y. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Having during the past year used five hundred dollars worth of your teeth, we 
have come to the conclusion to use none other now manufactured. 

HOLBROOK, BUTLER & HUNTINGTON. 
Watertown, N. Y., March 23, 1863. 



ORUM & ARMSTRONG, 
NO. 520 JLROH STREET, 

PHILADELPHIA, 

MANUFAOTUKEES OF THE 

lost Improved Gum Sections and Plain Teeth, 

ALSO, 

GUM & PLAIN TEETH FOR PLATE WORK, 

With all other Articles used in Dentistry, 



CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

MANUFACTURERS OF 

DENTISTS' FINE GOLD AND TIN FOIL, 

IsTOS. SS8 Sz S30 JPE.A.1^ STIiEET, 
PHIIiADEIiPHIA. 

The attention of Dentists is invited to our FI^E GOL.D FOIL., which is 
prepared under our constant personal supervision. Our Nos. are 4, 5, 6, 8 
and 10. 

We are aleo manufacturing an ADQESITE FIIVE GOL.D FOIL, 

Nos. 4, 5 and 6. 

AL,l, our Gold Foil is manufactured from ABSOL.UTEL.Y PURE 

CrOIiD^ prepared espreesly for the purpose, with great care, by ourselves. 

DENTISTS' REFINED TIN FOIL CONSTANTLY ON HAND. 

Address CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

Philadelphia. 



HORATIO C. KERN, 



MANUFACTURER OP 



SURGICIL & D[|IT1L imRUM[limiLEUt. 



The subscriber would again remind the profession that he still continues 
to manufacture all kinds of Instruments, Dental Files, &c. 

From the flattering testimonials he has received, (of which a few are 
appended,) of the superior quality of his Instruments and Files, he feels 
confidence in his ability to produce an article fully equal to any made. 

Assiduous attention to the details of the business, (with an experience 
of thirty years,) has enabled him to make many improvements in the 
adaptation to the specific purpose ; and, as the success of an operation 
depends, in some degree, on the adaptation of the instruments to the par- 
ticular character of the operation, it needs no argument to convince those 
wishing to procure instruments, of the importance of purchasing the manu- 
facture of those of long and well established reputation. Any orders ten- 
dered him will be promptly attended to. Illustrated catalogues will be 
furnished on application. 

HORATIO G. KERN, 
No. 25 North Sixth Street, Philadelphia. 



501 North Seventh Street, Philadelphia, June Sth, 1863. 

II. Gr. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators which you handed me some 
days since I have had in constant use, and take great pleasure in stating 
that I believe them to be a superior article, both in their ability to retain a 
sharp cutting edge, and withstand the force essential to the operation. 
Yours, &c. C. N. Peirce, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. G. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators recently manufactured 
by you have been used with the utmost satisfaction. I can give them an 
unqualified recommendation. Yours, respectfully, 

June 26th, 1863. Geo. T. Barker, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. G. Kern — Dear Sir — The last excavators obtained from you 
are of a very superior quality. I can recommend them as being equal te 
any I have ever used. T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S. 

June :a5th, 1863. 



A substitute for Amalgam in filling badly decayed teeth ; and used 
for resetting Pivot Teeth in badly decayed roots ; also for filling over 
Sensitive Dentine to destroy sensibility, and as a non-conductor of 
heat, and for many other Dental Purposes. 

For sale by all dealers in Dental Materials and by the undersigned. 

One fourth ounce packages, with directions, sent by mail free of post- 
age, on receipt of $1. 

O. H. ROBERTS, M. D., 

POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y. 



HIGH PEESSURE 



YULCANIZIN6 OVEN. 

ALSO, 

New Vulcanizing Boiler. 

steam Joint secured by means of a Screw 
Collar and Set Screws. No Bolts — no Nuta — 
no Friction on the Rubber Packing. 

These machines Vulcanize in 40 minutes at 
320° ; make the best quality of work ; conswme 
but one fluid ounce of alcohol, and produce no 
smell of sulphur in the rooms. 

PRICES: 

All complete, with furniture : — 

For one case, copper oven $11 00 

For two cases, copper oven 12 00 

For two cases, copper boiler 13 00 

For three cases, copper boiler 14 00 

Pamphlets sent, on application, gratis. 
For testimonials see advertisement in Dental 
Cosmos, January number, 1862. 

Address, GEO. E. HAVES, 

BUFFALO, N. Y. 
[XF* For sale at the Dental Depots. 



New Self-Clamping Flask 

AND 

AUTOMATIC BURNER 

FOR HAYE'S VULCANIZERS, 

Needs little attention, and puts itself out at 
the right time. 

For sale as above. 




A. JONES, 



No. 724 BROADWAV, W. Y., 



WHILE THANKING THE 



DENTAL PROFESSION 



For the very liberal patronage they have extended to him for the last 
twenty-five years, begs leave to say, that he still continues his business 
as usual at the above number, where may be found 



All Articles in the Dental Line, 

Of his own, and other manufacturers, of the most 



AND 



At the Most Favorable Prices. 



All orders from abroad will be punctually and thoroughly attended to. 



W. A. DUFF £ CO. 











No. 516 



A.ROH: STREET, 
PHILADELPHIA. 



« m»m » 



EMPLOYING THE 



BEST SKILL, 



USING THE 



BEST MATERIAL, 



WE ARRIVE AT THE 



BEST RESUIiT. 



W. A. DUFF, 

Dr. J. J. GRIFFITH, 

J. W. WATT. 



o 



» 



a 

Q 
> 



» 
O 

4 
O 
O 

o 

H) 






Hd 
M 



P> 



12! 
O 

n 

H 

H 
H 
H 



8 

O 

M 














» 





^ 




^ 




VJI 



03 



'^Q 



9 

PUBLISHED BY 

LINDSAY & BLAKISTON, 

DPia:ii:j^A.iDEiL:piii.A.. 

Harris's Principles and Practice of Dental Surgery. 

The Eighth Revised and Enlarged Edition, with 250 Ilhistrations, will be ready 
in August. Price, $5.00. 

2. 

System of Dental Surgery, 

By John Tomes, F. R. S., author of "Tomes' I>eDtal Physiology," &c. &c. 
With^Ob beautifully executed Illustrations. One Volume. Price, $3.50. 

3. 

Richardson's Practical Treatise on Mechanical Dentistry. 

By Joseph Richardson, D.D.S., Professor of Mechanical Dentistry in the 
Ohio College of Dental Surgery, &c. One Volume, with over 100 Illustra- 
tions. Price, $a.50. 

4. 

Taft's Practical Treatise on Operative Dentistry. 

By Jonathan Taft, D. D. S., Professor of Operative Dentistry in the Ohio 
College of Dental Surgery, &c. With eighty well-executed Illustrations. One 
Volume. Price, $3.00. 

6. 

Bond's Practical Treatise on Dental Medicine ; 

As connected with the Study of Dental Surgery. By Thomas E. Bond, M. D., 
Professor of Special Pathology and Therapeutics in the Baltimore College of 
Dental Surgery. The Third Enlarged Edition. One Volume. Price, $3.00. 

6. 

Handy's Text-Book of Anatomy, 

' And Guide to Dissections. For the use of Students of Medicine and Dental 
Surgery. By Washington R. Handy, M. D., late Professor of Anatomy and 
Physiology in the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery. With 312 Illustra- 
tions. One Volume. Price, $3.00. 

7. - 

Piggot's Dental Chemistry and Metallurgy. 

Containing Physiological Chemistry, as applied to Dentistry, &c. By A. 
Snowden Piggot, M. D., Professor of Practical and AnalyticalChemistry, &c. 
One Volume. Price, $3.00. 

8. 

Fox and Harris on the Human Teeth : 

Their Natural History and Structure, Treatment, &c. One Volume, with 250 
Illustrations. Price^ $3.00. 

9. 

Robertson's Manual for Extracting Teeth, 

With Illustrations, preparing. 

10. 
A Complete Descriptive and Priced Catalogue of 

]»IEDICAI., DEfVTAI. AND SCIEIVTIFIC BOOKS 

Furnished gratis, upon application to 

LINDSAY & BLAKISTON, Publishers, 

25 South Sixth Street, above Chestnut, Philadelphia. 



ISy^ 



m 




s> 




VOL. I. 



APRIL, 1864. 




NO. 4. 



^ 






^==s= 



T^M ' 



THE 



SFPIO 1.339 




DENTAL TIMES, 



aUARTERLY JOURNAL 



OF 



DENTAL SCIENCE. 



EDITED AND PUBLISHED BT 



THE FA.CULTY 



OP THB 




PHILADELPHIA 




PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE. 




CO 1^T T E IsT T S. 



PAoa 



Proficiency and Success, by J. K. W., 145 

Caoutchouc, by E. Wildman, M. D., D. D. S., H7 

Tobacco and Teeth, by John B. Young, D. D. S., - - - - - 164 

Fatal Result from the Inhalation of Nitrous Oxide, by Jose R. Brunet, D. D. S., 157 

Dental Periostitis, by Edwin C. Baxter, D. D. S., - - - - - - 158 

American Dental Convention, --------- 161 

On the Administration of Nitrous Oxide, by Charles C. Barker, - - - 162 

A Case of Ossification of the Dental Pulp, by A. M. Hills, - - - 163 
Eighth Annual Commencement of the Pennsylvania College of Dental Surgery, 

by James Truman, D. D. S., 164 

Editorial, 172 






I ,. 



TO THE PEOFESSION. 

In issuing the " Dental Times," we desire io riiake it of interest to 
the mass of practitioners. In furthering this end we would earnestly 
solicit from our professional friends, communications on any branch of our 
specialty. Let no one hesitate because they have nothing rare, or of 
particular interest, nor from the fear of being unable to clothe their ideas 
in language that will please the most fastidious ] give us the facts, and 
the method, and we will lay them before our readers so that all will under- 
stand and many be instructed. 

We send the first number of the periodical to all whose names are 
known to us; those who meet with this notice, and have not received it, 
will confer a favor by sending their name and address to C. N. Peirce, 
501 North Seventh street ; also notify us when changing their location, 
for we desire to obtain, and keep a corrected list, of the dentists in the 
United States. 

The price of the " Dental Times" is one dollar per annum, in advance. 
Those who inclose the amount with their name and address will be sure to 
receive it punctually, and without delay. 



REGULATIONS. 



The candidate must be twenty-one years of age. He must have studied 
under a private preceptor at least two years, including his course of 
instruction at the College. Attendance on two full courses of lectures in 
this institution will be required, but satisfactory evidence of having attended 
one full course of lectures in any respectable dental or medical school, will 
be considered equivalent to the first course of lectures in this College ; five 
years' practice, inclusive of the term of pupilage, will also be considered 
equivalent to the first course of lectures. The candidate for graduation 
must prepare a thesis upon some subject connected with the theory or 
prcCtice of dentistry. He must treat thoroughly some patient requiring all 
the usual dental operations, and bring such patient before the Professor of 
Operative Dentistry^ He must, also, take up at least one artificial case, 
and after it is completed, bring his patient before the Professor of 
Mechanical Dentistry. He must, also, prepare a specimen case to be 
deposited in the College collection. The operations must be performed, 
and the work in the artificial cases done, at the College building. He must 
also undergo an examination by the Faculty, when, if found qualified, he 
shall be recommended to the Board of Trustees : and, if approved by them,, 
shall receive the degree of Doctor of Dental Surgery. 



TEXT BOOKS AND WORKS OF REFERENCE. 



Wilson's, or Leidy's Sharpey & Quains' Anatomy ; Carpenter's Physi- 
ology, or Dunglison's Human Physiology ; United States Dispensatory ; 
Mitchell's Materia Medica : Fownes' Elements of Chemistry ; Regnault's- 
Chemistry ; Lehmann's Pysiological Chemistry ; C. J. B. Williams' Prin-^ 
ciples of Medicine; Wood's Practice; Tomes' Dental Physiology and 
Surgery ; Harris' Principles and Practice ; Taft's Operative Dentistry ; 
Richardson's Mechanical Dentistry ; Paget's Surgical Pathology, or other 
standard works on the subject. 



m 






ALL OPERATIONS IN THE CLINICS OF THIS INSTITUTION ARE PERFORMED 
GRATUITOUSLY FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE POOR ONLT, 



SESSION OF 1863-'64. 



OPERATIVE DEPARTMENT. 

Number of Patients visiting the Clinic, 2202 

Number for whom the following operations were performed, '• 1687 

Gold Fillings, 607 

Tin do .* 690 

Temporary Fillings, , 13 

Amalgam do 6 

Treatment and Filling Pulp Cavities 201 

Superficial Caries Removed, < '.. 15 

Removal of Salivary Calculi, 85 

Treatment of Periostitis, .'. 37 

Do Alveolar Abscess, , 24 

Do Inflammation of the Gums, 5 

Do Partial Necrosis, : 15 

Do Diseased Antrum, 2 

Do Irregularities, 15 

Do Necrosis of Superior Maxilla, 1 

Extraction of Teeth and Roots, 2112 

Total, 3828 

JAMES TRUMAN, Demonstrator. 



MECHANICAL DEPARTMENT. 

125 Patients were supplied with the following Artificial Dentures : 

Whole Sets of Teeth, 21 

Full Upper Sets, 42 

Full Lower Sets, 3 

Full Upper Set, Blocks, 1 

Do Continuous Gum Sets, 3 

Partial Upper Sets, 60 

Do Lower Sets, 8 

Obturators,* 3 

Teeth Mounted on Metal Plates, 517 

Do Hard Rubber Base, 1130 

Whole Number of Gum Teeth, 671 

Do Plain Teeth, 976 

Do Teeth Mounted, 1647 

EDWARD N. BAIIiEY, A. M., Demonstrator. 

* These were made for soldiers having lost their teeth and adjacent bones from gunshot wounds. 



iflli) 



^!pma<Bira.^sji 



SESSION 1863-'64. 



R. H. SHOEMAKER, Philadelphia. 

ALEX. O'CALLAGHAN, Cuba. 

JOHN HINES, Philadelphia. 

CHARLES BUCKLEY, Jr...... •' 

THOMAS ROBSON. Jr., «« 

WILLIAM A. NEWLAND,.... <' 

A. EMOKY STREET, New Jersey, 

GEO. J. UNDERWOOD, New York. 

JONAS M. KERN, Pennsylvania. 

J. A. WOODWARD, Philadelphia. 

I. S. FOGG, D. D. S., " 

EDWIN C. BAXTER, Maine. 

J. W. RHONE, Penns3'lvania. 

A. S. REBER, " 

E. L PARRAMORE, Virginia. 

HORACE ENOS, Philadelphia. 

WM. H. PAULLIN, " 

J. 0. A. JOHNSON, New Jersey. 

JOHN N. FARRAR, Massachusetts. 

SIMEON H. GUILFORD, Pennsylvania 

ABRAM PRATT, '< 

SIMON FRAU , Cuba. 

HERNY COWIE, Michigan. 



FEDERICO COMAS, Cuba. 

MANUEL TRUJILLO, " 

H. C. ROCKWELL, New York. 

W. T. SHANNON, New Jersey. 

J G. CAMP, Pennsylvania. 

J. W. VANOSTEN,.... Philadelphia. 

J. B. R. WRIGGINS New Jersey. 

S. G. PERRY, New York. 

C. A. MILBANK, <» 

G. W. CALDWELL, Philadelphia. 

JOHN N. CROUSE, Illinois. 

P. PRETERRE, M. D., New York. 

S. C. RICHARDSON, Illinois. 

J. B. SNOW, Connecticut. 

J. D. WHITE, Jr., Philadelphia. 

GEORGE CLARK, Vermont. 

C. McGRATH, Philadelphia. 

EDW. LEFAIVRE, Canada. 

THOS. E. OSMUN, M. D., Philadelphia 

N. B. WELDON, D. D. S., Connecticut. 

HOWARD BASSETT, Philadelphia. 

U.B.KIRK, ♦' 



GRADUATES, 1863-'6^. 



R. H. SHOEMAKER, Pennsylvania, Alveolar Abscess, 

ALEX. O'CALLAGHAN, Cuba, Dental Caries and its Treatment. 

GEO, J. UNDERWOOD, New York, Orthodontia. 

EDWIN C. BAXTER, Maine, Dental Periostitis. 

ABRAM S. REBER, Pennsylvania, The Relations of the Teeth to each other, and 

the Importance of these Relations. 

HENRY COWIE, Michigan, Diseased Pulps and their Treatment. 

FEDERICO COMAS, ...Cuba, Mechanical Dentistry. 

MANUEL TRUJILLO, - '• Caries. 

W, T. SHANNON, New Jersey, Exposed Pulps. 

J. G. CAMP, Pennsylvania, Neuralgia. 

J. W. VANOSTEN, '< Dental Caries. 

G.W.CALDWELL, << The Arsenical Paste. 

S.C.RICHARDSON, Illinois, Why Superior Teeth Decay in greater pro- 
portion than Inferior, 

J. B. SNOW, , Connecticut, Cheap Mechanical Dentistry. 

GEORGE CLARK, Vermont, Dental Caries. 

EDWARD LEFAIVRE, Canada, Dentistry in Canada 

THOS. E. OSMUN, M. D., Pennsylvania, Inflammation. 



OR. B. VrOOD'S 

PLASTIC METALLIC FILLING, 

A Substitute for Gold where Economy is an Object, and for Inferior Material. 

(PROTECTED BY LETTERS PATENT.) 

The Plastic Metallic Filling possesses advantages which commend it above every 
other material but gold for filling teeth, v^rhile it can be successfully employed in many 
cases where gold cannot. By ordinary skill and a little practice it can be introduced with 
facility, or built out from defective teeth, so as to restore their natural contour. It does 
not recede from the walls of the cavity upon introduction, nor shrink afterwards. It forms 
a perfect plug, solid throughout, that elfectually excludes air and moisture. 

The metal is close and compact in structure like solid silver or gold, and cannot absorb 
secretions of the mouth, as do the earthy and metallic pastes in use, and also gold and tin 
foils when not well condensed ; it therefore does not, like these, become tainted from this 
cause, but remains clean and pure. It is the best non-conductor of any metallic substance 
employed. 

At a moderate heat — but little higher than that of ordinary hot drinks, and yet not low 
enough to be eflFeoted by them — it is rendered soft and plastic, and of the proper consistency 
for application, while at a temperature liable to do harm it becomes too fluid to work : by 
this it is easily guaged, and is its own thermoscope. As it solidifies as soon as introduced, 
it is of immediate service for mastication, and not liable, like amalgam and other cements, 
to wear off or crumble out. 

It contains no mercury, nor is it in any way allied to amalgams, and it is free from their 
objections. Being of silver-white color that does not darken the tooth, it is suitable for 
front teeth as well as molars. In hardness, it is nearly equal to pure gold, and will outwear 
plugs of gold foil imperfectly consolidated, as well as tin plugs, however perfect. 

Dentists once skilled in the use of this material, find it better for the efiTeetual preserva- 
tion of teeth than any other yet employed, except gold, thoroughly impacted at every point, 
and far superior to indiS'erent gold fillings; while the community willingly pay more for 
operations performed with it than for anything else but gold. 

To suit different operators Nos 1, 2 and 3 are prepared; all of which have been brought 
to the desired s.ate of perfection, and a new patent filed for the improvement. No 3 is 
mostly preferred for general use; No. 2 is less plastic, but finishes smoothly and is much 
used ; No 1 is harder^ but brittler. They all soften at the same temperature. 

The Filling as now improved is patented for the exclusive benefit of Dentists who sustain 
improvements. After the 1st of May, 1864, it will be sold only to licensees, and furnished 
to dealers upon condition of selling to none other, and it will be withdrawn from all the 
depots which do not comply with this condition. 

Many have advised raising the price to $3 or $5 an ingot, and having that secure the right 
of use But this would affect those who have already obtained rights. Besides that, it is 
necessary to have the names of all entitled to use it recorded, in order to know who to 
proceed against for infringement, and who to protect from prosecutions brought by assignees 
of territorial rights. But to accommodate, as far as possible, licenses will be granted for 
limited periods, in territory not disposed of. 

Office Rights for the full term, (17 years,) $26 

Price of Material to Licensees, . . 2 

An ingot of three-quarters ounce weight, postage 6 cents. To non-licensees $3 an ingot, 
with a right for six months. For particulars see circular. 

Improved Pluggers for using the Filling, in sets of eight, at from $2 to $3 a set, according 
to style and finish, postage 24 to 30 cents. 

Letters requesting answer should enclose stamps for return postage. 

For Licenses, Material, &c., address 

DR. B. WOOD, Dentist, 



W. A. DUFF & CO. 








No. 516 



^RCH STREET, 
PHILADELPHIA. 



EMPLOYING THE 



BEST SKILL, 



USING THE 



BEST MATERIAL, 



WE ARRIVE AT THE 



BEST RESUL.T. 



W. A. DUFF, 

Dr. J. J. GRIFFITH, 

J. W. WATT. 



R. IXT. ARCHER'S 

IMPROVED DENTAL CHAIR. 



Patented September 4y 1$60. 




"^ a 
a ^ 

O "^ 
C5 -^ 

.S3 8 

O § 

too 9 

a 

1^ 

CD 



O 



&4 O 

a ^ 

o o 

^^ 

a "TJ 
a> 

02 



-a 
O 



§ o 






CO « 

«— t 

<D 

•^ a 

S ^ 

cS O 

"2 Si 



. • 3 



^ .a 

O OQ 

O -<J 

Ph Q 
P^ o. 

■4^ 



03 



O 



SUTTON & RAYNOR, 

No. 748 Broadvray, Nevr York, 

MANUFACTURERS OF AND DEALERS IN 

EVERY DESCEIPTION OF 

mum umim. 

^4 kit ALSO, 

Importers of and Wholesale and Retail Dealers in 



PLATINA PLATE AND WIRE. 



TO 3D E! IXn? I JST7 



THE CHEAPEST DENTAL DEPOT IN THE CITY 

FOR THE 



MmM Wnmwvti Muili 



OP ALL KINDS, 

FORCEPS, PLUGGERS, SCALERS, EXCAVATORS, BURRS, 
CHAIRS, SPITTOONS, LATHES, 

Together with a General Assortment of all kinds of 

DENTAL INSTRUMENTS, MATERIALS, &C. 

WHOLESALE AND RETAIL, AT 

JOHN KLEIN'S 

No. 22 North Eighth St, Philadelphia. 

N. B. — One price, and all goods warranted as represented. Cash 
orders promptly filled. 



NEALL, McCURDY & NEALL, 

SUCCESSORS TO 

HAiFACTURSRI! OF FORCILAIN TEETH 

AND 

DENTISTS' MATERIALS. 



534 Arch St., south-east corner of Sixth, 

PHILADELPHIA, PENNA. 



JOHNSON Zc LUND, 



MANUFACTURERS OP 



IMPROVED 



Acknowledged by a large share of the 

AMERICAN PROFESSION 



TO BE 



UPERIOR TO ALL OTHER 

NOW MADE. 

DEALERS IN ALL AETICLES 



RELATIVE EITHER TO THE 



)J1J3V& it 



Read Testimouials ou uext Pa^e. 



ALSO, 



I^XJBIjISIiEI^S OF THE 

DENTAL QUARTERLY 

Devoted to Ihe interests of Dental Science. 



EDITED BY 



DR. AMBLER TEES, 



AND 



F. N. JOHNSON". 

33EI»OT, 

No. 27 North Seventh Street, 



TESTIMONIALS. 



This is to certify, that I have used the various and most of the different manu- 
facturers' teeth for the last eight years, and now give to Johnson & Lund's the 
choice ; deeming them as combining the most desirable qualities looked for in arti- 
ficial teeth ; such as naturalness of color, shape, symmetry and beauty of ar- 
rangement, COMELINESS OF EXPRESSION in the mouth, and strength and firmness 
for use. R. WALKER, Owego, New York. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund ; — 

Gents : — I have had an opportunity of using some of your beautiful teeth, and 
can pronounce them Excelsior. They stand the fire well, and are in every respect 
worthy. , S. J. BRACKETT, St. Louis, Mo* 



Having within the last thirteen years used teeth from nearly every establishment 
in the Union, I have no hesitation in saying that Johnson & Lund's teeth, as lately 
improved, present a greater combination of desirable qualities than do those of any 
other one establi.shment ; and I cheerfully recommend them to the profession as a 
decidedly superior article. F. O. HYATT, Cortlandville, New York. 



If there is such a thing as perfection in the manufacture of artificial teeth, 
Johnson & Lund have certainly attained it. E.J. LARASON, Philadelphia. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Gentlemen — Having used your teeth in my practice for the past year, and 
finding them superior to all others in beauty, natural appearance, and dura- 
bility, I hereby add my humble testimony in their favor. 

Yours, respectfully, B. F. CLARK, Flint, Michigan. 



I have used Teeth from the different manufacturers for ten years, and have 
discovered in none those qualities which so nearly approach a desideratum as the 
productions of Johnson & Lund. Their resemblance to nature in shape, shade an^ 
transparency is unsurpassed ; and their freedom from brittleness under the hammer, 
and unequalled endurance under the blow-pipe, show that the proportion of their 
ingredients effect such a happy combination as to leave little room for improvement 
in respect to general strength. S. H. COSTEN, Philadelphia. 



I use Johnson & Lund's make of Artificial Teeth, and can recommend them as 
being perfect in every particular ; they give complete satisfaction, and leave nothing 
further to be desired. J. M. BARRETT, Wilkesbarre, Pa. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Dear Sirs : — I take pleasure in adding my certificate in favor of your teeth. 
They are without a fault. A.' H. FOWLER, Ithica, New York. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Gentlemen — You ask me howl like your teeth. I must say that I prefer them 
to those of any other manufacturer. The beautiful shape, the life-like and natural 
shades, and their strength under the blow-pipe and hammer, render them all that the 
dentist could desire. The perfection you have attained in the manufacture of 
artificial teeth, deserves the thanks and substantial support of the dental profession. 
Wishing you success, I remain, Yours, truly, M. LUKENS LONG, Phila. 



Having used Johnson & Lund's Teeth to my perfect satisfaction, I would earn- 
estly recommend them to Dentists in search of a superior article, and one that will 
always please. S. F. TREMAIN, (Of the Firm Tremain Bro.'s,) Rome, N. Y. 



Messrs. Johnson & Lund : — 

Having during the past year used five hundred dollars worth of your teeth, we 
have come to the conclusion to use none other now manufactured. 

HOLBROOK, BUTLER & HUNTINGTON. 
Watertown, N. Y., March 23, 1863. 



ORUM & ARMSTRONG, 
I<ro. 520 ^ROH STREET, 

PHILADELPHIA, 

KANIJFACTFRBKS OF THB 

Most Improved Gum Sections and Plain Teeth, 

"FOTl THE ^iT'XJX.C^^nsriTE B.A.SE. 

ALSO, 

GUVI & PLAIN TEETH POft PLATE WORK, 

^Vitli all other Articles used in Dentistry. 

CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

MANUFACTUREES OF 

DENTISTS' FINE GOLD AND TIN FOIL, 

iisros. SS8 <S5 sso :e>-jbj^:e<, stpieet, 

PHItADEIiPHIA. 

The attention of Dentists is invited to our FIJIE GOLD FOIL., which is 
prepared under our constant personal supervision. Our Nos. are 4, 5, 6, 8 
and 10. 

We are also manufacturing an ADHESITE FI\E GOLD FOIL, 
Nos. 4, 5 and 6. 

ALL our Gold Foil is manufactured from ABSOLUTELY PURE 
GOLD, prepared expressly for the purpose, with great care, by ourselves. 

DENTISTS' REFINED TIN FOIL CONSTANTLY ON HAND. 

Address CHARLES -ABBEY & SONS, 

Philadelphia, 



HORATIO G. KERIM, 



MANUFACTURER OF 



S0IIGIC11&D[IIT1LIIISIRUM[IITS,FIL[UC. 



The subscriber would again remind the profession that he still continues 
to manufacture all kinds of Instruments, Dental Files, &c. 

From the flattering testimonials he has received, (of which a few are 
appended,) of the superior quality of his Instruments and Files, he feels 
confidence in his ability to produce an article fully equal to any made. 

Assiduous attention to the details of the business, (with an experience 
of thirty years,) has enabled him to make many improvements in the 
adaptation to the specific purpose ; and, as the success of an operation 
depends, in some degree, on the adaptation of the instruments to the par- 
ticular character of the operation, it needs no argument to convince those 
wishing to procure instruments, of the importance of purchasing the manu- 
facture of those of long and well established reputation. Any orders ten- 
dered him will be promptly attended to. Illustrated catalogues will be 
furnished on application. 

HORATIO G. KERN, 
No. 25 North Sixth Street, Philadelphia. 



TESTIIvd:03Sri.A.3L.S. 

501 North Seventh Street, Philadelphia, June Sth, 1863. 
H. G. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators which you handed me some 
days since I have had in constant use, and take great pleasure in stating 
that I believe them to be a superior article, both in their ability to retain a 
sharp cutting edge, and withstand the force essential to the operation. 
Yours, &c. C. N. Peirce, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. G. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators recently manufactured 
by you have been used with the utmost satisfaction. I can give them an 
unqualified recommendation. Yours, respectfully, 

June 26th, 1863. Geo. T. Barker, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. G. Kern — Dear Sir — The last excavators obtained from you 
are of a very superior quality. I can recommend them as being equal t© 
any I have ever used. T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S. 

June 25h, 1863. 



A substitute for Amalgam in filling badly decayed teeth ; and used 
for resetting Pivot Teeth in badly decayed roots ; also for filling over 
Sensitive Dentine to destroy sensibility, and as a non-conductor of 
heat, and for many other Dental Purposes. 

For sale by all dealers in Dental Materials and by the undersigned. 

One fourth ounce packages, with directions, sent by mail free of post- 
age, on receipt of $1. 

O. H. ROBERTS, M. D., 

POUGHKEEPSIE, N, Y. 



HIGH PRESSURE 

VULCANIZING OVEN. 

ALSO, 

New Vulcanizing Boiler. 

steam Joint secured by means of a Screw 
Collar and Set Screws. No Bolts — no Nuts — 
no Friction on the Rubber Packing. 

These machines Vulcanize in 40 minutes at 
320°; make the best quality of work; consume 
but one fluid ounce of alcohol, and produce no 
smell of sulphur in the rooms. 

PRICES: 

All complete, with furniture i — 

For one case, copper oven $11 00 

For two cases, copper oven 12 00 

For two cases, copper boiler 13 00 

For three cases, copper boiler 14 00 

Pamphlets sent, on application, gratis. 
For testimonials see advertisement in Dental 
Cosmos, January number, 1862. 

Address, GEO. IS. KAYISS, 

BUFFALO, N. Y. 
11^ For sale at the Dental Depots. 



New Self-Clamping Flask 

AND 

AUTOMATIC BURNER 

FOR HAYE'S VULCANIZERS, 

Needs little attention, and puts itself out at 
the right time. 

For sale as above. 




A. JONES, 



Wo. 724 BROADWAY, N. Y., 



WHILE THANKING THE 



DENTAL PROFESSION 



For the very liberal patronage they have extended to him for the last 
twenty-five years, begs leave to say, that he still continues his business 
as usual at the above number, where may be found 



All Articles in the Dental Line, 

Of his own, and other manufacturers, of the most 



AND ] 



At the Most Favorable Prices. 



AH orders from abroad will be punctually and thoroughly attended to- 



RUBENGAME & STOCKTON, 

MANUFACTURERS OF 



No. 825 Arch Street, 

. PHILADELPHIA, PA. 



oil 



Would respectfully inform their Dental Friends, and the Profession 

generally, that they have 



to their new place of business (number as abo\e,) where, with 

ENLARGED STOCK AND INCREASED FACILITIES, 

They will continue to MANUFACTURE and SUPPLY all articles requisite,- 
for both the OPERATIVE and MECHANICAL Departments, 

Desiring to excel in every branch of their business, they respectfully ask the 
co-operation of Dentists everywhere, assuring them that CRITICISMS, SUG- 
GESTIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS will always be welcomed, and treated 
with careful consideration. 

They would especially call attention to their 

NEW AND IMPROVED 

PINLESS TOlCiNITl TEETH, 

(See annexed Drawing of Sections.) 





[secured.] 

These teeth can be mounted with moie cant and ftpc.ed^ morejirmly and with 
lesfi risk, than am/ other now mode for the Vulcanite base. They enmhine, 
when properly set up, GREAT SYMMETRY OF FORM, with COMPLETE- 
NESS OF FINISH. 

Thanking their friends for the very liberal patronage extended to them in the 
past, they pledge themselves to do all in their power, by promptness, energy 
and careful attention to orders, to merit a continuance of their favor in the 
future. 

RUBENCAME & STOCKTON, 

No. 825 Arch Street, Philadelphia, Fa. 



Messrs. Rubknoamb & Stockton : — Gentlemen— Having used your Teeth in my practice for the 
past four years, and finding them superior to all others, in beauty, natural appearance and durability , 
I hereby add my humble testimonial in their favor. Respectfully, 

Lewistown, Pa. S. BELFORD. 

Having used Rubencamb & Stockton's Teeth for several years past, I can safely recommend 
them to the profession. 

Bloomington, III. E. STEVENS. 

Messrs. Rubencamr & Stockton: — Gentlemen — Having used your Teeth in my practice for 
several years, I can conscientiously recommend them as being equal, if not superior, to any now 
made in the City of Philadelphia, or elsewhere. 

Lambertville N.J. J. HAYHURST. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton :— Gentlemen — Having used your Teeth, lean with pleasure 
recommend them as a superior article. 
Philadelphia. J. M. GARRETSON. 

The undersized having used Teeth manufactured by Rubencame & Stockton, find that they 
have given entire satisfaction to all patients furnished with the same. 
Philadelphia. ISAAC GRIFFITH. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton : — Gents. — I have used your make of Teeth for several years, 
and they have given general satisfaction to my patients. I would recommend them lo the Dentists 
generally. 

Burlington, Iowa. H.BAILEY. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton : — Gentlemen — I have used the Teeth of your manufacture for 
two years past, and believe them to be superior to all others, they give perfect satisfaction. 

Georgetown, Del. GEORGE SNOW. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton: — Gents. — For the last two years I have been using your 
Teeth, and can safely say that I have found them all to be as you have represented : giving natural 
expression, both in style and shade, and bearing admirably the severe test they are subjected to in 
soldering. In a word, they stand the fire, and look well in the mouth. 

Cochranville, Pa. ROBT. L. McCLELLAN. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton: — Gentlemen — I have been using Teeth manufactured by you 
for some time past, and thus far they have given entire satisfaction. Yours, trulv, 

Bridgeton, N. J. JOSEPH C. KIRBY. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton : — Gentlemen — Having used your Teeth in my practice for the 
past two years, and finding them superior to all others in beauty, natural appearance and unequalled 
endurance under the blow-pipe, I hereby cheerfully add my humble testimonial in their favor. 

Somers^ Point, N. J. J. HAND. 

Having for the last three years used the Teeth manufactured by Rubencame &; Stockton, J can 
speak in the highest terms of their strength, beauty and adaptability ; their appearance in the mouth 
is natural and life-like. 

Alexandria, Pa J. R. HEWITT. 

Messrs. Rubencame &; Stockton: — I have used your improved styles of Artificial Teeth, and 
find them in every respect neat and substantial, and take pleasure in recommending them to the 
profession as worthy oftriai. Yours, truly, 

Philadelphia. H. S. DEPUTY. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton : — Having used for the last five years, with entire satisfaction, 
your make of Artificial Teeth, I cheerfully recommend them to the profession, and believe they 
combine all the qualities required by the Dentist. 

Millville, N J. J. S. SIMMERMAN. 

Messrs. Rubencame &, Stockton: — Gentlemen — Having used your make of Teeth for the last 
seven or eight years, I can say that they are equal to any now made, and inferior to none. 

Philadelphia. Yours, truly, " G. L. NAGLE. 

Messrs. Rubencame &; Stockton: — Dear Sirs — Having used your Teeth ever since tbey have 
been in the market, it takes no strain of the imagination to recommend them. They, like the 
manufacturers, are quite good looking, producing in the most gruff countenance a smile of appro'^ 
bation. They stand fire and hammering ; in fact, none jnore desirable can be had anywhere. 

Bellefunte, Pa. Very truly, JNO. D. WINGATE 

This is to certify, that I have used Rubencame &; Stockton's Teeth for the last two years, and 
can rcecommend them to the profession as a good article. 

Philadelphia. J. E. HENDRICKSON. 

Messrs Rubencame & Stockton: — Sirs — Having used your Teeth for some time, I can truth, 
fully say that tliey are as ^ood as any I have ever used and can recommend them to the Dental 
profession. 

■Butler, Pa. S. R. DIEFFENBACHER. 

I have used Rubencame 6c Stockton's Artificial Teeth for a sufficient time to test their strength 
and atl aptability ; they give entire satisfaction to myself and customers, are much adtnired. particu- 
larly by the Ladies, for their beauty and natural appearance in the mouth. I do earnestly recom- 
mend them to the Dental profession as a decidedly superior article. 

Waynesburg, Pa. SAMUEL McCLEES. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton: — Gentlemen — About eight years since, I bought the first 
Teeth offered for sale by Mr Rubencame. After proper trial, and finding in them every requisite 
of the profession, 1 have continued their exclusive use to the present time, and with decided satis-' 
faction to myself and patients. Respectfully, 

Philadelphia. C S. CORFIELD. 

Having inserted a great number of Teeth manufactured by Rubbnoame &: Stockton, it gives me 
pleasure lo recommend them to all Dentists for their unsurpassed natural and life-like appearance, 
being satisfied that they will stand the acttor^ of fire as well, ifrtot better, than any 1 have ever used 
manufactured by others. 

Ktnnelt Square, Pa. ALBEN WAY. 




PUBLISHED BY 
LINDSAY & BLAKISTON, 




1. 
Harris's Principles and Practice of Dental Surgery. 

The Eighth Revised and Enlarged Edition, with 250 Illustrations, will be ready 
in jlugust. Price, $5.00. 

2. 

System of Dental Surgery, 

By John Tomes, F. R. S., author of " Tomes' Dental Physiology," &c. &c. 
"With 208 beautifully executed Illustrations. One Volume. Price, $3.50. 

3. 

Richardson's Practical Treatise on Mechanical Dentistry. 

By Joseph Richardson, D. D. S., Professor of Mechanical Dentistry in the 
Ohio College of Dental Surgery, &c. One Volume, with over 100 Illustra- 
tions. Price, $3.50. 

4. 

Taft's Practical Treatise on Operative Dentistry. 

By Jonathan Tapt, D. D. S., Professor of Operative Dentistry in the Ohio 
College of Dental Surgery, &c. With eighty well-executed Illustrations. One 
Volume. Price, $3.00. 

5. 

Bond's Practical Treatise on Dental Medicine; 

As connected with the Study of Dental Surgery. By Thomas E. Bond, M. D., 
Professor of Special Pathology and Therapeutics in the Baltimore College of 
Dental Surgery. The Third Enlarged Edition. One Volume. Price, $3.00. 

6. 

Handy 's Text-Book of Anatomy, 

And Guide to Dissections. For the use of Students of Medicine and Dental 
Surgery. By Washington R. Handy, M. D., late Professor of Anatomy and 
Physiology in the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery. With 312 Illustra- 
tions. One Volume. Price, $3.00. 

7. 

Piggot's Dental Chemistry and Metallurgy. 

Containing Physiological Chemistry, as applied to Dentistry, &c. By A. 
Snowden PiGGOT, M. D , Professor of Practical and Analytical Chemistry, &c. 
One Volume. Price, $3.00. 

8. 

Fox and Harris on the Human Teeth: 

Their Natural History and Structure, Treatment, &c. One Volume, with 250 
Illustrations. Price, $3.00. 

9. 

Robertson's Manual for Extracting Teeth, 

With Illustrations, preparing. 

10. 
A Complete Descriptive and Priced Catalogue of 

MEDICAI., DEIVTAE. ANU SCIEiVTIFIC BOOKS 

Furnished gratis, upon application to 

LINDSAY & BLAKISTON, Pabllshers, 

25 South Sixth Street, above Chestnut, Philadelphia. 




^^• 




VOL. 11. 



JULY, 1864. 



HO. 1. 




THE 






DENTAL 





A 



aUARTERLY JOURNAL 



OP 



DENTAL SCIENCE. 



BDITED AND PUBLISHED BT 



THE FACULTY 



OF THB 



i^)m0|liJBiii^ I^0lfo0$ d §mM Mtpt^* 



n 



PHILADELPHIA. 




PRICE ©l.OO A YEAR, IN ADVANCE. 



r- *■ - " "•' 




OO 1^T T E ISr T S. 



VAOM 



A Case of Artificial Nose and Hard Palate, by E. Wildman, M. D., D. D. S., 1 
Nitrous Oxide, hj T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S^ - - - - - - 6 

Replacement of a Tooth, by C. JST. Peirce, D. D. S., 10 

Therapeutical Agents, by L. Buffett,D.D. S., - - - - . - 11 

Filling Teeth, by Dr. H. Scott, - - - 12 

Repairing Gold Plates, by Dr. Corydon Palmer, - - - - - - 14 

A Perplexing Case, by Dr. H. Scott, - - 15 

Creasote, by Geo. T. Barker, D. D. S., - - - 16 

Dental Gossip, by O. U. C, - - - . ^ 19 ■ 

Case in Practice, by H. Cowie, D. D. S., 21 

Spirit Varnishes, by E. Wildraan, M.D.,D.D.S., - - - - - 22 

Tooth Powders and Mouth Washes, by Geo. T. Barker, D. D. S., - - - 23 

Rubber, by Edwin C. Baxter, D. D. S., 25 

PROCEEDINQS OF DENTAL ASS0CIATI0N,S. 

Hudson Valley Dental Association, by Dr. S. D. French, - - - ' - 26 

Susquehanna Dental Association, by Dr. J. D. Wingate, - - - - 28 

Buffalo Dental Association, by G. B. Snow, D. D. S., . - . - 29 

EDITORIAL. 

Publishers' Notice, --_• 30 

Removal, - - - - - - - - . - - - - 30 

Dental Meetings, - - - - - - - - -- - 31 

Obituary, 32 

" by Pennsylvania Association of Dental Surgeons, - - - 32 

" by Dentists of Lowell, 33* 



TO THE PEOPESSION. 

In issuing the " Dental Times," we desire to make it of interest to 
the mass of practitioners. To this end we earnestly solicit from our 
professional friends, communications on any branch of our gpecialtj. To 
those who hesitate because their limited time incapacitates them for 
writing long or elaborate articles, we would say, give us the facts and tie 
method, and we will lay them before our readers so that all will under- 
stand and many be instructed. 

Persons desiring to become subscribers, can do so by remitting the 
price of subscription, one dollar per annum, with name and address, to 
Dr. C. N. Peirce, 501 North Seventh street, Philadelphia. 

As we desire to keep a corrected listof the dentists in the United States, 
our friends and subscribers will please nptify us. when changing their, 
location. 



ALL OPERATIONS IN THE CLINICS OF THIS INSTITUTION ARE PERFORMED 
GRATUITOUSLY FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE POOR ONLY. 



SESSION OF 1863-'64. 



OPERATIVE DEPARTMENT. 

Number of Patients visiting the Clinic, 2202 

Number for whom the following operations were performed, 1687 

Gold Fillings, 607 

Tin do 690 

Temporary Fillings, , 13 

Amalgam do 6 

Treatment and Filling Pulp Cavities, 201 

Superficial Caries Removed, 15 

Removal of Salivary Calculi, 85 

Treatment of Periostitis, 37 

Do Alveolar Abscess, 24 

Do Inflammation of the Gums, 6 

Do Partial Necrosis, 15 

Do Diseased Antrum, 2 

Do Ir regularities, 15 

Do Necrosis of Superior Maxilla, _ 1 

Extraction of Teeth and Roots, 2112 

Total, 3828 

JAMES TRUMAN, Demonstrator, 



MECHANICAL DEPARTMENT. 

125 Patients were supplied with the following Artificial Dentures : 

Whole Sets of Teeth, 21 

Full Upper Sets, 42 

Full Lower Sets, 3 

Full Upper Set, Blocks, 1 

Do Continuous Gum Sets, ■■ 3 

Partial Upper Sets, 60 

Do Lower Sets, 8 

Obturators,* 3 

Teeth Mounted on Metal Plates, 517 

Do Hard Rubber Base, 1130 

Whole Number of Gum Teeth, 671 

Do Plain Teeth, 976 

Do Teeth Mounted, 1647 

EDWARD N. BAIIiEY, A. M., Demonstrator. 

* These were made for soldiers having lost their teeth and adjacent bones from gunshot wounds 



ms^isi^ii^m^i^mw 



SESSION 1863-'64. 



R. H. SHOEMAKER Philadelphia. 

ALEX. O'CALLAGHAN, Cuba. 

JOHN HINES, Philadelphia. 

CHARLES BUCKLEY, Jr...... « 

THOMAS ROBSON, Jr.,.. <« 

WILLIAM A. NEWLAND,.... '< 

A. EMOKY STREET, New Jersey. 

GEO. J. UNDERWOOD, New York. 

JONAS M. KERN, Pennsylvania. 

J. A. WOODWARD, Philadelphia. 

I. S. FOGG, D. D. S., » 

EDWIN C. BAXTER, Maine. 

J. W. RHONE, Pennsylvania. 

A. S. REBER, u 

E. L PARRAMORE, Virginia. 

HORACE ENOS, Philadelphia. 

WM. H. PAULLIN, a 

J. 0. A. JOHNSON, New Jersey. 

JOHN N. FARRAR, Massachusetts. 

SIMEON H. GUILFORD, Pennsylvania. 

ABRAM PRATT, a 

SIMON FRAU , Cuba. 

HERNY COWIE, Michigan. 



FEDERICO COMAS, Cuba. 

MANUEL TRUJILLO, " 

H. C. ROCKWELL, New York. 

W. T. SHANNON, New Jersey. 

J G. CAMP, Pennsylvania. 

J. W. VANOSTEN, Philadelphia. 

J. B. R. WRIGGINS New Jersey. 

S. G. PERRY, New York. 

C. A. MILBANK, " 

G. W. CALDWELL, Philadelphia. 

JOHN N. CROUSE, Illinois. 

P. PRETERRE, M. D., New York. 

S. C. RICHARDSON, Illinois. 

J. B. SNOW, Connecticut. 

J. D. WHITE, Jr., Philadelphia. 

GEORGE CLARK, Vermont. 

C. McGRATH, Philadelphia. 

EDW. LEFAIVRE, Canada. 

THOS. E. OSMUN, M. D., Philadelphia. 

N. B. WELDON, D. D. S., Connecticut. 

HOWARD BASSETT, Philadelphia 

U. B. KIRK, " 



GRADUATES, 1863-'6i. 



R. H. SHOEMAKER, 

ALEX. O'CALLAGHAN, 
GEO. J. UNDERWOOD,. 
EDWIN C. BAXTER,... 
ABRAM S. REBER 



HENRY COWIE, 

FEDERICO COMAS,.... 
MANUEL TRUJILLO,. 

W. T. SHANNON, 

J.G.CAMP, 

J. W. VANOSTEN, 

G. W. CALDWELL, .... 
S. C.RICHARDSON,... 



J. B. SNOW, 

GEORGE CLARK, 

EDWARD LEFAIVRE,.. 
THOS. E. OSMUN, M. D. 



.Pennsylvania, Alveolar Abscess. 

.Cuba, Dental Caries and its Treatment. 

.New York, Orthodontia. 

..Maine, Dental Periostitis. 

.Pennsylvania, The Relations of the Teeth to each other, and 

the Importance of these Relations. 

..Michigan, Di.seased Pulps and their Treatment. 

..Cuba, Mechanical Dentistry. 

.. <*■ Caries. 

..New Jersey, Exposed Pulps. 

..Pennsylvania, Neuralgia. 

" Dental Caries. 

" The Arsenical Paste. 

..Illinois, Why Superior Teeth Decay in greater pro- 
portion than Inferior. 

..Connecticut, Cheap Mechanical Dentistry. 

..Vermont, Dental Caries. 

.Canada, Dentistry in Canada, 

.Pennsylvania, Inflammation. 



BLOCK TEETH AND VULCANITE. 



I ^oud respectfully inform the Dental Profession that my Laboratory has been 
REMOVED TO lOO NORTH TENTH STREET, v^here, after having made 
considerable improvements in my style of carving and enamels, with assistants also, I am. 
now enabled to execute all orders with promptness and despatch. 

Dentists wishing to try Vulcanite Base, can have a few cases made at a reduced price. 

VTM. R HALL, 

3 100 North Tenth Street, Philadelphia. 



if 






EMBRACED IN" LETTERS PATENT GRANTED MARCH 20, 1860. 

PATENT FOR THE IMPROVEMENT AttOWED. 

This material possesses advantages which commend it above every other 
but gold, for filling Teeth, and can be employed where gold cannot. 

To suit different cases, three Nos. are prepared. No. 3 is mostly pre- 
ferred for general use ; No. 2 is less plastic, but works handsomely, and 
is much used ; No. 1 is harder but brittle. 

For particulars in regard to the material, manner of using it, &c., see 
Dr. B. Wood's Dental Circular for May, 1864. . 

Purchasers can have until the 1st of November, 1864, to perfect their 
licenses — until which time the material may be used for trial, in territory 
not disposed of, without a license ; after that date, regular licenses will 
be required. 

Price $2 an ingot of 3-4 oz. weight. Postage 6 cents. Every ingot or 
piece sold is stamped with the name of the Patentee and the date of the 
Patent. 

Individual Right of Use in office practice, full term, $25 00 

" " " and Manufacture for one's own use,. ... 50 00 

Exclusive Right according to Territory and population. 

Licenses can be had for limited periods, and the amount subsequently 
applied on the full term. Attention is particularly requested to the pro- 
position made in the Circular, 

Those intending to obtain licenses, would do well to apply at once, as 
proposals will now be received for State, County and Town Rights. 

IMPROVED PLUGGERS FOR USING THE FILLING, 

In sets of 8 and 12, at $2.50 and $3.75 respectively. For a plainer and 
cheaper style, $2 to |3. Postage 24 to 36 cents. 

Address, 

DR. B. WOOD, Dentist, 

Albany, New York. 



DR. WOOD'S DENTAL CIRCULAR. 

The May number (of which 3000 copies were issued) contains 32 pages, 
printed in type equal to 40 or 50 pages ordinary journal print. A copy 
can be had upon application, if before the edition is exhausted. 

It is proposed to postpone the issue of the next number until the first 
of January. Meanwhile correspondence from the profession is respect- 
fully invited. 



R. W. ARCHER'S 



IMPKOVED DENTAL CHAIR. 



Patented September 4, I860. 




o -^ 

•" a 



<D 



a 



as 



O 

03 -co 
S 

a 



O 



rt 



<3i <V 



a ^ 

o © 
o S 

p «+-< 
a TS 

•- C3 

^ <u 

• ^ tn 

-a tB 

O '^ 

o 

CO tH 

£-^ 

(-1 -jj 
O.^ 

^ P 

S ^ 
ci o 



^ 

H 



c3 «v 






. ^ 



^ r» r^ "rt 



P 
P 
O 

o 

■^ *^ 

OQ 

O p 
^ .P 

§ 5 

^ ft 

ai 

& 'S 

.2 

p4 '§. 






o 

CQ 



SUTTON & RAYNOR, 

No. 748 Broadway, New York, 

MANOTACXURERS OF AND DEALERS IN 

EYERY DESCEIPTION OF 




nneiiiii. 



ALSO, 



Importers of and Wholesale and Retail Dealers in 



PLATINA PLATE AND WIRE. 



T" O ID E3 KTT? I JSTS 

THE CHEAPEST DENTAL DEPOT IN THE CITY 

rOE THB 



pitilit f laiJMMl 



OF ALL KINDS, 

FORCEPS, PLUGGERS, SCALERS, EXCAVATORS, BURRS, 
CHAIRS, SPITTOONS, LATHES, 

Together with a General Assortment of all kinds of 

DENTAL INSTRUMENTS, MATERIALS, &C. 

WHOLESALE AND RETAIL, AT 

JOHISr KLEIN'S 

No. 22 North Eighth St., Philadelphia. 

N. B. — One price, and all goods warranted as represented. Cash 
orders promptly filled. 



NEALL, McCURDY & NEALL, 

SUCCESSORS TO 

liFACTIBEBS Of FflBCElMN TEET9 

AND 

DENTISTS' MATERIALS. 



534 Arch St., south-east corner of Sixth, 

PHILADELPHIA, PENNA. 



ORXTM & ARMSTRONG, 
NO. 520 A-ROH STREET, 

PHILADELPHIA, 

HANUPACTURERS OF THE 

Most Improved Gum Sections and Plain Teeth, 

:fo:r the "vxjx.c.A.isriTE b.a.se. 

ALSO, 

GUM & PLAIN TEETH FOR PLATE WORK, 

l¥it1i all other Articles used in Deiiti»itry. 

CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

MANUFACTURERS OF 

DENTISTS' FINE GOLD AND TIN FOIL, 

nsros. SS8 <sc sso jp:eij^:r stpieet, 

PHItADEIiPHIA. 

The attention of Dentists is invited to our FINE GOL.D FOlli, which is 
prepared under our constant personal supervision. Our Nos. are 4, 5, 6, 8 
and 10. 

We are also manufacturing an ADHESITE FII«E GOL.D FOIIi^ 
Nos. 4, 5 and 6. 

AL.L. our Gold Foil is manufactured from ABSOL.UTEL.Y PURE 
GOIiD, prepared expressly for the purpose, with great care, by ourselves. 

DENTISTS' REFINED TIN FOIL CONSTANTLY ON HAND. 

Address . CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

Philadelphia, 



HORATIO C. KERIM, 



MANUFACTURER OP 



SURGICIllU[IIIlLimRUM[|ITS,Fll[UC. 



The subscriber would again remind the profession that he still continues 
to manufacture all kinds of Instruments, Dental Files, &c. 

From the flattering testimonials he has received, (of which a few are 
appended,) of the superior quality of his Instruments and Files, he feels 
confidence in his ability to produce an article fully equal to any made. 

Assiduous attention to the details of the business, (with an experience 
of thirty years,) has enabled him to make many improvements in the 
adaptation to the specific purpose ; and, as the success of an operation 
depends, in some degree, on the adaptation of the instruments to the par- 
ticular character of the operation, it needs no argument to convince those 
wishing to procure instruments, of the importance of purchasing the manu- 
facture of those of long and well established reputation. Any orders ten- 
dered him will fee promptly attended to. Illustrated catalogues will be 
furnished on application. 

HORATIO G. KERN, 
No. 25 North Sixth Street, Philadelphia. 



501 North Seventh Street, Philadelphia, June Sth, 1863. 
11. Gr. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators which you handed me some 
days since I have had in constant use, and take great pleasure in stating 
that I believe them to be a superior article, both in their ability to retain a 
sharp cutting edge, and withstand the force essential to the operation. 
Yours, &c. C. N. Peirce, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. Gr. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators recently manufactured 
by you have been used with the utmost satisfaction. I can give them an 
unqualified recommendation. Yours, respectfully, 

June 26th, 1863. Geo. T. Barker, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. Gr. Kern — Dear Sir — The last excavators obtained from you 
are of a very superior quality. I can recommend them as being equal t© 
any I have ever used. T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S. 

June 25h, 1863. 



A substitute for Amalgam in filling badly decayed teetb ; and used 
for resetting Pivot Teeth in badly decayed roots ; also for filling over 
Sensitive Dentine to destroy sensibility, and as a non-conductor of 
heat, and for many otber Dental Purposes. 

For sale by all dealers in Dental Materials and by the undersigned. 

One fourth ounce packages, with directions, sent by mail free of post- 
age, on receipt of $1. 

O. H. ROBERTS, M. D., 

POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y. 



HIGH PRESSURE 

VULCANIZING OVEN. 

ALSO, 

New Vulcanizing Boiler. 

steam Joint secured by means of a Screw 
Collar and Set Screws. No Bolts — no Nuts — 
no Friction on the Rubber Packing. 

These machines Vulcanize in 40 minutes at 
320°; make the best quality of work; conswme 
but one fluid ounce of alcohol, and produce no 
smell of sulphur in the rooms. 

PRICES: 

All complete, with furniture : — 

For one case, copper oven $11 00 

For two cases, copper oven 12 00 

For two cases, copper boiler 13 00 

For three cases, copper boiler 14 00 

Pamphlets sent, on application, gratis. 
For testimonials see advertisement in Dental 
Cosmos, January number, 1862. 

Address, GEO. E. HAVES, 

BUFFALO, N. Y. 
HF^ For sale at the Dental Depots. 



New Self-Clamping Flask 



AND 



AUTOMATIC BURNER 

FOR HAYE'S VULCANIZERS, 

Needs little attention, and puts itself out at 
the right time. 

For sale as above. 




A. JONES, 



Wo. 724 BEOAD'WAY, N. Y, 



WHILE THANKINO THE 



DENTAL PROFESSION 



For the very liberal patronage they have extended to him for the last 
twenty-five years, begs leave to say, that he still continues his business 
as usual at the above number, where may be found 



All Articles in the Dental Line, 

Of his own, and other manufacturers, of the moat 



AND 



At the Most Favorable Prices. 



All orders from abroad will be punctually and thoroughly attended to. 



JNO. R.RUBENCAME, 
THOS. H. STOCKTNN, 



General Partners, 



JOHN R. McCURDY, 

Special Partner. 



RUBENCAME & STOCKTON, 





ISTo. 825 ^rch Street, 
PHILADELPHIA. PA. 

We desire to inform our customers and the profession generally : 

First. That we have removed to 825 Arch Street, by which removal 
we secure increased facilities and abundant room, in the manufacturing as 
well as the sale department. 

Second. That Mr. John R. McCurdy, formerly of the firm of Jones, 
White & McCurdy, by his association with us as Special Partner, places 
us in possession of ample means to enlarge our business to any required 
extent. 

We propose, therefore, to keep constantly on hand articles of every 
description, and of qualities to suit all, embracing Grold and Tin Foil, 
Grold and Silver Plate, Wire, Solder and Springs, and a full assortment 
of Porcelain Teeth for Plate and Vulcanite work, with and without Grum 5 
also, 

THE I]Vsd:i>ItO"V^Ei:) 




(Terrell's patent,) manufactured only by us, 





Together with every thing required by the Dentist, both in the operative 
and mechanical departments. 

All orders by Mail, Express or otherwise, will receive our prompt and 
careful attention — everything warranted as represented. 

While thanking the profession for the liberal patronage heretofore 
extended to us, we respectfully solicit a continuance of the same, believ- 
ing that we shall be fully able to meet all demands made upon us. 

Very respectfully, 

RUBENCAME & STOCKTON. 

P. S. The undersigned having connected himself with Messrs. Rubencamk 
& Stockton, as a Special Partner, in the manufacture of Porcelain Teeth, Dental 
Material, etc., is desirous of renewing the business intercourse with the Dental 
Profession, which ill-health compelled him to suspend five years since. 

He pledges himself that nothing shall be wanting on his part to make these 
renewed relations as pleasant and as satisfactory as those heretofore maintained. 

Kespectfully, 

JOHIV R. incCURDY, 



[From the «' Dental Times," April, 1864.] 

VULCANITE TEETH.— We desire to call attention to the new kind of Teeth for Volcanitc Base, 
manufactured by Rubbncamb & Stockton. The improvement eonsists in tfce method of fastening 
without the use of platina rivits, and appears to us to combine many advantages not to be 
obtained in Teeth of any other description, we have ever seen or used. 

There can be no possible danger of exposing rivit heads or encte ia finishing, or fear of the teeth 
drawing away from their rivWs, (as in ordinary pin teeth,) on the contrary, we believe that no 
more durable or Simple fa.stening can be desired than these allord, presenting at the same time, so 
complete and accurate a finish, with so much less risk and labor in mounting. 

Below we give a cut, showing the heel lurface of some sections, and also ap end view, the 
rubber forcing its way into the openings, and over the edges of the gum, inside and out, affords a 
perfectly solid foui^ation, and in fact becomes, as it were, Jk.par." of the tooth itself. 

"We believe they are' good, and recommend them to the profession generally. G. T. b. 

Messrs. Bubencahb &; Stockton :— (gentlemen— Having used your Teeth in my practice for the 
past four years, and finding them superior to all others, in beauty, natural appearance and durab ilily , 
I hereby add my humble testimonial in their favor. KespectfuUy, 

Lewistown, Pa. S. BELFORD. 

Messrs. Rubencamr & Stockton: — Gentlemen — Having used your. Teeth in my practice foj 
several years, I can conscientiously recommend them as being equal, if not superior, to any now 
made in the City of Philadelphia, or elsewhere. • 

Lambertville N.J. J. HAYHURST. 

Messrs. RtJBENCAMK & Stockton : — Gentlenven— Having used your Teeth, lean with pleasure 
recommend them as a superior article. 
Philadelphia. ' J. M. GARRETSON. 

The undersigned having used Teeth manufactured by Robencame & Stockton, find that they 
have given entire satis/action to all patients furnished Avith the same. 
Philadelphia. , ISAAC GRIFFITH. 

Messrs. Rubencame &; Stockton: — Gents. — I have used your make of Teeth for several years, 
and they have giyen ge/ieral satisfaction to n^y patients. I would recommend them to. the Dentists 
generally. 

Burlington, Iowa. - H.BAILEY. 

Messrs. Rbbenoame & S-eockton :— Gentlemen— I have used the Teetji of your manufacture for 
two years past, and believe them to be superior to alt others, they give perfect satisfaction. 

Georgetown, Del. GEORC^E SNOW. 

Mbssrs. Rubencamb Sc Stockton: — Gents. — For the last two years I have been using your 
Teeth, and can safely say that I have found them all to be as you have represented : giving natural 
expression, both in style aad shade, and bearing admirably the severe test they are subjected to in 
soldering. In a word, they stand thefirt, and look well in the mouth. 

Cochranville, Pa. ROBT, L. McCLELLAN. 

Messrs. RtrBENOAME k Stockton: — Gentlemen — I have been using Teeth manufactured by you 
for some time past, and thus far they hare given entire satisfaction. Yours, trulv, 

Bridgeton, N . y. ' JOSEPH C. KIRBY. 

Messrs. BnBENCAME Is, Stockton ; — Gentlemen — Having used your T,eeth in my practice for the 
past two years, and finding them superior to all others in beauty, natural appearance and unequalled 
tndurance under the blow-pipe, I hereby cheerfully add my humble testimonial ip their favor. 

Somers' Point, N. J. ' J. HAND. 

Having for the last three years used the Teeth manufactured by Rxtbencaue «& Stockton, I can 
tpeak in the highest terms of their strength^ beauty and adaptability) thieir apjpearance in the mouth 
is natural and life-like. 

Alexandria, Pa J. R. HEWITT. 

Messrs. Rubencamk & Stockton: — Having used for the last five years, with entire satisfaction. 
your make of Artificial Teeth, I cheerfully recommend them to the profession, and believe thev 
combine all the qualities required by the Dentist. 

Millville, N. J. J. S. SIMMERMAN. 

Messrs, Rubencamb k Stockton: — Gentlemen — Having used your make of Teeth for the last 
seven or eight years, I can say that they are equal to any now made, and inferior to none. 

Philadelphia. Yours, truly, G. L. NAGLK. 

JIessrs. Rubencamb &; Stockton: — Dear Sirs — Having used your Teeth evar since tbey have 
been in the market, it takes no strain qf the imagination to recommend them. They, like the 
manufacturers, are quite good looking, producing in the most grufif countenance a smile of appro- 
bation. They stand fire and hammering; 'no. iSkCt, none m^re desirable can be had anywhere. » 

Belle fonte, Pa. Very truly, JNO. D WINGATE. 

I have used Rubencamb &; Stockton's Artificial Teeth for a sufficient time to teat their strength 
and adaptability, they give entire satisfaction to myself and customers, are much adinired, particu- 
larly by the Ladies, for their beauty and natural appearance in the mouth, I do earnestly recom- 
mend tkem to the Dental profession as a decidedly superior article. 

Waynesburg, Pa,. SAMUEL McCLEES. 

Mbssrs. Rdbbncami k Stockton: — Gentlemen — About eight years since, I bought the first 
Teeth offered for sale by Mr. Rubencamb. After proper trial, and finding in them every requisite 
of the profession, I have continued their exclusive use to the present time, and with decided scuis- 
f action to myself and patients. Respectfully, 

Philadelphia. C, S, CORFIELD. 

Having inserted a great number of Teeth manufactured by Rubbncamb & Stockton, it gives ra« 
pleasure to recommend them to all Dentists for their unsurpassed natural and life-like appeiaranee. 
being satisfied that they will itand tke action of fire as well, if not better, them any 1 have ever used 
manufactured by others. 
"B.ennett Square, Pa. A^Bl^N WAT. 



OTTt^j* 




W. A. DUf F £ CO. 

nKANVrACTURSB.S 97 






No. 516 ARCH STREET, 

PHmADELPHIA. 



We invite the attention of Dentists and Dealers to our assortment of 
Artificial Teeth^ believing them to equal any offered to the profession. 

We are prepared to furnish every variety of Plain land Gum Teeth for 
Gold and Silver Plate, and Rubber or VuLCANfTE WoR^jIncluding 
Block and Single Teeth, for, Vulcanite, with 

'iiUILE-IIAlEP' fim. 

These Pins have really two distinct and well-formed heads, one in the 

tooth, preventing the possibility of their being drawn out, and one for 

insertion in the Rubber. Our up{)er central blocks have each fire pins, 

and the lower central and srd6 blocks each four ; together. Fifty-one 

Double-headed Pins in .each full set, our machinery enabling us to finish 

them in this improved manner. v 

We would also call the ipecial attention of the profession to our 



i^^^lsfe^ "%%%! 






for Vulcanite Work. For strength and peculiar adaptation to the pur- 
• - pose intended, we believe them to be unsurpai^sed. 

DENTAL INSTRUMENTS, LATHES, VULCANIZERS, 

ARCHER'S IMPROVED DENTAL CHAIRS, 

Footstools, Spittoons, Trays, &c., &c., including the various arti- 
cles used by the profession. 

"^ ^ '^''^^ ^ I W. A. DUFF & CO.. 

J. w. WATT. ) " S16 Arch Street, Phila, 




^ 




VOL. IF. 



OCTOBER, 1864. 



NO. 2 




THE 



DENTAL TIMES, 



PROPERTY 

DENTAL SOCIETY. 

Presented by 



[ERLY JOURNAL 



OF 



DENTA 



i>'% O-I-E WJO E . 

JUN20 1891 * 



EDTTED ANj5/PUmiSTf£B ;^¥. 

THE F^CTJi:.TY 



OP THE 




1 0I §mhl Miitpt^^ 



PHILADELPHIA 




PRICE Sl.OO A YEAR, IN ADVANCE. 




€ 



CO IsT T E IsT T S- 



PACK 



Inflammation, by T. Embley Osmun, M. D., D. D. S., - - - - 49 

Alveolar Abscess, by Reginald H. Shoemaker, D. D. S., - - - - 52 

The Arsenical Paste, by George W. Caldwell, D. D. S., - - ■» - 56 

Extracting Teeth, by T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S., ^ .... 61 

Tobacco, by W. W. Townsend. D. D. S,, - 64 

Dental Caries— Its Effects on the General Health, by Geo. T. Barker, D. D. S., 65 

Discolored and Necrosed Teeth, by James Truman, D. p. S., - - - 69 

Caoutchouc, by E. Wildman, M. D., D. D. S„ - - * - - • 73 

Deformity of Artificial Teeth, by C. H. Eccleston, 76 

PROCEEDINGS OF DENTAL ASSOCIATIONS. 

American Dental Association, by C. N. Peirce, D. D. S., - - - - 77 

American Dental Convention, by C JST. Peirce, D. D. S., - - - - 79 

Editorial, ,..-81 



TO THE PROPESSION. 



In issuing the " Dental Times," we desire to make it of interest to 
the mass of practitioners. To this end we earnestly solicit from our 
professional friends, communications on any branch of our specialty. To 
those who hesitate because their limited time incapacitates them for 
writing long or elaborate articles, we would say, give us the facts and the 
method, and we will lay them before our readers so that all will under- 
stand and many be instructed. 

Persons desiring to become subscribers, can do so by remitting the 
price of subscription, one dollar per annum, with name and address, to 
Dr. C. N. Peirce, 501 North Seventh street, Philadelphia. 

As we desire to keep a corrected list of the dentists in the United States, 
our friends and subscribers will please notify us when changing their 
location. 



iiTOisf lATOis' w&mm, 



ALL OPERATIONS IN THE CLINICS OF THIS INSTITUTION ARE PERFORMED 
iJRATUITOUSLY FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE POOR ONLY. 

SESSION OF 1863-'64. 

OPERATIVE DEPARTMENT. 

Nrnmber of P&tiente visiting the Clinic, 2202 

Number for whom the following operations were performed, ^ 1^87 

Gold Fillings, 607 

Tin do „ _ „ _ 690 

Temporary FilUagt;, _ _ _ ^ , 13 

Amalgam do „ 6 

Treatment and Filling Pulp Cavities, ^ „ 201 

Superficial Caries Removed, „ , 15 

Removal of Salivary Calculi, „ „ 85 

Treatmeat of Periostitis, , 37 

Do Alveolar Abscess, _ „... „ 24 

Do Inflammation of the O-ums, 5 

Do Partial Necrosis, -^..,. _ _ ^ 15 

Do Diseased Antrum, 2 

Do Irregularities, ^ 15 

Do Necrosis of Superior Maxilla, „ „ „ 1 

Bxtractioa of Teeth and Roots, „ 2112 

Total, ^ 3828 

JAMES TRUIHAN, Demonstrator. 



MECHANICAL DEPARTMENT. 

125 Patiexts were supplied with the foUowiitg Artificial Dentures : 

Whole Sets of Teeth, 21 

Full Upper Sets, „ 42 

Full Lower Sets, _ 3 

Full Upper Set, Blocks, > _ ^ 1 

Do Continuous Grum Sets, „ , ^ 3 

Partial Upper Sets, ^ _ _ 60 

Do Lower Sets, ^ --....- - 8 

Obturators,* 3 

Teeth Mounted ou Metal Plates, ^ ^^ >. 517 

Do Hard Rubber Base, ^ „ - 1130 

Whole Number of Gum Teeth , 671 

Do Plain Teeth, ^ _ „ — 97« 



Do Teeth Mounted, 1647 

EDWARD N. BAItEY, A, M., Demonstrator. 

# These were made for soldiers having lost their teeth and adjacent bones from gunshot wounds 



SH^i'^ociri.^irir 



SESSION 1863-^64, 



JR. H. SHOEMAKER, Philadelphia. 

ALEX. O'CALLAGHAN^ Cuba. 

JOHN HINES, Philadelphia. 

CHARLES BUCKLEY, Jr...... ♦* 

THOMAS ROBSON, Jr., «' 

WILLIAM A. NEWLAND,.... '^ 

A. EMORY STREET, New Jersey. 

&E0. J. UNDERWOOD, New York. 

JONAS M. KERN, Pennsylvania. 

J. A. WOODWARD, Philadelphia. 

I. S. FOGG, D. D. S., « 

EDWIN C. BAXTER, Maine. 

J. W. RHONE, Pennsylvania. 

■A. S. REBER, (( 

I. L PARRAMORE, Virginia. 

HORACE ENOS, Philadelphia. 

WM. H. PAULLIN, " 

J. O. A. JOHNSON, New Jersey. 

JOHN N. PARRAR, Massachusetts. 

SIMEON H. GUILFORD, Pennsylvania. 

ABRAM PRATT, " 

SIMON FRAU , Cuba. 

XIERNY eOWlE, MichigaB. 



FEDERICO COMAS, Cuba. 

MANUEL TRUJILLO, " 

H. C. ROCKWELL, New Yorit, 

W. T. SHANNON, New Jersey. 

J G. CAMP, Pennsylvania 

J. W. VANOSTEN, Philadelphia. 

J. B. R. WRIGGINS New Jersey. 

S. G. PERRY, New York. 

C. A. MILBANK, „... <' 

G. W. CALDWELL, Phila(3elphS» 

JOHN N. CROUSE, Illinois. 

P. PRETERRE, M. D., New York. 

S. C. RICHARDSON, Illinois. 

J. B. SNOW, Connecticut. 

J. D. WHITE, Jr., Philadelphia. 

GEORGE CLARK, Vermont. 

C. McGRATH, Philadelphia. 

EDW. LEFAIVRE, Canada. 

THOS. E OSMUN, M. »., Philadelphia 

N. B. WELDON, D. D. S., Connecticut. 

HOWARD BASSETT^ Philadelphia. 

F. B. KIRK^ " 



GRADUATES, 1863-'6^. 



R. H. SHOEMAKER, 

ALEX. O'CALLAGHAN,. 
GEO. J. UNDERWOOD,.. 

EDWIN C. BAXTER, 

ABRAM S. REBER, 



HENRY COWIE^ 

FEDERICO COMAS,.... 
MANUEL TRUJILLO,. 

W. T. SHANNON, 

J.G.CAMP, 

J. W. VANOSTEN, 

e. W. CALDWELL, .... 
S. C. RICHARDSON,... 



J. B. SNOW, 

GEORGE CLARK, 

EDWARD LEFAIVRE,.... 
*HOS. E. OSMUN, M. D.,. 



.Pennsylvania, Alveolar Abscess. 

.Cuba, Dental Caries and its Treatment. 

.New York, Orthodontia. 

..Maine, Dental Periostitis. 

.Pennsylvania^ The Relations of the Teeth to each otheir, and 

the Importance of these Relations. 

..Michigan, Diseased Pulps and their Treatment. 

..Cuba, Mechanical Dentistry. 

.. '* Caries, 

..New Jersey, E.xposed Pulps. 

..Pennsylvania, Neuralgia. 

" Dental Caries. 

" The Arsenical Paste. 

.J/linois, Why Superior Teeth Decay in greater pr«^- 

portion than Inferior. 

..Connecticut, Cheap Mechanical Dentistry. 

...Vermont, Dental Caries. 

..Canada, Dentistry in Canada, 

..Pennsylvania, Inflammation. 



BLOCK TEETH AND VULCANITE. 



I woud respectfully inform the Dental Profession that my Laboratory has teen 
REMOVED TO lOO NORTH TENTH STREET, where, after having made 
considerable improvements in ray style of carving and enamels, with assistants also, I am 
BOW enabled to execute all orders with promptness and despatch. 

Dentists wishing to try Vulcanite Base, can have a few cases made at a reduced price. 

VIM. R HALL, 

IQQ North Tenth gtreet^ Fhiladelphift. 



w l 'Wm W\ w ^ 



[^ 



(PROTECTED BY LETTERS PATENT.) 



This material possesses advantages which commend it above every other 
but gold, for filling Teeth, and it can be employed where gold cannot. 

For particulars in regard to its qualities, the manner of using it, instru- 
ments employed, &c., apply for Dr. Wood's Dental Circular. 

Purchasers can have until the 1st of November, 1864, to perfect their 
licenses — until which time the material may be used for trial, in territory 
not disposed of, without a license j after that date, regular licenses will 
be required. 

All Licenses to use the Material issue from September 20th, 1864. 

Terms. — For five years from that date, ^8; for ten years, $15; for 
seventeen years, (full term,) $25. Licenses for limited periods, apply 
towards the extension. 

Grants to use the Material for trial, not exceeding one year, $2. 
These secure the holders the refusal of a license before the expiration of 
the year, as against applicants for territorial rights, and will be accepted 
in payment towards a license at any time ; they may be taken out monthly 
or oftener, and so gradually secure a full license within the year. They 
must be obtained upon every purchase for trial. 

Price op Material. — To licensees, $2 an ingot of f oz. weight. To 
non-licensees, $4 an ingot, with a grant to use it for trial not exceeding 
one year. Postage 6 cents. 

Pluggers for Using the Filling, in sets of 8 and 12, plain steel 
handles, at $2.50 and $3.75, respectively. Postage 24 to 36 cents. 

Attention is directed to the " ofier to applicants for licenses " made in 
the ''Dental Circular'' for May, 1864, page 32. 

Those intending to obtain licenses, would do well to apply at once, as 
proposals will now be received for State, County and Town Rights. 

Address, 

B. WOOD, M. D., Dentist, 

Albany, New York. 



DR. B. WOOD'S INSULATED PLUGGEftS, 

FOR USING THF PLASTIC METALLIC FILLING. 

PATENT APPLIED FOR. 

In sets of 8 and 12, with silver or other metallic points and bulbs, at 
$6 to $20 per set, according to style and material. For particulars, 
apply as above. 



The Dental Circular and Examiner for January, 1865) 

Will be issued in a few weeks. A copy sent gratuitously on application. 
Albany, JV. Y., Oct, 1, 1864. 



R. "W. ARCHER'S 

IMPKOVED DENTAL CHAIR. 

Patented September 4^ 1860. 




o^ o 



p o o 

•^ a 'a. 

•g "is O S3 

S ■*§ o ^ 

<» O 



00 



a Ti 



OQ 
C 

o 

• I— < - 

Cm 



W:- ^ 



s 

tiD a -a 

^ -a ■*= 

§ o -^ c 

" ^ a a 

10 r— I <^ .O 

a s Q 



on 

o a 

-a '^ 

P5 ft 

in $. 






p:^ 






si 
O 



SUTTON & RAYNOR, 

No. 748 Broadway, New Tork, 

MANUFACTURERS OF AND DEALERS IN 

EYERY DESCRIPTION OF 

ALSO, 

Importers of and Wholesale and Retail Dealers in 



PLATINA PLATE AND WIRE. 



TO 3D ESIXTTI JSTS. 

THE CHEAPEST DENTAL DEPOT IN THE CITY 

FOR THE 



WV.-H.^| UjJJ 




OF ALL KINDS, 

FORCEPS, PLUGGERS, SCALERS, EXCAVATORS, BURRS, 
CHAIRS, SPITTOONS, LATHES, 

Together with a General Assortment of all kinds of 

DENTAL INSTRUMENTS, MATERIALS, &C. 

WHOLESALE AND RETAIL, AT 

JOHN KLEIN'S 

No. 22 North Eighth St., Philadelphia. 

N. B. — One price, and all goods warranted as represented. Cash 
orders promptly filled. 



NEALL, McCURDY & NEALL, 

SUCCESSORS TO 

HiUFACmiBS OF FDKCELftIN TEETH 

AND 

DENTISTS' MATERIALS. 



534 i^rch St., south-east corner of Sixth, 

PHILADELPHIA, PENNA. 



ORUM & ARMSTRONG, 
N^O. 520 ^RCH STREET, 

PHILADELPHIA, 

MANUPACTUBEES OP THB 

Most Improved Gum Sections and Plain Teeth, 

FOIi THE "VXJX.O.A.JSriTE B.A.SE. 

ALSO,. 

GUM & PLAIN TEETH POU PLATE WORK. 

With all other Articles used in Dentistry. 



CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

MANUFACTURERS OF 

DENTISTS' FINE GOLD AND TIN FOIL, 

ISTOS. SJ38 <Sc SSO I»E-A.I^ STrREEO?, 
PHIIiADE^I^PHIA. 

The attention of Dentists is invited to our FINE GOLD FOIL., which is 
prepared under our constant personal supervision. Our Nos. are 4, 5, 6, 8 
and 10. 

We are also manufacturing an ADUESIYE FINE GOLD FOIL^ 
Nos. 4, 5 and 6. 

ALL our Gold Foil is manufactured from ABSOLUTELY PURE 
GOLD^ prepared expressly for the purpose, with great care, by ourselves. 

DENTISTS' REFINED TIN FOIL CONSTANTLY ON HAND. 

Address CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

Philadelphia, 



HORATIO C. KERN, 



MANUFACTURER OF 



SURGICll&DEIITUIIISTRyM[IITUIUUC. 



The subscriber would again remind the profession that he still continues 
to manufacture all kinds of Instruments, Dental Files, &c. 

From the flattering testimonials he has received, (of which a few are 
appended,) of the superior quality of his Instruments and Files, he feels 
confidence in his ability to produce an article fully equal to any made. 

Assiduous attention to the details of the business, (with an experience 
of thirty years,) has enabled him to make many improvements in the 
adaptation to the specific purpose ; and, as the success of an operation 
depends, in some degree, on the adaptation of the instruments to the par- 
ticular character of the operation, it needs no argument to convince those 
wishing to procure instruments, of the importance of purchasing the manu- 
facture of those of long and well established reputation. Any orders ten- 
dered him will be promptly attended to. Illustrated catalogues will be 
furnished on application. 

HORATIO G. KERN, 
No. 25 North Sixth Street, Philadelphia. 



TESTiiS/a:onsri.A.ijS. 

501 North Seventh Street, Philadelphia^ June Sthy 1863. 
U. G. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators which you handed me some 
days since I have had in constant use, and take great pleasure in stating 
that I believe them to be a superior article, both in their ability to retain a 
sharp cutting edge, and withstand the force essential to the operation. 
Yours, &c. C. N. Peirce, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. Gr. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators recently manufactured 
by you have been used with the utmost satisfaction. I can give them an 
unqualified recommendation. Yours, respectfully, 

June 26th, 1863. Geo. T. Barker, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. Gr. Kern — Dear Sir — The last excavators obtained from you 
are of a very superior quality. I can recommend them as being equal t» 
any I have ever used. T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S. 

June 25h, 1863. 



A substitute for Amalgam in filling badly decayed teeth ; and used 
for resetting Pivot Teeth in badly decayed roots ; also for filling over 
Sensitive Dentine to destroy sensibility, and as a non-conductor of 
heat, and for many other Dental Purposes. 

For sale by all dealers in Dental Materials and by the undersigned. 

One fourth ounce packages, with directions, sent by mail free of post- 
age, on receipt of $1. 

C. H. ROBERTS, M. D., 

POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y. 



HIGH PRESSURE 

VULCANIZING OVEN. 

ALSO, 

New Vulcanizing Boiler. 

steam Joint secured by means of a Screw 
Collar and Set Screws. No Bolts — no Nuts — 
no Friction on the Rubber Packing. 

These machines Vulcanize in 40 minutes at 
320**; make the best quality of work; consHme 
but one fluid ounce of alcohol, and produce no 
smell of sulphur in the rooms. 

PRICES: 

All complete, with furniture : — 

For one case, copper oven fll 00 

For two cases, copper oven 12 00 

For two cases, copper boiler 13 00 

For three cases, copper boiler 14 00 

Pamphlets sent, on application, gratis. 
For testimonials see advertisement in Dental 
Cosmos, January number, 1862. 

Address, GrUO. E. HAYBS, 

BUFFALO, N. Y. 
[XF* For sale at the Dental Depots. 



New Self-Clamping Flask 

AND 

AUTOMATIC BURNER 

FOR HAYE'S VULCANIZERS, 

Needs little attention, and puts itself out at 
the right time. 

For sale as above. 




A. JONES, 



No. 724 BBOADWAV, N. T., 



WHILE THANKING THE 



DENTAL PROFESSION 



For the very liberal patronage they have extended to him for the last 
twenty-five years, begs leave to say, that he still continues his business 
as usual at the above number, where may be found 



All Articles in the Dental Line, 

Of his own, and other manufacturers) of the most 



AND 



At the Most Favorable Prices. 



All orders from abroad will be punctually and thoroughly attended to. 



JNO. R. RUBENCAME, 
THOS. H. STOCKTNN, 



General Partners. 



JOHN R. McCURDT, 
Special Partner* 



RUBENGAME & STOCKTON, 






ISTo. 835 ^rck Street, 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 

We desire to inform our customers and the profession generally : 

First. That we have removed to 825 Arch Street, by which removal 
we secure increased facilities and abundant room, in the manufacturing as 
well as the sale department. 

Second, That Mr. John R. McCurdt, formerly of the firm of Jones, 
White & McCurdy, by his association with us as Special Partner, places 
us in possession of ample means to enlarge our business to any required 
extent. 

We propose, therefore, to keep constantly on hand articles of every 
description, and of qualities to suit all, embracing Gold and Tin Foil, 
Gold and Silver Plate, Wire, Solder and Springs, and a full assortment 
of Porcelain Teeth for Plate and Vulcanite work, with and without Gum 5 
also, 

THE IlSdllPI^O'VEID 

fFLCiNITE TEETH, 

(Terrell's patent,) manufactured only by us, 






Together with every thing required by the Dentist, both in the operative 
and mechanical departments. 

All orders by Mail, Express or otherwise, will receive our prompt and 
careful attention — everything warranted as represented. 

While thanking the profession for the liberal patronage heretofore 
extended to us, we respectfully solicit a continuance of the same, believ- 
ing that we shall be fully able to meet all demands made upon us. 

Very respectfully, 

RUBENCAME & STOCKTON. 

P. S. The undersigned having connected himself with Messrs. RtBENCAMB 
& Stockton, as a Special Partner, in the manufacture of Poreclain Teeth, Dental 
Material, etc., is desirous of renewing the business intercourse with the Dental 
Profession, which ill-health compelled him to suspend five years since. 

He pledges himself that nothing shall be wanting on his part to make theao 
renewed relations as pleasant and as satisfactory as those heretofore maintained. 

Respectfully, 

JOHIV R. RIcCURDY. 



[From the " Dental Times,"' April, 1864] 

VULCANITE TEETH.— "NVe desire to call attention to the new kind of Te th for A'ulcanite Base, 
manufactured by Rubexcamk A; Stocktox. The improvement consists in the method of fastening 
without the use of platina rivits, and appears to us to combine many advantages not to b,j 
obtain' d in Teeth of any other descri, tion we havcijver seen or used. 

'J here can be no possible danger of exposing rivit heads or ends in fin'shing, or fear of the teeth 
drawing away from tlieir rivits, (as in ordinary pin teeth.) on tlie contrary, we believe that no 
more durable or simple fa.steniug can be desired than these tilford, presenting at the ^an^e time, so 
complete and accurate a finish, with so much less risk and labor in mounting. 

Below we give a cut, showing the heel surface of some sectiDns, and also an end view, the 
rubber forcing its way into the openings, and over the edges of the gum. inside and out, affords a 
perfectly solid foundation, and in fact becomes, as it were, a par of the tooth itself. 

We believe they are good, and recommend them to the profession generally. G. T. B. 

Messrs. Rcbencave & Stockton : — Gentlemen— Having used your Teeth in my practice for the 
past four years, and finding them superior to all others, in beduty, natural appearance And durabiliii/, 
I hereby add my humble testimonial in their favor. Eespectfully, 

Lewistown, Pa. S. BELFORD. 

Messrs. Rubekcamr & Stockton: — Gentlemen — Having used your TeetK in my practice for 
several years, I can conscientiously recommend them as being equal, if not superior, to any now 
made in the City of Philadelphia, or elsewhere. 

Lambertville N. J. J. HAYHURST, 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton :—Gentlemcn— Having used j^our Teeth. lean with pleasure 
recommend them as a superior article. 

Philadelphia. J. M. GARRET SON. 

The undersigned having used Teeth manufactured by Rubencame & Stockton, find that they 
have given entire satisfaction to all pati«nts furnished with the same. 

Philartelphia. ISAAC GRIFFITH. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton: — Gents. — I have used your make of Teeth for several years, 
and they have given general satis/action to my patients. I would recommend them to the DentistB 
generally. 

Burlington., Iowa. H. BAILEY. 

Messrs. Rdbexcame <fc Stockton :— Gentlemen — I have used the Teeth of your manufacture for 
two years past, and believe them to be superior to all others^ thev give perfect satisfncion. 

Georgetown, Del. " GEORGE SNOW. 

Messrs Rubencame^ & Stockton: — Gents. — For the last two years I have been using your 
Teeth, and can safely say that I have found them all to be as you have represented : giving naturnl 
expression , both in style and shade, and bearins admirably the severe test the}' are subjected to in 
Boldering. In a word, they stand the fire, and look well in the mouth. 

Cochranville, Pa. ROBT. L. McCLELLAN. 

Messrs. Rcbencamb & Stockton: — Genfemen — I have been using Teeth manufactured by you 
for some time past, and thus far they have given entire satisfaction. Yours, truiv, 

Bridgeton, N. J. JOSEPH C. KIRBY. 

Messrs. Rubencame k Stockton : — Gentlemen — Having used your Teeth in my practice for the 
past two years, and finding them superior to all otJiers in beauty, natural appearance and unequalled 
endurance under the blow-pipe, I herebv cheerfully add my humble testimonial in their favor. 

Somers' Point, N. J. " J.HAND. 

Having for the last three years used the Teeth manufactured by Rubencame & Stockton, I can 
speak in the highr.st terms of their strength^ btauty and adaptability ; their appearance in the moutU 
is natural and life-like. 

Alexandria, Pa. 3 R. HEWITT. 

Messrs Rubencame & Stockton : — Having used for the last fire years, with entire satisfaction, 
your make of Artificial Teeth, I cheerfully recommend them to the profession, and believe they 
combine all the qualities required by the Dentist. 

Millville, N J. J. S. SIMMERMAN. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton: — Gentlemen— Having used your make of Teeth for the la«t 
«even or eight years'; I can say that they are equal to any now made, and inferior to none. 

Philadelphia. Yours, truly, G. L. NAGLE. 

Messrs. Rubencame &; Stockton: — Dear Sirs— Having used your Teeth ever ."ince t ey have 
been in the market, it takes no strain of the imagination to recommend them. They, like tli« 
manufacturers, are quite good looking, producing in the most gruff countenance a smile of appror 
bation. They stand fire and hammering ; in fact, none more desirable can be had anywhere. 

Bellefonte, Pa. Very truly, JNO. D WINGATE. 

I have used Rubencame ic Stockton's Artifici.il Teeth for a sufficient time to test their strength 
and adaptability ; they give entire satisfaction to myself and customers, are much admiral, particu; 
larly by the Ladies, for their beauty and natural appearance in the mouth. I do earnestly recom- 
mend them to the Dental profession as a decidedly superior article. 

Waynesburg, Pa. ' SAMUEL McCLEES. 

Messrs. Rubbncamb &; Stockton: — Gentlemen — About eight years since, I bought the firgt 
Teeth ofiFered for sale by Mr Rubisncam^. After proper trial, and tihding in them every requisite 
of the profession, I have continued their exclueive use to the present time, and with dttided sa.is-r 
faction to myself and patients. Respectfully, 

Philadelphia. C. S. CORFIELD. 

Having inserted a great number of Teeth manufactured by Rubkncamk & Stockton, it gives m» 
pleasure to recommend them to all Dentists for their unsurpassed natural and life-like appearance, 
being satisfied that they will stand tht action of fir* as well, ifn»t better, than any I have ever us«4 
manufactured by others. 

K^nnett Square, Pa, AJ^B»N WAIT. 



03 




W. A. DUFF £ CO. 



VaiLI9VT/LCTVm.Ii^B o? 





No. 516 ARCH STREET, 

PHILADELPHIA. 



We invite the attention of Dentists and Dealers to our assortment of 
Artificial Teeth, believing them to equal anyoifered to the profession. 

We are prepared to furnish every variety of Plain and Gum Teeth for 
Gold and Silver Plate, and Rubber or Vulcanite Work, including 
Block and Single Teeth > for Vulcanite) with 

iiiiLE'iiieii ri.H 

These Pins have really two distinct and well-formed heads, one in the 

toothj preventing the possibility of their being drawn out, and one for 

insertion in the Rubber. Our upper central blocks have each five pins, 

and the lower Central and side blocks each four; together. Fifty- one 

Double headed Pins in each full set, our machinery enabling us to finish 

them in this improved manner. 

We would also call the special attention of the profession to our 








''ia»"1b"«a%i 




for Vulcanite Work. For strength and peculiar £tdjtptation to the pur- 
pose intended, we believe them to be Unsurpassed, 

DENTAL INSTRUMENTS, LATHES, VULCANIZERS, 

ARCHER'S IxMFROVED DENTAL CHAIRS, 

Footstools, Spittoons, Trays, &c., &c., including the various arti- 
cles used by the profession. 



W. A. DUFF, 

Dr. J. J. GRIFFItll, D. D. S. 

J. W. WATT. 



W. A. DUFF & CO. 



516 Arch Street, Phila, 



S^P" 



exJEJj 



(^- 







VOL. II. 



JANUARY, 1865. 



NO. 3. 




THE 



DENTAL TIMES, 



aUARTERLY JOURNAL 



OF 



DENTAL SCIENCE. 



EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 



THE FACULTY 



OP THB 




PHILADELPHIA. 




PRICE Sl.OO A YEAR, IN ADVANCE. 




CO 1^T T E 1^T T S. 



PAGS 



Steam Pressure in Viilcanizers, by A. Lawrence, M. D., - - - - 97 

Caoutchouc, by E. Wildraan,M. D.jD.D. S., ^9 

Making and Pointing Instruments, by George B. Snow, D. D. S., - - 104 

Duties and Responsibilities of the Dental Profession, by D. K. Boutelle, - 107 

Importance of the Teeth, by J. H. Allen, ------- 113 

Quack Dentists in the West, by H. Scott, M. D., 114 

Advice to Dental Students, by C. A. Milbank, ------ 117 

Diseases of the Maxillary Sinus, by George T. Barker, D. D. S., - - - 119 

A Case in Practice, by Edwin C. Baxter, D. D. S., - - - - - 121 

A Case of Irregularity, by H. Meredith White, M. D., A. M., - - - 122 

Merrimac Dental Association, by G. A. Gerry, ------ 123 

Editorial, 128 



TO THE PKOFESSION. 

In issuing the " Dental Times," we desire to make it of interest to 
the mass of practitioners. To this end we earnestly solicit from our 
professional friends, communications on any branch of our specialty. To 
those who hesitate because their limited time incapacitates them for 
writing long or elaborate articles, we would say, give us the facts and the 
method, and we will lay them before our readers so that all will under- 
stand and many be instructed. 

Persons desiring to become subscribers, can do so by remitting the 
price of subscription, one dollar per annum, with name and address, to 
Dr. C. N. Peirce, 501 North Seventh street, Philadelphia. 

As we desire to keep a corrected list of the dentists in the United States, 
our friends and subscribers will please notify us when changing their 
location. 



ALL OPERATIONS IN THE CLINICS OF THIS INSTITUTION ARE PERFORMED 
GRATUITOUSLY FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE POOR ONIiY. 



SESSION OF 1863-'64. 



OPERATIVE DEPARTMENT. 

Number of Patients visiting the Clinic, 2202 

Number for whom the following operations were performed, IGS''' 

Gold Fillings, 607 

Tin do 690 

Temporary Fillings, 13 

Amalgam do 6 

Treatment and Filling Pulp Cavities, 201 

Superficial Caries Removed, 15 

Removal of Salivary Calculi, 8^ 

Treatment of Periostitis, 37 

Do Alveolar Abscess, 24 

Do Inflammation of the Gums, 5 

Do Partial Necrosis, 15 

Do Diseased Antrum, , 2 

Do Irregularities, 15 

Do Necrosis of Superior Maxilla, 1 

Extraction of Teeth and Roots, 2112 

Total, ^. 3S28 

JAMES TRUMAN, Demonstrator. 



MECHANICAL DEPARTMENT. 

125 Patients were supplied with the following Artificial Dentures : 

Whole Sets of Teeth, 21 

Full Upper Sets, 4'J 

Full Lower Sets, 3 

Full Upper Set, Blocks, 1 

Do Continuous Gum Sets,... ^ 

Partial Upper Sets, .'... 60 

Do Lower Sets, ^ 

Obturators,* > 

Teeth Mounted on Metal Plates, 517 

Do Hard Rubber Base, 1130 * 

Whole Number of Gum Teeth, 671 

Do Plain Teeth, 976 

Do Teeth Mounted, 1647 

EDWARD N. BAIIiEY, A. M., Demonstrator. 

* These were made for soldiers having lost their teeth and adjacent bones from gunshot wounds. 



m 



^mtLi^mis 



SESSION 1863-'64. 



K. H. SHOEMAKER, .Philadelphia. 

ALEX. O'CALLAGHAN, Cuba. 

JOHN HINES, Philadelphia. 

CHARLES BUCKLEY, Jr...... 

THOMAS ROBSON, Jr., <« 

WILLIAM A. NEWLAND,.... •' 

A. EMORY STREET, New Jersey. 

GEO. J. UNDERWOOD, New York. 

JONAS M. KERN, Pennsylvania. 

J. A. WOODWARD, Philadelphia. 

I. S. FOGG, D. D. S., " 

EDWIN C. BAXTER, Maine. 

J. W. RHONE, Pennsylvania. 

A. S. REBER, u 

E. L PARRAMORE, Virginia. 

HORACE EXOS, Philadelphia. 

WM. H. PAULLIN, " 

J. 0. A. JOHNSON,...: New Jersey. 

JOHN N. FARRAR, Massachusetts. 

SIMEON H. GUILFORD, Pennsylvania 

ABRAM PRATT, " 

SIMON FRAU , Cuba. 

HERNY COWIE, Michigan. 



FEDERICO COMAS, Cuba. 

MANUEL TRUJILLO, " 

H. C. ROCKWELL, New York. 

W. T. SHANNON, New Jersey. 

J G. CAMP, Pennsylvania 

J. W. VANOSTEN, Philadelphia. 

J. B. R. WRIGGINS New Jersey. 

S. G. PERRY, New York. 

C. A. MILBANK, " 

G. W. CALDWELL, Philadelphia 

JOHN N. CROUSE,. .....Illinois. 

P. PRETERRE, M. D., New York. 

S. C. RICHARDSON,....;.. Illinois. 

J. B. SNOW, .....Connecticut. 

J. D. WHITE, Jr., Philadelphia. 

GEORGE CLARK, Vermont. 

C. McGRATH, Philadelphia 

EDW. LEFAIVRE, Canada. 

THOS. E. OSMUN, M. D., Philadelphia 

N. B. WELDON, D. D. S., Connecticut. 

HOWARD BASSETT, Philadelphia 

U. B. KIRK, " 



GRADUATES, 1863-'6^. 



R. H. SHOEMAKER, Pennsylvania, Alveolar Abscess. 

ALEX. O'CALLAGHAN, Cuba, Dental Caries and its Treatment. 

GEO. J. UNDERWOOD, New York, Orthodontia. 

EDWIN C. BAXTER, Maine, Dental Periostitis. 

ABRAM S. REBER, Pennsylvania, The Relations of the Teeth to each other, and 

the Importance of these Relations. 

HENRY COWIE, Michigan, Diseased Pulps and their Treatment. 

FEDERICO COMAS, Cuba, Mechanical Dentistry. 

MANUEL TRUJILLO, '• Caries. 

W. T. SHANNON, New Jersey, Exposed Pulps. 

J. G. CAMP, Pennsylvania, Neuralgia. 

J. W. VANOSTEN, " Dental Caries. 

G.W.CALDWELL, << The Arsenical Paste. 

S. C.RICHARDSON, Illinois, Why Superior Teeth Decay in greater pro- 
portion than Inferior. 

J. B. SNOW. Connecticut, Cheap Mechanical Dentistry. 

GEORGE CLARK, Vermont, Dental Caries. 

EDWARD LEFAIVRE, Canada, Dentistry in Canada. 

THOS. E. OSMUN, M. D., Pennsylvania, Inflammation. 



nil 



w imi 



Patented March 20, 1860, and Sept. 4, 1864. 

Manufactured by the Proprietor and Patentee, Albany, New York, 



This Material is fully conceded by Dentists skilled in its use, to be superior to 
any other but gold for filling teeth, while it can be successfully employed in many 
cases where gold cannot. Where economy is an object, it is undeniably the best 
filling we have. (For particulars in full, see Dr. Wood's Dental Circular, for May, 
1864.) 

All Licenses to use the Material are issued from this office, Albany, N. Y., 
and all take date from the date of the new Patent, Sept. 4, 1864. Terms : For 5 
years from that date, $8; for 10 years, $15; for 17 years, (full terra,) $25. Licenses 
for limited periods apply towards an extension, and for the full term, towards a 
Manufacturing License. 

Grants under the old patent extend for 14 years from the 2nth of March, 1860, 
and may be applied towards a license under the new patent, for the full term, or for 
10 years, upon payment for the residue of the time. 

Licenses are not issued for a less term than five years from the 4th of Sept., 
1864. But for a fee of $2 a Right may be had to use the material for trial for a 
limited period, not to exceed One Tear from that date. This will secure the refusal 
of a License, and can be applied thereon, at any time within the year ; but it does 
not constitute the holder a License, and he must pay the same fee and get a 
Receipt therefor upon the purchase of every ingot or part of an ingot, until he 
shall have obtained a regular license. Receipts, endorsed by the Patentee, are 
furnished to authorized agents for this purpose, each being good for $2 towards 
a license, as above. This proposition will be open only for the present year, after 
which regular Licenses will be required in all cases. 

Those who purchased in good faith under the conditions as heretofore adver- 
tised, and who wish further trial, or desire to take out their licenses gradually, 
should at once avail themselves of these ready and easy terras. The time during 
which the use of the material was allowed without a license, expired, agreeable to 
public announcement, the first of November, 1864. The. usin^ of it since that 
date, without right or License, is an infringement on the Patent, and leaves no alterna- 
tive but prosecution, unless the parties secure their licenses before action is brought. 

The Plastic Metallic Filling is formed into thin ingots about 1-20 of an 
inch in thickness, each weighing | of an ounce, avoir., and staraped with the narae 
of the Patentee and the dates of the patents. In view of the adoption of the 
license system, the old price has been raaintained notwithstanding the greatly 
advanced rates of everything. But should specie reach above 200 with a prospect 
of perraanency, the price will be advanced in proportion. 

Present Prick of Material — To Licensees, $2 an ingot. To non-Licensees, 
$4 an ingot, or $3 for half an ingot, with a Right to Use it for trial not exceeding 
one year. Postage, 6 cents. 

Pluggers for Using the Filling, in sets of 8 and 12, steel handles, at $3 and 
$4.50 respectively. Postage 24 and 36 cents. Scrapers for finishing, (set of 8,) at 
the same rates. 

For Licenses, Material, &c., address 

Dr. B. WOOD, Tentist, 

Albany, New York. 

JSr. B. — The Profession are warned against purchasing of unauthorized parties, 
thus becoming equally liable with them. The names of agents will be duly 
announced; but any one not provided with Receipts endorsed by the Patentee, or 
otFering to sell material difierent from the above terms or without the proper patent 
stamp, may be known as unauthorized. For list of agents, see the Dental Circular 
and Examiner for January, 1865. 



R. W. ARCHER'S 

IMPROVED DENTAL CHAIR. 

Patented September 4, I860. 




o »^ 



o 






P^ o 



o 



-a 



O 

P 



u 

o 

(D s_, 

• i-i OQ 

-a m 
o 



CO Sh 
TO O 

o ■"* 






C^ CN 






^ i 

tT .2 

-(J t2 
m 

^ .a 

O -+^ 

p^ ft 

^ ft 

P^ o. 



•«3 

c3 



O 
XJl 



SUTTON & RAYNOR, 

No. 748 Broadway, Neiv Ifork, 

MANUFACTURERS OF AND DEALERS IN 

EYERY DESCRIPTION OE 





ALSO, 

Importers of and Wholesale and Retail Dealers in 



PLATINA PLATE AND WIRE. 



T?0 3D ESIXTT I STjS- 

THE CHEAPEST DENTAL DEPOT IN THE CITY 




OP ALL KINDS, 

FORCEPS, PLUGGERS, SCALERS, EXCAVATORS, BURRS, 
CHAIRS, SPITTOONS, LATHES, 

Together with a General Assortment of all kinds of 

DENTAL INSTRUMENTS, MATERIALS, &C. 

WHOLESALE AND RETAIL, AT 

JOHTsT KLEinST'S 
No. 22 North Eighth St., Philadelphia. 

N. B. — One price, and all goods warranted as represented. Cash 
orders promptly filled. 

NEALL, McCURDY & NEALL, 

SUCCESSORS TO 

wmmmi of foscelain teeth 

AND 

DENTISTS' MATERIALS. 



334 Arch St., south-east corner of Sixth, 

PHILADELPHIA, PENNA. 



ORUM & ARMSTRONG, 
NO. 520 ^ROH STREET, 

PHILADELPHIA, 

MANUFAOTCREBS OF THE 

Most ImproYed Gum Sections and Plain Teeth, 

ALSO, 

GUM & PLAIN TEETH FOR PLATE WORK, 

With all other Articles used in Dentistry. 



CHARLSS ABBEY & SONS, 

MANUFACTUEEES OF 

DENTISTS' FINE GOLD AND TIN FOIL, 

PHItADEIiPHIA. 

The attention of Dentists is invited to our FI»fE GOL.D FOIL., which is 
prepared under our constant personal supervision. Our Nos. are 4, 5, 6, 8 
and 10. 

We are also manufacturing an ADHESITE FIWE GOLD FOIL., 
Nos. 4, 5 and 6. 

ALL our Gold Foil is manufactured from ABSOLUTELY PURE 
GOLD, prepared expressly for the purpose, vrith great care, by ourselves. 

DENTISTS' REFINED TIN FOIL CONSTANTLY ON HAND. 

Address CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

Philadelphia. 



HORATIO C. KERIM, 



MANUFACTURER OP 



SORGICIL&DIIITILINSIRUMENTUIUUC. 



The subscriber would again remind the profession that he still continues 
to manufacture all kinds of Instruments, Dental Files, &c. 

From the flattering testimonials he has received, (of which a few are 
appended,) of the superior quality of his Instruments and Files, he feels 
confidence in his ability to produce an article fully equal to any made. 

Assiduous attention to the details of the business, (with an experience 
of thirty years,) has enabled him to make many improvements in the 
adaptation to the specific purpose ; and, as the success of an operation 
depends, in some degree, on the adaptation of the instruments to the par- 
ticular character of the operation, it needs no argument to convince those 
wishing to procure instruments, of the importance of purchasing the manu- 
facture of those of long and well established reputation. Any orders ten- 
dered him will be promptly attended to. Illustrated catalogues will be 
furnished on application. 

HORATIO G. KERN, 
No. 25 North Sixth Street, Philadelphia. 



501 North Seventh Street, Philadelphia, June Sth, 1863. 
11. Gr. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators which you handed me some 
days since I have had in constant use, and take great pleasure in stating 
that I believe them to be a superior article, both in their ability to retain a 
sharp cutting edge, and withstand the force essential to the operation. 
Yours, &c. C. N. Peirce, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. Gr. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators recently manufactured 
by you have been used with the utmost satisfaction. I can give them an 
unqualified recommendation. Yours, respectfully, 

June 26th, 1863. Geo. T. Barker, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. Gr. Kern — Dear Sir — The last excavators obtained from you 
are of a very superior quality. I can recommend them as being equal t© 
any I have ever used. T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S. 

June 25h, 1868. 



XiXJTI3:EE.'S 



MiiAITIM WlTI-FIJLlLllie 



m^ 



This invaluable preparation is now used by, and meets the approbation 
of intelligent and experienced Dentists in every State in the Union as 
being the only Self-hardening filling known that will retain its integrity 
and metallic color, without turning black and discoloring the teeth, and as 
being in all respects unequalled as a substitute for Grold, in cases where the 
latter is inadmissible, on account either of the great extent of the decay, 
the extreme tenderness of the tooth, the difficulty of access to the cavity, 
or from motives of economy. 

Packages containing 1 oz.^ ... $3.00 

Do. do. 6 dwts., ... I.OO 

Sent, post paid, on receipt of money. For Circular enclose return 
postage. Address 

H. GILES LUTHER, Dentist, 

84 East Twenty-second Street, 

NEW YORK. 




A substitute for Amalgam in filling badly decayed teeth 5 and used 
for resetting Pivot Teeth in badly decayed roots ; also for filling over 
Sensitive Dentine to destroy sensibility, and as a non-conductor of 
heat, and for many other Dental Purposes. 

For sale by all dealers in Dental Materials and by the undersigned. 

One-fourth ounce packages, with directions, sent by mail free of post^ 
age, on receipt of $1. 

C. H. ROBERTS, M. D., 

poughkeepsie:, n. y. 



BLOCK TBBTH AND VULCANITE. 



I would respectfully inform the Dental Profession that my Laboratory has been 
REMOVED TO lOO NORTH TENTH STREET, where, after having made 
considerable improvements in my style of carving and enamels, with assistants also, I am 
now enabled to execute all orders with promptness and despatch. 

Dentists wishing to try Vulcanite Base, can have a few cases made at a reduced price. 

'WM. R. HALL, 

100 North Tenth Street, Philadelphia. 



A. JONES, 



No. 724 BROADTVA'Sr, N. Y., 



WHILE THANKING THE 



DENTAL PROFESSION 

For the very liberal patronage they have extended to him for the last 
twenty-five years, begs leave to say, that he still continues his business 
as usual at the above number, where may be found 

All Articles in the Dental Line, 

Of his own, and other manufacturers, of the most 



AND 



At the Most Favorable Prices. 



All orders from abroad will be punctually and thoroughly attended to. 



JNO. R. RUBENCAME, 
THOS . H. STOCKTON", 



General Partners, 



JOHN R. McCURDY, 

Special Partner, 





RUBENGAME & STOCKTON 



fM&, W lb 



]Sro. 835 A-3?ch. Street, 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 

We desire to inform our customers and the profession generally : 

First. That we have removed to 825 Arch Street, by which removal 
we secure increased facilities and abundant room, in the manufacturing as 
well as the sale department. 

Second. That Mr. John K. McCurdt, formerly of the firm of Jones, 
White & McCurdy, by his association with us as Special Partner, places 
us in possession of ample means to enlarge our business to any required 
extent. 

We propose, therefore, to keep constantly on hand articles of every 
description, and of qualities to suit all, embracing Gold and Tin Foil, 
Grold and Silver Plate, Wire, Solder and Springs, and a full assortment 
of Porcelain Teeth for Plate and Vulcanite work, with and without Grum ; 
also, 

THE iiS/a::E>i^o"VEiD 




Iff Tll^ il Ml Tl? T¥l?1^ll 



(Terrell's patent,) manufactured only by us. 





Together with every thing required by the Dentist, both in the operative 
and mechanical departments. 

All orders by Mail, Express or otherwise, will receive our prompt and 
careful attention — everything warranted as represented. 

While thanking the profession for the liberal patronage heretofore 
extended to us, we respectfully solicit a continuance of the same, believ- 
ing that we shall be fully able to meet all demands made upon us. 

Very respectfully, 

RUBENCAME & STOCKTON. 

P. S. The undersigned having connected himself with Messrs. Rubencamb 
& Stockton, as a Special Partner, in the manufacture of Porcelain Teeth, Dental 
Material, etc., is desirous of renewing the business intercourse with the Dental 
Profession, which ill-health compelled him to suspend five years since. 

He pledges himself that nothing shall be wanting on his part to make these 
renewed relations as pleasant and as satisfactory as those heretofore maintained. 

Respectfully, 

JOHN R. incClJRDY. 



[From the " Dental Times,-' April, 1864] 

VULCANITE TEETH.— We desire to call attention to the new kind of Tepth for Vulcanite Base, 
manufactured by Rubencame Sc Stockton. The improvement consists in the method of fastening 
\vithout the use of platina rivits, and appears to us to combine many advantages not to be 
obtained in Teeth of any other description, we have ever seen or used. 

There can be no possible danger of exposing rivit heads or ends in finishing, or fear of the teeth 
drawing away from their rivits, (as in ordiuary pin teeth.) on the contrary, we believe that no 
more durable or simple fastening can be desired than these alford, presenting at the same time, so 
complete and accurate a finish, with so much less risk and labor in mounting. 

Below we give a cut, showing the heel surface of some sections, and also an end view, the 
rubber forcing its way into the openings, and over the edges of the gum, inside and out, affords a 
perfectly solid foundation, and in fact becomes, as it were, a par' of the tooth itself. 

We believe they are good, and recommend them to the profession generally. G. T. B. 

Messrs. Rubencame k Stockton :— Gentlemen— Having used your Teeth in my practice for the 
past four years, and finding them superior to all others, in heavty, natvral appearance and durability , 
I hereby add my humble testimonial in their favor. Respectfully, 

Lewistown, Pa. S. BELFORD. 

Messrs. Rubencamr «fc Stockton: — Gentlemen— Having used your Teeth in my practice for 
several years, I can conscientiously recommend them as being equal, if not superior, to any now- 
made in the City of Philadelphia, or elsewhere. 

Lambertville N.J. J. HAYHURST. 

Messrs?. Rub encame <fc Stockton: — Gentlemen— Having used your Teeth, lean with pleasure 
recommend them as a superior article. 
Philadelphia. J. M. GARRETSON. 

The undersigned having used Teeth manufactured by Rubbncame & Stockton, find that they 
have given entire satisfaction to all patients furnished with the same. 
Philadelphia. ISAAC GRIFFITH. 

Messrs. Rubencame ic Stockton : — Gents. — I have used your make of Teeth for several years, 
and they have given general satis/action to my patients. I would recommend them lo the DentisLs 
generally. 

Burlington, Iowa. H.BAILEY. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton :— Gentlemen— I have used the Teeth of your manufacture for 
two years past, and believe them to be superior to all others, they give perfect satisfaction. 

Georgetown, Del. GEORGE SNOW. 

Messrs Rubencame & Stockton: — Gents. — For the last two years I have been using your 
Teeth, and can safely say that I have found them allto be as you have representeid : giving natural 
expression, both in style and shade, and bearing admirably ilie severe test they are subjected to in 
soldering. In a word, they stand thejire, and look well in the mouth. 

Cochranville, Pa. ROBT L. McCLELLAN. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton: — Gentlemen- 1 have been using Teeth manufactured by you 
for some time past, and thus far they hare given entire satisfaction. Yours, trulv, 

Brid^eton, N. J. JOSEPH C. KIRBY. 

Messrs. Rubencame ic Stockton : — Gentlemen — Having used your Teeth in my practice for the 
past two years, and finding them superior to all others in beauty, natural appearance and unequalled 
endurance under the blow-pipe, I hereby cheerfully add my humble testimonial in their favor. 

Somers' Point, N. J. J. HAND. 

Having for the last three years used the Teeth manufactured by Rubencame <fc Stockton, I can 
speak in the highest terms of their strength, beauty and adaptability ; their appearance in the mouth 
is natural and life-like. 

Alexandria, Pa. J. R. HEWITT. 

Messrs Rubenca.me «fc Stockton : — Having used for the last five years, with entire satisfaction, 
your make of Artificial Teeth, I cheerfully recommend them to the profession, and believe they 
combine all the qualities required by the Dentist. 

Millville, N J. J. S. SIMMERMAN. 

Messrs. Rubencame & Stockton: — Gentlemen — Having used your make of Teeth for the last 
seven or eight years, I can say that they are equal to any now made, and inferior to none. 

Philadelphia. Yours, truly, G. L. NAGLE. 

Messrs. Rubencame <fc Stockton: — Dear Sirs — Having used your Teeth ever .«ince t^ey have 
been in the market, it takes no strain of the imagination to recommend them. They, like the 
manufacturers, are quite good looking, producing in the most grutf countenance a smile of appro 
batiou. They stand fire and hammering ; in fact, none more desirable can be had anywhere. 

Bellefonte, Pa. Very truly, JNO. D VVINGATE. 

I have used Rubencame & Stockton's Artificial Teeth for a sufficient time to test their strength 
and adaptability; they give entire satisfaction to myself and customers, are much admired, particu- 
larly by the Ladies, for their beauty and natural appearance in the mouth. I do earnestly recom- 
mend them to the Dental profession as a decidedly superior article. 

Waynesburg, Pa. SAMUEL 3IcCLEES, 

Messrs. Rubencame «fc Stockton: — Gentlemen — About eight years since, I bought the first 
Teeth offered for sale by Mr Rubencame. After proper trial, and finding in them every requisite 
of the profession, 1 have continued their exclusive use to the present time, and with decided satis- 
faction to myself and patients. Respectfully, 

Philadelphia. C. S. CORFIELD. 

Having inserted a great number of Teeth manufactured by Rubencame &, Stockton, it gives me 
pleasure to recommend them to all Dentists for iheir unsurpassed natural and life-like appearance, 
being satisfied that they will stand tht acttan of fire as well, if not better, than any 1 have tver used 
manufactured by others. 

Kennett Square, Pa. ALBEN WAY, 



or 



'<^^ 



c^r;tp 




W. A. OUFF k CO. 



ZMEAVrUFACTURBRS OF 






No. 516 ARCH STREET, 

PHILADELPHIA. 



We invite the attention of Dentists and Dealers to our assortment of 
Artificial Teeth, believing them to equal any offered to the profession. 

We are prepared to furnish every variety of Plain and Gum Teeth for 
Gold and Silver Plate, and Rubber or Vulcanite Work, including 
Block and Single Teeth, for Vulcanite, with 

iiuiLE'iiAifi rem 

These Pins have really two distinct and well-formed heads, one in the 

tooth, preventing the possibility of their being drawn out, and one for 

insertion in the Rubber. Our upper central blocks have each five pins, 

and the lower central and side blocks each four ; together. Fifty-one 

Double-headed Pins in each full set, our machinery enabling us to finish 

them in this improved manner. 

We would also call the special attention of the profession to our 




liUUUUI ^lilllfU 




mm Ss 




for Vulcanite Work. For strength and peculiar adaptation to the pur- 
pose intended, we believe them to be unsurpassed, ' 

DENTAL mSTRDMENTS, LATHES, VULCANIZERS, 

ARCHER'S IMFROVii.JJ DENTAL CHAIRS, 

Footstools, Spittoons, Tbays, &c., &c., including the various arti- 
cles used by the profession. 

W. A. DUPP & CO.. 



W. A DUFF, 

Db. J. J. GRIFFITH, D. D. S. 



1 



516 Arch Street, Phila. 



C\i] 



\v- 




/J. 

1,-1 m 



VOL. II. 



APRIL, 1865. 



NO. 4 




THE 



DEN/TIAL TIMES, 



aUARTERLY JOURNAL 



OF 



DENTAL SCIENCE. 



EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 



THE FACULTY 



^K 



OP TUB 




ll> 



,t ^* m»^ * 



75^ 



PHILADELPHIA* 





PRICE ®i.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE. 



CO 3Sr T E ]sr T s. 



PAOS 



Diseases of the Maxillary Sinus, by George T. Barker, D. D. S.. - - 145 

Amalgam Fillings, by H. A. Robinson, - - 148 

The Steam Gauge in Vulcanizing, by A. Lawrence, - - - - - 149 
Ninth Annual Commencement of the Pennsylvania College of Dental Surgery, 

by James Truman, D. D. S., - - 151 

A Little Thing, by C. A. Milbank, D. D. S., 162 

Amalgam, by A. T. Johnson, --------- 163 

Professional Education, by T. L. Buckingham, D. D. S., - - - - 166 

Caoutchouc, by E. Wildman, M. D., D. D. S., 168 

To Strengthen Models for Vulcanite Work, by Israel "Williams, - - - 169 

A Case of Alveolar Abscess, by S. C. Richards n, D. D. S., - - - 170 

Cementfor Plaster Casts, by Alexander- O'CMla^fij.D. D. S., - - 170 

Editorial, - - - - _ . - - . - - - - 171 

Publishers' Notice, - - - - - *"«^*f ^, - - - - 171i 

J J- > V 

TO THE PEOFESSION. 

In issuing the " Dental Timps," we desire to make it of interest to 
the mass of practitioners. To this end we earnestly solicit from our 
professional friends, comnmnications on any branch of our specialty. To 
those who hesitate because their limited time incapacitates them for 
writing long or elaborate articles, we would say, give us the facts and the 
method, and we will lay them before our readers so that all will under- 
stand and many be instructed. 

Persons desiring to become subscribers, can do so by remitting the 
price of subscription, one dollar per annum, with name and address, to 
Dr. T. L. Buckingham, 243 North Ninth street, Philadelphia. 

As we desire to keep a corrected list of the dentists in the United States, 
our friends and subscribers will please notify us when changing their 
location. 



ALL OPERATIONS IN THE CLINICS OF THIS INSTITUTION ARE PERFORMED 
GRATUITOUSLY FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE POOR ONLY. 



SESSION OF 1864-'65. 



OPERATIVE DEPARTMENT. 

Number of Patients visiting the Clinic, *2600 

Number for whom the following operations were performed, 1487 

Gold Fillings, 627 

Tin do 696 

Wood's Metal, 9 

Hill's Stopping, 14 

Amalgam, 12 

Treatment and Filling Pulp Cavities, 176 

Superficial Caries Removed, 6 

Removal of Salivary Calculi, 57 

Treatment of Periostitis, 28 

Do Alveolar Abscess, 10 

Do Inflammation of the Gums, 5 

Do Partial Necrosis, 15 

Do Irregularities, 10 

Pivot Teeth inserted, 2 

Extraction of Teeth and Roots, 2010 

Total, 3677 

JAMBS TRUMAN, Demoustiator. 



MECHANICAL. DEPARTMENT. 

154 Patients were supplied with, the following Artificial Dentures : 

Whole Sets of Teeth, 31 

Full Upper Sets, 4^ 

Full Lower Sets, 2 

Full Upper Set, Blocks, 1 

Partial Upper Sets, "^ 

Do Lower Sets, * 

Obturators,* 2 

Teeth Mounted on Metal Plates, 528 

Do Hard Rubber Base, 1481 

Whole Number of Gum Teeth, 902 

Do Plain Teeth, 1107 

Do Teeth Mounted, 200^ 

J. M. BARSTOW, Demonstrator. 

* These were made for soldiers having lost their teeth and adjacent bones from gunshot woundn. 



^!?^a€^a.^irw 



NINTH ANNUAL SESSION, 1864-'65. 



ROBERT J AS. ADAMS, New York. 

BENJAMIN J. BING, Maryland. 

SAMUEL A. BEECHER, Missouri. 

HENRY BLAKENEY, New York. 

HOWARD BASSETT, New Jersey. 

JOSE BERTRAM. Cuba. 

GASPER A. BETANCOURT, '« 

JOHN R. BUCKINGHAM, PennsylvanJa. 

EDWIN C. BAXTER, D D.S.,. Maine. 

J. WESLEY CLEMSOX, Pennsylvania. 

AUGUST CULMAN, M. D., Bavaria. 

P. M. CHRISTIE, Pennsylvania 

FREDERICK K. CROSBY, Connecticut. 

EDWIN T. DARBY, New York. 

E. S. DAVENPORT. " 

HORACE ENOS,. Pennsylvania 

MICHELE FICHERA, Sicily. 

SIMON FRAU. Cuba. 

JOHN N. FARRAR, Massachusetts, 

ENOCH S. FOGG, Pennsylvania. 

JOHN FRASIER, Maryland. 

SIMEON H. GUILFORD, Pennsylvania. 

JESSE C. GREEN, •' 

CANBY HATHAWAY, '« 

JAMES A. JOHNSON, New Jersey. 

JONAS Y. KERN, Pennsylvania. 

DANIEL J. L vLLY, New York. 

WM. R. LINEAWEAVER, Pennsylvania. 

JOHN LYNAM, M. D., Ireland. 



C, B. McGRATH, Pennsylvania. 

FRANCIS MIGNOTTE Cuba. 

CHARLES A. MILBANK, New York. 

WM A. NEWLAND.JR, Pennsylvania, 

P. PRETERRE, M. D., New York. 

JAMES PARSONS, WisconsiB. 

ABRAM PRATT, Pennsylvania!. 

S. G. PERRY, New York. 

JARED A. PERKINS,.. Massftehusett&. 

JAMES R. RONEY Pennsylvania. 

THOMAS ROBINSON, Delaware. 

THOMAS ROBSON, Jb... Pennsylvauia. 

H. C. ROCKWELL, New York. 

H. P. ROBERTS, Illinois. 

H. C. REGISTER, Maryland, 

A. EMOKY STREET, New Jersey, 

JOHN SHELDON, New York. 

C. S. STOCKTON, New Jersey. 

WILLIAM SMEDLEY,. Pennsylvania. 

GEORGE B. SANFORD, New York. 

WM. U. SCHOLL, Pennsylvania. 

WM. H. TRUEMAN, " 

A. P. TOMPKINS, " 

J. J. VANDERFORD, Maryland. 

CARLOS Dr.L VILLAR, Cuba. 

AUGUSTIN DE VARONA,... " 

J. A WOODWARD, Pennsylvania. 

J. B. R. WIUGGINS New Jersey 



GRADUATES, 1864-'65. 



GASPER A. BET ANCOURT,.... Cuba, Filling Pulp Cavities and Roots of Teetb. 

SAMUEL A. BEECHER, Missouri Sulphuric Ether. 

HOWARD BASSETT New Jersey, Diseases Incident to First Dentition. 

BENJAMIN J. BING, Maryland, Dentistry, a Science. 

J. WESLEY CLEMSON, Pennsylvania, Predisposing Causes to Dental Caries. 

AUGUST CULMAN. M. D., Bavaria, Neuralgia of the Trigeminus. 

EDWIN T. DARBY, New York, Dentistry, a Profession. 

HORACE ENOS Pennsylvania, Vulcanized Rubber. 

SIMON FRAU... Cuba, Ether. 

MICHELE FICHERA, Sicily, Fillin? Teeth. 

T. N. FARRAR, Massachusetts, Intermittent and Hysterical Neuralgia, 

SIMON GUILFORD, Pennsylvania, Vascularity of Dentine. 

JAMES 0. A. JOHNSON, New Jersey, Extraction of Teeth. 

JOHN LYMAN. M. D. , Ireland, Military Dentistry. 

C A. MILBANK, New York, Diseases Attending First Dentition. 

CHAS. B. McGRATH, Pennsylvania, Hysteria. 

WM. A. NEWLAND, >' Fractures of the Teeth. 

ABRAM PR>TT, " Odontology. 

S. G. ^'ERRY, New York, Inflammation. 

P. PRETERi E, M. D., " Development of Teeth 

J\RED A. PERKINS, Massachusetts, Cause of Dent:il Caries. 

THOS. ROBINSON, Delaware, Irregularities of the Permanent Teeth. 

THOM.AS ROBSON. Jr., Pennsylvania, Rubber. 

HEWLETT. C. ROCKWELL, New York, Nitrous Oxide. 

A. EMORY STREET, New Jersey, Entire Artificial Dentures. 

W. H. SCHOLL Pennsylvania, Indurated Rubber. 

GEO. B. SANFORD, New York, Teeth and their Diseases. 

J. B. R. WRIGGENS, New Jersey, Caries of the Teeth. 

J. A. WOODWARD, Pennsylvania, Trmtment of Exposed Dental Pulp. 






Patented March 20, 1860, and Sept. 4, 1864. 

Manufactured by the Proprietor and Patentee. Albany, New York. 



This Material is fully conceded by Dentists skilled in its use. to be 
superior to any other but gold for filling teeth, while it can be success- 
fully employed in many cases where gold cannot. 

All Licenses to use the Material are issued from this office, Albany, 
N. Y., and all take date from the date of the new patent, Sept. 4, 1864. 
Terms : For 5 years from that date, $8 ; for 10 years, ^15 ; for 17 years, 
{full term,) $25. Licenses for limited periods apply in part payment 
towards an extension. 

Those who desire longer trial prior to procuring a license, can have 
the right of use until the 4th of September, 1865, upon the conditions 
advertised in the ^^ Dental Circular and Examine?'^' ior January, 1865. 

Price of material, in present currency, $4 an ingot, of | ounce weight, 
(or $2 in specie.) 

A reduction made upon material after procuring a regular license. 

For full particulars in regard to terms, &c., see advertisement in the 
January number of the Denial Circular and Examiner, a copy of which 
will be sent on application. 

Pluggers for Using the Filling, in sets of 8 and 12, steel handles, 
at f 3 and $4.50, respectively. Postage, 24 and 36 cents. With silver 
and German silver bulbs and points, from $6 to $20 a set, according to 
style and material. 

A patent on these instruments was granted February 28, 1865. 

For Licenses, Material, &c.. Address 

Dr. B. WOOD, Dentist. 

Albany, New York. 



THE DENTAL CIRCULAR AND EXAMINER 

IS PUBLISHED QUARTERLY, 

AT ONE DOLLAR A YEAR, IN ADVANCE. 

The January number will be sent to any one requesting a copy for 
examination. Address as above. 



R. Vr. ARCHER'S 

IMPROVED DENTAL CHAIR. 

Patented September 4^ 1860. 




is CO 4S 

C O a> 



•= a-^ 



a - « 



P^ o 



o 

o 






,«<S g 



CQ 



o 



PS t;:^ 






c3 



-^ _S -^ T! 



CD O 



05 

IS 



" 9 ^ 

CO <^ p, 

J- ";:$ .Jh 

> e o 

^ ?^ 02 

G S O) 

-^ r^ 



b 



>H -s 



-(-3 

o 

o 






o 
a> 



P5 ft 
^ "IS 

W I 

^ ft 

.a 



e3 



SUTTON & RAYNOR, 

No. 748 Broad-way, New York, 

MANUFACTURERS OF AND DEALERS IN 

EYERY DESCEIPTION OE 





ALSO, 

Importers of and Wholesale and Retail Dealers in 



PLATINA PLATE AND WIRE. 



■TO X> E3 INJ T I JS T? S . 

THE CHEAPEST DENTAL DEPOT IN THE CITY 

FOR THE 



mini mmmi 




OF ALL KINDS, 

FORCEPS, PLUGGERS, SCALERS, EXCAVATORS, BURRS, 
CHAIRS, SPITTOONS, LATHES, 

Together with a General Assortment of all kinds of 

DENTAL INSTRUMENTS, MATERIALS, &C. 

WHOLESALE AND RETAIL, AT 

JOHN KLEIN'S 

No. 22 North Eighth St., Philadelphia. 

N. B. — One price, and all goods warranted as represented. Cash 
orders promptly filled. 



NEALL, McCURDY & NEALL, 

SUCCESSORS TO 

MAiFACTUSERS OF FORCSLAIH TESTE 

AND 

DENTISTS' MATERIALS. 



534 Arch St., south-east corner of Sixth, 

PHILADELPHIA, PENNA. 



ORUM & ARMSTRONG, 
N"0. 520 ^ROH STREET, 

PHILADELPHIA, 

MANUPAOTUKEKS OP THE 

Most Improved Gum Sections and Plain Teetli, 

FOPl THE "V'XJIL.C.A.nsriTE B.A.SE. 

ALSO, 

GUM & PLAIN TEETH FOR PLATE WORK, 

With all other Articles used in Dentistry, 



CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

MANUFACTURERS OF 

DENTISTS' FINE GOLD AND TIN FOIL, 

3SrOS. SS8 <5c J330 I^E-A.1^ STPIEET, 
PHIIiADBIiPHIA. 

The attention of Dentists is invited to our FI.^E GOL.D FOIL., which is 
prepared under our constant personal supervision. Our Nos. are 4, 5, 6, 8 
and 10. 

We are also manufacturing an ADilESIYE Fli^E GOLD FOIL, 
Nos. 4, 5 and 6. 

AL.L. our Gold Foil is manufactured from ABSOLUTELY PURE 
GOLD, prepared expressly for the purpose, vrith great care, by ourselves. 

DENTISTS' REFINED TIN FOIL CONSTANTLY ON HAND. 

Address CHARLES ABBEY & SONS, 

Philadelphia. 



$OliyiimillVllbliM[NTS,Fll[S,&C. 



The subscriber would again remind the profession that he still continues 
to manufacture all kinds of Instruments, Dental Files, &c. 

From the flattering testimonials he has received, (of which a few are 
appended,) of the superior quality of his Instruments and Files, he feels 
confidence in his ability to produce an article fully equal to any made. 

Assiduous attention to the details of the business, (with an experience 
of thirty years,) has enabled him to make many improvements in the 
adaptation to the specific purpose ; and, as the success of an operation 
depends, in some degree, on the adaptation of the instruments to the par- 
ticular character of the operation, it needs no argument to convince those 
wishing to procure instruments, of the importance of purchasing the manu- 
facture of those of long and well established reputation. x\ny orders ten- 
dered him will be promptly attended to. Illustrated catalogues will be 
furnished on application. 

HORATIO G. KERN, 
No. 25 North Sixth Street, Philadelphia. 



501 North Seventh Street,. Philadelphia, June Sth, 186S. 
II. Gr. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators which you handed me some 
days since I have had in constant use, and take great pleasure in stating 
that I believe them to be a superior article, both in their ability to retain a 
sharp cutting edge, and withstand the force essential to the operation. 
Yours, &c. C. N. Peirce, D. D. S. 



Mr. H. G. Kern — Dear Sir — The excavators recently manufactured 
by you have been used with the utmost satisfaction. I can give them an 
unqualified recommendation. Yours, respectfully, 

June 26th, 1863. Geo. T. Barker, D. D. S, 



Mr. H. G. Kern — Dear Sir — The last excavators obtained from you 
are of a very superior quality. I can recommend them as being equal ta 
any I have ever used. T. L. Buckingham, D. D, S. 

June 25h, 1863. 



This invaluaDie preparation is now ^. 
of intelligent and experienced Dentists in every Slate in the Union as 
being the only Self-hardening filling known that will retain its integrity 
and metallic color, without turning black and discoloring the teeth, and as 
being in all respects unequalled as a substitute for Gold, in cases where the 
latter is inadmissible, on account either of the great extent of the decay, 
the extreme tenderness of the tooth, the difficulty of access to the cavity, 
or from motives of economy. ■• 

Packages containing 1 oz., - - . $3.00 

Do. do. 6 dwts , - - - l.OO 

Sent, post paid, on receipt of money. For Circular enclose return 
postage. Address 

H. G-ILES LUTHER, Dentist, 

84 East Twenty-second Street. " 

NEW YORK. 




A substitute for Amalgam in filling badly decayed teeth 5 and used 
for resetting Pivot Teeth in badly decayed roots ; also for filling over 
Sensitive Dentine to destroy sensibility, and as a non-conductor of 
heat, and for many other Dental Purposes. 

For sale by all dealers in Dental Materials and by the undersigned. 

One-fourth ounce packages, with directions, sent by mail free of post- 
age, on receipt of $1. 

C. H. ROBERTS, M. D., 

POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y. 



BLOCK TEETH AND VULCANITE. 



I would respectfully inform the Dental Profession that my Laboratory has been 
REMOVED TO lOO NORTH TENTH STREET, where, after having made 
considerable improvements in my style of carving and enamels, with assistants also, I am 
now enabled to execute all orders with promptness and despatch. 

Dentists wishing to try Vulcanite Base, can have a few cases made at a reduced prioe. 

WM. R HALL, 

100 North Tenth Street, Philadelphia. 



[Prom the «« Dental Times," April, 1864 ] 

VULCANITE TEETH.— We desire to call att-ntion to the new kind of Te-'th for Vulcanite Baw, 
manufactured by Rubencamb & Stockton. The improvement consists in the method of fastening 
without the use of platina rivits. and appears to us to combine many advantages not to be 
obtain d in Teeth of any other descri lion we have ever seen or used. 

'J here can be no possible danger of exposing rivit heads or ends in fln'shing, or fear of the teeth 
drawing Hway from their rivits. (a« in ordinary piu teeth,) on th» contrary, we believe that no 
more durable or simple fastening can be desired than these afford, presenting at the same time, so 
complete nnd accurate a finish, with so much less risk and labir in mounting. 

Below we give a cut. showing the heel surface of some sections, and also an end view, the 
rubber forcing its way into the openings, and over the edges of the gum. inside and out, afifords a 
perfectly soiid foundation, and in fact becomes, as it were, a par of the tooth itself. 

We believe they are good, and recommend them to the profession generally o. T. b. 

Messrs. Rcbgncamb & Stockton : — Gentlemen— Having used your Teeth in my practice for the 
past four years, and tiiiding them sujierior to all others^ in heavty, naivral apptarance &nd durability , 
I hereby ada n y humble lestimouial in their favor. Respectfully, 

Lewistown, Pa S. BELFORD. 

Messrs. Rubencamf. &, Stockton: — Gentlemen — Having used your Teeth in my practice for 
•everal years. I can conscientiously recommend them aa being equal, if not syperior, to any now- 
made in the City of Philadelphia, or elsewhere. 

Lambertville N. J. J. HAYHURST, 

Messk.s. Rubencamb & Stockton: — Gentlemen — Having used your Teeth, loan with pleasure 
recommend ihem as a svperior article. 
Philadelphia. J. M. GARRET SON. 

The undersigned having used Teeth manufactured by Rcbencaue & Stockton, find that they 
have given entire t^aAsfaciion to all patiants furnished with the same. 
Philadelphia ISAAC GRIFFITH. 

Messrs. Robbncamb &, Stockton : — Gents. — I have used your make of Teeth for several years, 
and th»-y have given general satis/action to my patients. I would recommend them lo the Dentists 
generally. 

Burlington, Toua. H.BAILEY. 

Messrs. Rubencamb & Stockton: — Gentlemen — I have used the Teeth of your manufacture for 
two years past and believe them to be superior to all others^ they give perfect satiyfaciou. 

Georgetown, Del. GEORGE SNOW. 

Messrs Rdbencamb &, Stockton: — Gents. — For the last two years I have been using your 
Teeth, and cnn sately say that I have found them all to be as you have represented : giving 7?a^j/ra^ 
€xpre^\ion, both in xfy/e and shade, and bearins atJmirably the severe test they are bubjected to in 
soldering In a word, they stand thejire, and look well in the mouth. 

Coehrnnville, Pa. ROBT L. McCLELLAN. 

Mbssrs. Rdbencamb & Stockton: — Gent' emen — I have been using Teeth manufactured by you 
for some time past, and thus far ihey have given entire satisfaction. Yours, trulv, 
Bridketon, A' J. JOdtPH C KIRBY. 

Messrs. Robenc»me k Stockton : — Gentlemen — Having used your Teeth in my practice for the 
past two years, and (inding them superior to all others in beauty, natural apjearnnce and unequalled 
endurance under the blow-pipe, I hereby cheerfully add my humble testimonial in their favur. 

tamers* Point, N. J. J UAND. 

Having for the last three years used the Teeth manufactured by Rubencamb & Stockton I can 
speak ill the highest terms of their strength, beauty and adaptability; their appearance in the mouth 
is natural and life-like. 

Altrandria, Pa. J R. HEWITT. 

Messrs Rubencamb &, Stockton : — Having used for the last five years, with entire sa'isfaction, 
your make of Arti.icial Teeth. I cheerfully recommend them to the profession, and bel eve they 
combine all the qualities required by the Dentist. 

Millville, N J. J. S. SIMMERMAN. 

Mbssrs. Rdbencamb &, Stockton: — Gentlemen — Having used jour make of Teeth for the last 
seven or eight years, I can say that they are equal to any now made, and inferior to none. 
Philadelphia Yours, truly, G L. NAGLE. 

Messrs. Rubencamb & Stockton: — Dear Sirs— Having used your Tcih ever since t ey have 
been ill the market, il takes no strain of the iinagiuation to recommend ttiem 'hey, like the 
manufacturtTS, are quite good looking, producing iu the most grutf couuteuaiice a smile of appro- 
bation They stand jire and hammering ; in fact, none more desirable can be had aiiyiik>re. 

Belle fume, Pa. Very truly, J.\0 D V>1.\GATB. 

I have used Rdbencamb &, Stockton's Artificial Teeth for a sufficient time to test their strength 
and adaptability ; they give entire satisfaction to myself und customers, are miic'i adtntreil. particu- 
larly by the Ladies, for their beauty and natural appearance in the mouih. I do earuestiy reuom- 
mend them to the Dental profe&siou as a decidedly superior article. 

Waynesbtrg, Pa. SAMUEL McCLEES. 

Messks. Rubencamb & Stockton: — Gentlemen — About eight years since, I bought the first 
Tedth oflered lur sale by Air Hubbnoamb. After proper trial, and finding iu them every rf-quisite 
of the profession, 1 have continued their exclusive use to the present time, and with d-.c deil sotis- 
fmclion lo myself and patieuis. Respectfully, 

Philadelphia. C S CORFIKLD. 

Having inserted a great number of Teeth manufactured by Rdbenoamk & Stockton, it gives me 
pleasure lo recommend them to all Dentists for their unsurpassed natural and tijt.-like apptaiance, 
being satisfied ihat they will stand the action of fire as well, if not better, than any I hare ever used 
manufactured by others. 

Kennelt Square, Pa. ALUEN WAY. 




cX5Y 



W. A. DUf F & C 



zifflAi^urACTURSRs or 





Ho. 516 ARCH STREET, 

PHILADELPHIA. 



We iavite the attenSbn of Dentists and Dealergrto our assortment of 
Artificial Teeth, believing them to equal any offered to the profession. 

We are prepared to furnish every variety of Plain and Gum Teeth for 
Gold and Silver Plate, and Rubber or Vulcanite Work, including 
Block and Single Teeth, for Vulcanite, with 

eojiiLi-iijiAiiii fim. 

These Pins have really two distinct and well-formed heads, one in the 
tooth, preventing the possibility of their being dfawn out, and one for 
insertion in the Rubber. Our upper ce!itral blocks have each five pins, 
and the lower central and side blocks ..each four } together, Fifty-one 
Double-headed Pins in each full set, oiir machinery enabling n^ to finish 
them in this improved manner. 

We would also call the special attention of the profession to our 




Ifua ''liiii'i 



''iuuiun 'luiiiiiui 




W 






for Vulcanite Work. For strength and peculiar adaptation to the pur- 
pose intended, we believe them to be unsurpassed. 

DENTAL INSTRUMENTS, LATHES, VULCANIZERS, 

ARCHER'S IMPROVED DENTAL CHAIRS, 

Footstools, Spittoons, Trays, &c., &c., including the various arti- 
cles used by the profession. 

, W. A. DUFF & CO., 

Dh. J. J, aRlFFiTii, D. D. s. } 516 Arch street, Phila. 




f'sS> 



