HX000553U1 ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^B 
^^I^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^HI iiliilill i^^^^^^^^^^^^^IRi 


1 ^ 

1 
■ 



rRD540 M\^n 

Columbia (Hnitier^ttp 

College of ^f)v^imn& anb ^urgeong 
Xihxaxv \^ 14- 




^>r/ (yV-Ow^-^o"^ j\c^''«-^'V. 



I 



^ 

n 



Digitized by tine Internet Archive 

in 2010 with funding from 

Open Knowledge Commons 



http://www.archive.org/details/abdominaloperati01moyn 



WORKS BY SIR B. G. A. MOYNIHAN 



Retroperitoneal Hernia. London, 1899 
Bailliere, Tindall & Cox 

The Surgical Treatment of Gastric and Duodenal 
Ulcers. W. B. Saunders & Co., 1903 

Gall-Stones and their Surgical Treatment 
Second Edition, 1905 W. B. Saunders & Co. 

Abdominal Operations 
Third Edition, 1914 W. B. Saunders Company 

Duodenal Ulcer 
Second Edition, 1912 W. B. Saunders Company 

Pathology of the Living and other Kssays. W. B. 
Saunders Company, 1910 



WITH MR. MAYO ROBSON 

Diseases of the Stomach. Second Edition, 1905 

Diseases of the Pancreas. W. B. Saunders & Co. 

1902 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS 

VOLUME I 



BY 

Sir BERKELEY MOYNIHAN, M.S. (London), F.R.C.S. 



LEEDS, ENGLAND 



Third Edition, Revised 



Fully Illustrated 



PHILADELPHIA AND LONDON 

W. B. SAUNDERS COMPANY 

1914 






Set up, printed, and copyrighted, August, 1905. Revised, reprinted, and 

recopyrighted, September, 1906. Revised, reprinted, and recop}- 

righted, October, 19 14 



Copyright, 1914, by W. B. Saunders Company 



Registered at Stationers' Hall, London, England 









\o 



PRINTED IN PHILADELPHIA 



TO MY WIFE 



PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 



The Second Edition of this work has long been out of print. 

For this edition a considerable revision has been necessary, 
and certain chapters have been entirely rewritten. I have kept 
strictly to the original purpose of the book, and describe in detail 
only those operations and methods which are practised by myself. 
There are certain disadvantages in this course, but I have always 
felt that what is chiefly needed in medical literature is the direct 
expression of personal opinions, methods and results. 

I am under many obligations. My debt to the surgeons of 
America is too considerable for repayment ; I can only most grate- 
fully acknowledge it. Among those whose work and writings 
have been a constant help and inspiration to me are Dr. William 
J. Mayo, Dr. Charles H. Mayo, Dr. John B. Murphy, and Dr. 
George W. Crile. 

My colleagues, Mr. Harold Collinson and Mr. L. R. Braith- 
waite have helped me in many ways. The final effort to complete 
the work was made easier by the willing help of Mr. E. Tissington 
Tatlow. 

The illustrations are almost exclusively the work of Miss 

Ethel M. Wright. 

Berkeley Moynihan. 

33 Park Square, Leeds 
October, 1914 



PREFACE 



In this volume I have included only those operations which 
are common to the two sexes. No gynaecological operations are 
described. 

The surgery of organs, such as the kidney and the bladder, 
which is partly intraperitoneal and partly extraperitoneal, is 
not included, nor are the various operations for hernia. 

The operations described are those in general use, and all, 
or almost all, of them are those practised by myself. Some 
comment will doubtless be made on the fact that there is no 
detailed reference to any mechanical appliance, button or bobbin, 
for intestinal anastomosis. This omission is made deliberately, 
for I believe that the purpose of these mechanical aids has been 
served, and that their interest is now only historical. 

The illustrations are, with few exceptions, original, and have 
been drawn for me by Miss Ethel J\I. Wright. I desire to ex- 
press my thanks to her for her careful and successful work. 
In preparing the subjects for illustrations, and in the laborious 
task of reading proofs, I have received great help from Mr. 
W. Gough, F.R.C.S., and Mr. H. Upcott, F.R.C.S. 

I am greatly indebted to my secretary, Miss A. M. Harrold, 
for help at all stages of the work. 

Berkeley Moynihan. 

33 Park Square, Leeds 



13 



CONTENTS OF VOLUME I 



SECTION I— GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 

CHAPTER I. PAGE 

The Bacteriology of the Stomach and Intestines 17 

CHAPTER II. 

General Remarks upon the Preparations Necessary in Abdominal 
Operations, upon the Conduct of the Operation, and upon the 
After-treatment of the Patient 24 

CHAPTER III. 
The Complications and Sequels of Abdominal Operations 66 

CHAPTER IV 
Abdominal Incisions 105 

CHAPTER V 
Penetrating Wounds of the Abdomen 114 

CHAPTER VI. 

The Surgical Treatment of Acute Peritonitis 119 

CHAPTER VII. 
Tuberculous Peritonitis 128 

CHAPTER VIII. 
Subphrenic Abscess 137 

CHAPTER IX. 
The Surgical Treatment of Visceral Prolapse 150 



SECTION II— OPERATIONS UPON THE STOMACH 

CHAPTER X. 
Operations for Perforating Gastric or Duodenal Ulcers 163 

CHAPTER XI. 
Operations for Chronic Gastric Ulcer, Pyloric Stenosis, etc. — 

Gastro-enterostomy 177 

Posterior Gastro-enterostomy i77 

Anterior Gastro-enterostomy 19 7 

Complications After the Operation 202 

IS 



1 6 CONTENTS OF VOLUME I 

CHAPTER XII. PAGE 

Operations for Chronic Gastric Ulcer. Gastroduodenostomy 240 

CHAPTER XIII. 
Excision of Gastric Ulcer 258 

CHAPTER XIV. 
Operations for Hour-glass Stomach 276 

CHAPTER XV. 
The Operative Treatment of Cancer of the Stomach 285 

CHAPTER XVI. 
The Choice of Operation in Cancer of the Stomach 318 

CHAPTER XVII. 
Oomplete Gastrectomy 332 

CHAPTER XVIII. 
Gastrostomy 350 

' CHAPTER XIX. 
Jejunostomy 363 

CHAPTER XX. 
Gunshot Wounds of the Stomach 369 



SECTION III— OPERATIONS UPON THE INTESTINES 

CHAPTER XXI. 
Intestinal Localisation 375 

CHAPTER XXII 
Intestinal Suture 384 

CHAPTER XXIII. 
Enterotomy and Enterostomy 406 

CHAPTER XXIV. 
Colotomy 417 

CHAPTER XXV. 
Entero-anastomosis, Lateral Anastomosis, or Short-circuiting ... 433 

CHAPTER XXVI. 
Enterectomy 440 

Index of Names 471 

Index of Subjects 477 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



SECTION I. 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS. 



CHAPTER 1. 
THE BACTERIOLOGY OF THE STOMACH AND INTESTINES. 

Many of the problems connected with the surgery of the 
stomach and intestines depend for their elucidation upon a 
knowledge of the bacteriology of the alimentary canal. This 
subject is one still in need of further investigation. 

Billroth in 1874 was the first to recognise that the intes- 
tinal contents of the newborn are always sterile, and that the 
yellow stools, coming a few hours or days after birth, are the 
first intestinal discharges to contain micro-organisms. Popoff 
and others shewed that the appearance of the bacteria in the 
motions depended upon the time at which the first nourish- 
ment was taken. The exact origin of the Bacillus colt, which 
is the constant inhabitant of the intestinal canal in man, has 
never been satisfactorily determined; but there can be little 
doubt that the infection takes place through the mouth, and 
that the vehicle is the food. It is to Escherich that we owe 
a recognition of the fact that the Bacillus coll is the charac- 
teristic organism of the human intestine, and that it remains 
an unvarying inhabitant throughout life. 

A bacterial invasion of the intestinal canal is not essential 
to the life or health of the individual. Experimental work, 
VOL. 1—2 17 



1 8 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

which has been amply confirmed, has shewn that hfe may be 
sustained in young animals whose food and whose surroundings 
are sterile. Nuttall and Thierf elder obtained a guinea-pig 
from its mother by Csesarean section, and placed it at once 
in a sterile chamber, supplied with sterile air, and fed it upon 
sterilized foods. At the end of eight days the animal, which 
was thriving, was killed, and its intestinal contents found to 
be sterile. Levin investigated the bacterial conditions in the 
intestinal canals of animals (bears, seals, reindeer, etc.) in Spitz- 
bergen, and found that, as a rule, the contents of the bowel 
were sterile. In the Arctic regions, of course, there is a great 
scarcity of organisms both in the air and in water. 

Within the first few hours of life the intestinal contents 
cease to be sterile; organisms can always be found. Of these 
organisms, tw^o varieties are described — the permanent and 
the transient. The permanent variety in man is the Bacillus 
colt and some of the streptococci group; the transient includes 
any that are introduced into the intestinal canal by the food. 
It is obvious that, if any organism whatever be introduced de- 
liberately into the stomach with the food, it will remain for a 
shorter or longer time an inhabitant of the alimentary canal. 
But, as Gillespie and Miller have shewn, when bacteria are in- 
troduced in this way there is a steady decrease in their numbers 
as digestion proceeds, and in proportion to the increase in the 
acidity of the gastric contents. According to Miher, at the end 
of nine hours the stomach contains no organisms. In the duo- 
denum the number of the bacteria is small ; but, the further down 
in the intestine is the material from which the examination is 
made, the more numerous are the organisms, until the ileocaecal 
valve is reached. In the large intestine the bacteria are again 
few in number. Gilbert and Domenici have represented dia- 
grammatically the average bacterial virulence of the alimen- 
tary canal of dogs. 

Harvey Gushing has investigated the conditions in cases 
of intestinal fistula. In a case of jejunal fistula a glass of milk 



BACTERIOLOGY OF STOMACH AND INTESTINES. 



19 



could be entirely recovered within a few minutes of its inges- 
tion, with its bacteriological features practically unchanged. 
The importance of the physical characters of the food is there- 
fore considerable. If the ingesta be fluid, they are passed 
rapidly onwards into the duodenum, and are but little, if at 
all, altered by transit through the stomach. If the food be 
solid, it will remain, perhaps for hours, in the stomach, sub- 
ject throughout this time to the action of the gastric juice, 
and when passed into the duodenum it will have the number 

No-of germs 

her TTfy-. 
100,000 




l^cuve Intestine 



Fig. I. — "Gilbert and Domenici's diagram shewing the relative number of 
bacteria present in the contents of different parts of the alimentan.^ tract. The 
dogs were killed three hours after a meal of bread and meat. Examination of 
the intestinal contents at this stage of digestion shewed an abundance of or- 
ganisms in the stomach, a pronounced diminution in number at the duodenum, 
followed by a gradual rise to the ileocsecal valve, where bacteria flourish in 
the greatest luxuriance. When the large intestine is reached there is a marked 
falling off in the number, with a slight rise proportionate to the distance from 
the caecum" (Harvey Gushing). 



of its bacteria greatly reduced. Macfadyen, quoted by Gush- 
ing, has shewn that the bacillus of anthrax, an organism easily 
killed by the gastric juice, cannot be recovered from the in- 
testine when taken after a full meal, but that when adminis- 
tered with a large amount of liquid on an empty stomach, 
its recovery from the lower bowel is eas3^ In one of Cushing's 
cases, the Bacillus prodigiosus, an organism especially suscep- 
tible to the action of the gastric juice, could be easily recovered 
from a jejunal fistula after its ingestion with inoculated milk. 



20 



ABDOMINAL OPER-\TIOXS. 



When the normal stomach has emptied itself of food, either 
fluid or solid, the mucous membrane is sterile; the small 
amount of material that can be scraped from the mucous sur- 
face contains no organisms. Marfan and Bernard have shewn 
that the same applies to the intestine : that when any part of 
the intestine has emptied itself of its contents, it becomes 
amicrobic. In cases of artificial anus in man, the distal loop of 
the bowel, so long as it remains empty, is always found to be 
sterile. If from any reason the stomach is unable to empty 
itself satisfactorily, leaving always some food stagnant, the 
natural amicrobism can never be attained. Gushing writes: 
"It is, I believe, dependent only upon interference with the 




Stamcuch . Huodsnutn Jt^uxuint Ileum. Ceeum. 



KecTlutL 



Fig. 2. — Harvey Cushing's diagram shewing the relative number of micro- 
organisms at different levels of a dog's intestine after a prolonged fast. 



stomach's power completely to expel its contents that bacterial 
life may persist in its lumen. The same principle holds true 
for the duodenum, and it is not improbable that a similar ami- 
crobic state following digestion, with a canal completely free 
from food and the accompanying bacteria, may be brought 
about as far down as a condition of emptiness may be reached 
through fasting." In a dog that had been starved for several 
days, the upper part of the intestine was found sterile. The 
accompanying diagram which Gushing gives may be contrasted 
with that given by Gilbert. It will be seen that all that por- 
tion of the intestine which can be rendered empty is by this 



BACTERIOLOGY OF STOMACH AND INTESTINES. 21 

means alone rendered sterile also. Conversely in cases of 
acute or of chronic intestinal obstruction where the bowel 
has been unable to empty itself for days or for weeks, the in- 
testinal contents are teeming with bacterial life ; the Bacillus 
coli and streptococci are often found in great numbers, and 
their virulence is extreme. 

The conclusions which may be stated are as follows : 

1. The stomach contains, immediately after a meal, a number 

of micro-organisms of different varieties, according to 
the nature of the food administered. 

2. If the food is given in a liquid form, it is rapidly passed on- 

wards into the intestine, and the bacterial forms are 
but slightly, if at all, affected. 

3. If food is given in a solid form, it remains longer in the stom- 

ach, and the number of bacteria contained therein under- 
goes a steady diminution until digestion is complete. 
The empty stomach is then amicrobic. 

4. The duodenum is often sterile; the number and virulence 

of the bacteria of the intestine increase in proportion 
to the distance from the duodenum, and attain their 
maximum at the ileocascal valve. 

5. The Bacillus coli communis is the characteristic organism 

of the human intestine ; it is never absent after the 
first few days of life. 

6. The stomach and the upper part of the jejunum can be 

rendered sterile by administering only sterilized foods 
and by attention to the toilet of the mouth. In dogs, 
starvation for a few days leaves the upper part of the 
intestine empty and sterile. 

7. The stomach and intestine, when their contents have been 

discharged and they are empty, are sterile. If the 
emptying is prevented by obstruction at the pylorus, 
or in the intestine, the contents, dammed up behind 
the block, contain organisms whose number and whose 
virulence are greatly increased. 



22 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

The importance of these facts from the surgical point of 
view is that they shew what is to be expected in cases of per- 
foration of the stomach or intestine, and they demonstrate 
the possibiHty of rendering sterile, for purposes of operation, 
the stomach and the upper part of the intestinal canal. For 
example, when peritonitis results from a perforation high in 
the intestine, the offending micro-organism is generally a strep- 
tococcus ; when the perforation is low down in the intestine, 
the Bacillus coli is the most abundant or the only organism. 

It is to Dr. Harvey Gushing, of Baltimore, that we are 
indebted for calling the attention of surgeons to the possibil- 
ity of rendering the stomach and intestine sterile as a pre- 
paratory measure to operations. He wrote, in a very able 
paper from which I have quoted freely (vol. ix, "Johns Hop- 
kins Hospital Reports") : 

' ' The procedure which we have employed is simple and 
mainly consists in an attempt to render amicrobic all ingesta. 
The mouth is rinsed with an antiseptic solution and the teeth 
are carefully brushed at intervals of a few hours, and with 
especial care before and after feeding. The stomach, if any 
chronic catarrh exists and micro-organisms in number are 
found present after a test-meal, is washed out carefully morn- 
ing and evening. Food is taken in small amounts and at com- 
paratively frequent intervals, from clean or, preferably, sterile 
vessels, and consists of boiled water, sterilised milk, beef- tea, 
albumin- water, and similar liquids. Patients with chronic 
gastritis have been seen to gain in weight under this regime. 
Preliminary to the operation for from six to ten hours nothing 
is given by the mouth, rectal feeding being instituted if neces- 
sary." 

Many drugs have been given in the hope that by their aid 
the intestinal contents could be rendered sterile. Among such 
are /S-naphthol, salol, iodoform and actol, to mention only a few. 
All have proved useless. Recently Adolph Hofmann (" Mitth. 
a. d. Grenzgebiet.," 1906, Bd. 15, Heft 5, p. 596) has recorded 
a series of observations made upon the intestinal contents 



BACTERIOLOGY OF STOMACH AND INTESTINES. 23 

(recovered from fistulse, colotomy openings, and enterostomy 
openings) after the administration of isoform. This drug is 
administered in powder or in capsules, or in both together, 
the dose being 3 grammes, given in quantities of -^- gramme, within 
a period of two to twenty-four hours. The effect was remark- 
able and constant. The number of colonies that could be cul- 
tivated from the discharge was enormously reduced in all cases. 
The rapidity with w^hich the effect upon the contents was pro- 
duced depended upon the part of the alimentary canal from 
which cultures were taken. In cases of pAdoric disease the effect 
upon the stomach contents was noticed in a few minutes, if 
the drug was administered in powder. Isoform is supplied 
in powder and in capsules, hardened and unhardened, — the 
latter dissolve in about an hour and a half in the stomach, 
setting free the drug; the former pass into the intestine where 
they are dissolved in a variable and often uncertain time. In 
the intestine an undoubted effect is produced in thirty hours 
from the administration of the dose. Though 3 grammes 
is the usual dose, as much as 7 to 8 grammes have been given 
to the adult male without producing distress. The symptoms 
which come from an excessive dose, or from too frequently repeated 
doses, are loss of appetite, vomiting and a feeling of sickness. 
Unfortunately isoform is no longer procurable. It is now my 
general practice before operations which probably involve a 
resection of the intestine to give large doses of bismuth for several 
days beforehand. This I began to do in those patients who were 
to be examined by the x-tsljs, and as I found the method of value 
I extended it to all cases. One-half ounce of bismuth carbonate 
is given twice daily for two, three, or four days. 



CHAPTER II. 

GENERAL REMARKS UPON THE PREPARATIONS NECES- 
SARY IN ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS, UPON THE 
CONDUCT OF THE OPERATION, AND UPON 
THE AFTER-TREATMENT OF THE 
PATIENT. 

Success in abdominal surgery, as in all the affairs of life, 
depends very largely upon the observance of details. In the 
careful examination of the patient, with reference both to the 
local and general conditions ; in the strict preparation, for a 
few days before the operation, whenever possible; in neatness, 
rapidity, and thoughtful planning of the operation — in all these 
there lie the means and the secret of success. With few excep- 
tions, the same technique is desirable in all operations. I 
propose to describe the details which are carried out in my 
own operations, first, with reference to the surgeon, assistants, 
nurses, instruments, and dressings; and, secondly, with refer- 
ence to the patient. 

PREPARATIONS ADOPTED BY THE SURGEONS AND ASSISTANTS. 

It is most desirable — it is even more, it is absolutely necessary 
— that for the due observance of cleanliness during operations 
the surgeon should be properly clad. The garments which are 
suitable for daily wear are surgically unclean and should be 
changed by all those who are to be in immediate proximity to the 
area of operation. 

The surgeon should be clad from head to foot in spotless steril- 
ised garments. A sterilised cap is worn, so that the heads of 
the surgeon and his assistant when they meet in sharp contact 
over the abdominal wound shall not scatter hair and dirt broad- 
cast. A sterile coat is worn, sterile sleeves, and boiled rubber 

24 



PREPARATIONS ADOPTED BY SURGEONS AND ASSISTANTS. 25 

gloves. Sterilised or, at least, newly washed, white trousers 
and clean shoes, preferably with rubber soles, are worn. Pre- 
pared in this way, the surgeon is safe not to inflict a chance 
infection in any wound. All parts likely to be near the wound 
or to touch it are absolutely clean. 




Fig- 3- — J^he surgeon prepared for operation wearing the spectacle mask. 

It is not enough, though one can see the practice every 
day, to wash the hands and perhaps the forearms and to be 
content with this. When instruments are lying on a towel 
during the performance of an operation, the surgeon may, in 
some manipulation, allow an unclean elbow or arm to rest for 
a few moments upon an instrument, and presently employ 



26 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



that instrument again. The operator should be so prepared 
that all his accessible surfaces are clothed with sterile gar- 
ments. Exactly the same rules apply to the assistants and 
the nurses. There should be no uncovered surfaces, which, 
by contact, are likely to cause infection. Experimental work, 
amply confirmed, has shewn that particles of saliva are 
ejected during ordinary conversation to a considerable distance. 




Fig. 4. — Gauze mask. The gauze is suspended on hooks dependent from a 

spectacle frame. 

The saliva contains organisms in profusion. According to one 
eminent bacteriologist it is in this respect "worse than the 
worst London sewage." Unless the operator and his assistant, 
and all those nearly engaged in the operation, can preserve 
absolute silence during an operation, they should wear gauze 
masks. I have had a sort of spectacle frame made for me to 
which the gauze is fixed. The frame is fixed, by bent sides, 



PREPARATIONS ADOPTED BY SURGEONS AND ASSISTANTS. 27 

behind the ears, so that there is no fear of the gauze slipping 
or becoming displaced during an operation. It is the custom 
among the unenlightened to scoff at the necessary precautions 
taken by those who practise aseptic surgery ; the meaning of 
the word "aseptic" is forgotten. The thoughtful enthusiast 
may console himself with the reflection that in every race there 
must be some who lag behind. The laggards, moreover, are 
generally those who are "quite satisfied with their results;" 
a testimony not, as it is intended to be, to their results, but 
rather to the ease of their satisfaction. 

Hands. — The preparation of the hands should be the same 
whether gloves are worn or not. It is almost impossible to 
over-emphasise the importance of thorough cleansing of the 
hands and nails. The literature on this one subject alone would 
require almost a lifetime for the reading, but the conclusions 
of all investigators are unanimous in stating that an assured 
and absolute sterilisation of the hands is impossible to obtain. 
But there can be no question that a sufficiently near approach 
to perfection can be attained by the exercise of the greatest 
care. Professor Kocher, for example, whose results are at 
the least the equal of any, operates sometimes with bare hands. 
But of the care taken by him to ensure cleanliness, all those who 
have seen him work, or who have read his book, will realise. 
It could, I think, be successfully argued that of all the details 
in the preparation for an operation none equals that of the 
cleansing of the surgeon's hands. 

The preparation begins with a thorough washing in soap 
and hot water. When the hands and arms are socially clean, 
a nail-brush or, what is perhaps better, some squares of sterile 
gauze or butter-muslin may be taken and a thorough scrub- 
bing of the hands, fingers, and nails especially, is begun. Each 
finger and each nail must be separately scrubbed, and frequent 
rinsing, in water as hot as can be borne, is necessary. If pos- 
sible, running water should be used, but, failing that, a series 
of basins will do equally well. After prolonged washing in 



28 ABDOMINAL OPER-\TIONS. 

one basin, a second is used, and a third, and finall}' a fourth. 
Each basin and the water which it contains should be steril- 
ised. It is of no advantage to have sterile running water 
if the basin into which it runs is a fixed basin, which cannot 
be rendered sterile ; nor is it possible to h.a.xe water remain 
sterile if the basin which it fills is fixed, as in the ordinary 
lavaton'. Either the water must be running continuously 
and allowed to flow over and away from the hands and arms, 
or the basin and its contained water must each be easily steril- 
isable. The washing must be carried out regardless of time. 
After at least fifteen minutes of soap and water, the hands 
and nails may be scrubbed with sterile gauze, which is worked 
into all the crevices and cracks which exist on ever}^ hand 
and finger. After this, some antiseptic application is necessary. 
The best is alcohol in some form or another. A solution of 
60 to 70 per cent, of alcohol to the extent of two or four 
ounces may be poured OA'er the hands, rubbed well over, and 
wiped off with a sterile towel, or the hands may be soaked for 
a few minutes in a solution of spirit and biniodide of mercur}^ 
Instead of alcohol a watery solution of biniodide of mercur}' 
I : 2000 with potassium iodide may be used, and the hands, 
forearms, and elbows allowed to soak therein for at least five 
minutes by the clock. Watery solutions have, however, a value 
far inferior to spirituous solutions, being less effective as germi- 
cides and more prone to irritate the skin. The great disadvan- 
tage of aU antiseptic preparations for the hands is the undoubted 
tendency that they have to cause roughness. This rough and 
coarse condition of the skin makes any cleansing very much 
more tedious and any reasonable sterilisation very difficult of 
attainment. In these matters the personal idiosyncrasy of the 
surgeon counts for much. Some operators can bear mercury 
compounds, others are immune to the irritation of carbolic, but 
all, so far as I can judge, can bear to use alcohol preparations 
better than any other antiseptic agent. My own practice is to 
wash thoroughly in the way I have described, with soap and hot 



PREPAR.\TIONS ADOPTED BY SURGEONS AND ASSISTANTS. 29 

water, to use gauze friction, to steep for a few minutes in l : 2000 
biniodide, then to have a wash over with 65 per cent, alcohol, 
and finally to rinse well in sterile salt solution. 

Gloves. — It is now my invariable practice to use rubber 
gloves during operations. At the first I found some difficulty 
in working in them, and I felt clumsy and inapt. That was 
the fault of the gloves, and of my want of knowledge of the 
proper method of putting them on. 

I now use No. 7 or 7^ light or medium rubber gloves. They 
are a size smaller than my ordinary glove, and therefore fit 
fairly tight. Gloves may be sterilised in the autoclave or by 
boiling: they may be used, that is, dry or wet. I greatly prefer 
the former. There is no difficulty in the dry sterilisation of 
gloves, though I think the life of a glove is shorter when this 
method is employed. If used wet, the gloves after being boiled 
for twenty minutes are put on in the following way: The open- 
ing in the glove is held stretched wide by two fingers and the 
glove is filled, by a movement of "scooping," with sterile salt 
solution which fills the basin in which the gloves lie. When the 
glove is nearly filled with water it is held in one hand while the 
other hand gently wriggles into it. As the hand enters, water 
escapes until the fingers have reached to within about an inch 
of the tip. The cuff of the glove is turned backwards and the 
glove is held from the inside. It is only after the sterile sleeves 
have been put on that the cuff is turned over on to the forearm. 
Then the other glove is filled and put on in exactly the same way. 
The further pulling on of the gloves is impossible, but they 
may be made to go on by rapidly stroking the glove from the 
fingers to the wrist with dry sterile gauze. The glove when 
fully on should fit quite tight, but should not be so tight as 
to hamper the movements of the hand. The outside of the 
glove should never be touched with the opposite hand, which, 
though scrupulously prepared, should be considered, as it doubt- 
less is, capable of infecting the glove if friction be used. (See 
Kocher's "Operative Surgery," second English edition.) 



30 ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 

During an operation the glove-covered hand is rinsed in 
sterile salt solution as soon as soiled. As a rule, it is easier 
to work with a glove which is wet than with one which is dry, 
for when drv, the gloves are apt to stick to instruments, liga- 
tures, and swabs. A frequent rinsing in a sterilised solution 
is therefore necessary. No antiseptic solution is ever used, 
and none is permitted to touch the peritoneum. There is 
abundant experimental evidence to shew that the delicate 
peritoneum is seriously damaged by contact with antiseptic 
solutions, and that its power of absorption is thereby decidedly 
lessened. 

During an operation a glove may be pricked or torn by 
a needle or other sharp instrument. This is more likely to 
happen when the operator is unused to gloves ; as he becomes 
more accustomed to them and has cultivated a slightly altered 
tactile sense, he will find that an injury to a glove is rarely 
caused. If the prick be on a finger, a finger-stall or a finger 
cut from another glove which has been partiall}^ spoilt, must 
be used to cover the damage. This should be done at once, 
for if the glove has been w^orn even for a few minutes, the hand 
will be septic. The sweat-glands and the deeper portions of 
the skin will have emptied their organisms on to the surface 
of the hand. If a rent be made in the hand of the glove, a 
fresh glove must be put on at once. It is, therefore, always 
necessary to have a reserve pair of gloves for the surgeon and 
for his assistant, and several glove-fingers. 

At the first using of the gloves the operator will doubtless 
feel that the fingers are clumsy, and that it is difficult to get 
a proper grip of any structure. A little practice, however, will 
soon overcome all these initial difficulties. If a flat gauze 
swab be used on the gloved hand, it will be found that a better 
hold is thereby obtained than is possible with the bare hand. 
A pattern of glove has recently been sold in which the surface 
of the rubber is roughened by the impress of innumerable fine 



PREPARATIONS ADOPTED BY SURGEONS AND ASSISTANTS. 3 1 

pits. In use, however, I have not found any advantage from 
this. 

After the surgeon has become thoroughly accustomed to 
the wearing of the gloves, he will probably find that he can 
work quite as well with medium as with thin gloves. 

Assistants. — The remarks made as to the preparation of 
the surgeon apply also to his assistant. As a rule, only one 
assistant is necessary or desirable. Indeed, many operations — 
such, for example, as gastro-enterostomy — can be done with- 
out any assistance. A good, well- trained assistant is, how- 
ever, a great help. More assistants than one are rarely, if 
ever, necessary, and each one is an additional potential source 
of infection. The fewer persons engaged in an operation, the 
fewer are the chances of infection. The nurse or nurses imme- 
diately engaged in the operation are instructed to prepare 
in the same manner as the surgeon. A white, sterilised dress 
or overall is worn, the hair is covered with a sterile cap, and 
clean, white rubber shoes are worn. If a nurse helps in the 
operation by handing swabs or sponges, or by cutting liga- 
tures, threading needles, or the like, she should prepare her 
hands as does the surgeon, and should wear rubber gloves. 
In these circumstances, she becomes an additional assistant, 
and if the same nurse be employed over a series of months 
or years, she will soon become expert in her work and scrupu- 
lous in the preparation for it. 

Swabs. — Swabs are employed for all operations. I have 
ceased to use marine sponges for many years ; they are more 
difficult and more tedious to prepare and are not so trust- 
worthy. The large, flat sponge certainly answered its purpose — 
the protection and covering of the viscera — rather better than 
any flat swab I have used, but the difference is only slight 
and is more than compensated for, in my opinion, by the 
greater sense of security that one has in regard to the sterility 
of a gauze swab. 

Swabs are made entirely of gauze or butter-muslin. I 



32 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

prefer the latter. The swabs are of various sizes from three 
inches square to six inches square, and are made by folding 
over, two or three times, a large square of gauze. The frayed 
ends of the gauze are tucked in, so that no loose filaments are 
left on the wound when the swab is used. 

The large flat swabs are made of several layers of muslin, 
and are quilted at the edge in order to prevent fraying. At 
the comer of each, a piece of tape eighteen inches in length 
is stitched. The whole of the gauze square can be introduced 
and the tape left hanging from the wound, a clip being fastened 
on the end. This method is the most satisfactory of all, for, 
if no tape be affixed, the sponge or swab must be kept in sight, 
or a portion of it must project from the wound, and the space 
in which the surgeon has to work is thereby greatly narrowed. 

The small swabs are put up, for sterilising purposes, in 
packages of two dozen, the large ones in packages of half a 
dozen. The number of each size is counted at the completion 
of the operation so as to make certain that none has been left 
in the abdomen. My own rule is never, under any circum- 
stances, or in any operation, to allow a small swab to be left 
even for a moment in the cavity; a small swab is not allowed 
to leave the hand of the surgeon or his assistant; the large 
swabs are introduced in any number, but a clip is at once ap- 
plied to each tape, or to a group of two, three, or more tapes. 
The counting of the swabs under these conditions is not neces- 
sary, but it is as w^ell to observe the ceremony, as it impresses 
upon all concerned the importance of being exact in such mat- 
ters. 

For the last few years I have used in all operations upon the 
abdomen square sheets consisting of dental rubber with two lay- 
ers of gauze on each side infolded and stitched round the edges. 
These mackintoshes are lo or 12 inches square, and can be boiled 
or sterilised in the autoclave on a great many occasions. They 
are used to cover any organ during the time it may have to lie 
outside the incision, and are used in all gall-bladder operations 



PREPARATIONS ADOPTED BY SURGEONS AND ASSISTANTS. 33 

to wrap well round the edges of the abdominal incision. Being 
wrung out of the hot saline solution they serve to keep all the 
parts they cover warm and moist, and they form an impassable 
barrier if any infective lesion is being handled. Indeed they are 
on all occasions and in all places most useful. 

Gauze swabs have been occasionally left in the abdomen, ow- 
ing to a defective method, or an absence of any method, of count- 
ing them before and after the operation. As a rule the wound 
will stubbornly refuse to heal, or having healed will break down, 
if any foreign material remains. But many cases are known in 
which an excellent recovery has been made by the patient, and 
a year or two later a second operation has been undertaken for 
the removal of an abdominal tumour. A friend of my own, a 
most careful and competent operator, performed an operation 
upon the stomach of a girl for a chronic ulcer. A little over 
a year later the patient again consulted him on account of a 
painless median abdominal tumour, freely movable and of smooth 
outline. The abdomen was again opened and a ' ' fibrous tumour 
of the omentum removed, which on section proved to be a gauze 
swab completely invested by the omentum. An interesting case 
is recorded by Loze ("Rev. de Chir.," 1908, i, 853). A woman un- 
derwent an operation for appendicitis ; three years later the ab- 
dominal cicatrix gave way and 34 strips of gauze were extracted 
through it, one by one. The operator had not dressed the wound 
himself but ordered that one strip of gauze should be introduced 
daily. This was done most conscientiously, and as he had 
omitted to direct the daily withdrawal of the strip, 34 were intro- 
duced but never removed; the wound ultimately healed over 
them. 

The swabs, after being made in the manner described, are 
packed in a hold-all made of gamgee tissue, protected on the 
outer side by brown hoUand. The number in each package 
is always the same — two dozen of the smaller sizes, half a dozen 
of the larger size. In these packages the swabs are sterilised, 
three or four of the hold-alls being wrapped together in a strong, 



34 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

large towel. The sterilisation is effected in a pressure steriliser, 
a temperature of 250° F. being maintained for fort}^ to sixty 
minutes. 

It is important that as short an interval as possible should 
elapse between the sterilisation and the usage of the swabs. 
The most desirable, though not alwa^^s the most convenient, 
arrangement is for the process of sterilisation to conclude 
within an hoiu" of the operation, and for the packages to be 
taken from the steriliser forthwith to the operation room. But 
if this cannot be done, it is most desirable that the interval 
should not be more than one or, at the most, two days. After 
a longer period than this it is necessar}^ to repeat the sterilisa- 
tion. The same rules and procedure appty to the towels used 
during the operation. There should be an abundance of these, 
used to cover in the patient completely. These should be 
sterile, and their sterilisation should have been recently com- 
pleted. 

Instruments and Ligatures. — Everything used by the surgeon 
or by the nurses engaged in the operation should be steril- 
ised. Bowls, ligature, and instrument dishes, jugs for saline 
solution, and similar articles should all be boiled. These are 
often large and even cumbersome in size, and their sterilisa- 
tion b}^ boiling is not easily effected. I have a large copper 
vat, measuring two feet by two feet by two feet, into which 
all bowls necessary for any operation are placed and therein 
boiled for thirty to forty minutes. If the operation should 
prove to be a septic one, as in appendix, or tubal, or gall-blad- 
der operations, especial care is subsequently taken that all 
bowls, etc., are subjected to prolonged boiling. The washing 
out of such basins with strong antiseptic solutions may be 
soothing to the conscience of the surgeon or of the nurse, but 
it probably does not much affect the power of procreation of 
a pyogenic organism. Prolonged boiling is necessary. 

Catgut. — During the last nine years I have used exclu- 
sively the method of Claudius in the preparation of catgut. 



PREPARATIONS ADOPTED BY SURGEONS AND ASSISTANTS. 35 

The ordinary raw commercial catgut is steeped in a solution made 
by adding one ounce of iodine and one ounce and a half of 
potassium iodide to five pints of water, for eight to ten days. 
The crystals of potassium iodide and of iodine are together 
dissolved in about two and a half ounces of water, first, and the 
solution is then diluted to the requisite degree. The catgut 
may be kept in this solution for many weeks without under- 
going any change for the worse. It can be used on the eighth 
day or on any subsequent day. I have tested this catgut 
thoroughly and am convinced, on experimental and clinical 
grounds, of its sterility. The instruction given by Claudius 
and all subsequent writers is to use one ounce of iodine and one 
ounce of potassium iodide; but with these proportions the full 
solution of the iodine is impossible. Moschowitz's modification 
of the Claudius method consists of placing ordinary raw com- 
mercial catgut for five days in a 5 per cent, alcoholic solution 
of iodine, then removing and storing dry. Catgut prepared in 
this way may be soaked in sterile water before use. I have tried 
this method but find that the results are inferior to those obtained 
by the original Claudius method — the catgut being too brittle. 

Catgut is used for almost all ligatures. If anything stronger 
is needed, then Pagenstecher's celluloid thread is used. This 
is made in several sizes, but the thin and a medium size are 
all that are necessary. I use this material for all ligatures or 
sutures that require to be retained in place for more than a few 
days. The use of silk has been entirely abandoned by me for 
some years, as I find that the celluloid thread is more easily ster- 
ilised, that it presents a smoother surface, and that it is far 
stronger than an equal size of silk. The breaking of a Pagen- 
stecher thread ligature or suture is an extremely rare occurrence ; 
when it happens, it is almost certainly due to the fact that the 
thread has been boiled too often. The thread when wound on 
glass reels can be boiled for four or five operations, but after this 
it begins to fray and is then liable to break. It is, moreover, 
then most unsuitable for sutures, for the rough surface tears 



36 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

the peritoneum as it is being pulled through. This is the only 
fault that the thread has, and as the thread is very cheap, it 
is better to throw it away, after being boiled three or four times, 
than to run any risk of its breaking. 

Drainage Material. — During recent years a marked change 
has come over surgical opinion with regard to the question 
of drainage after abdominal section. At one time it was 
considered that drainage was the safeguard after all opera- 
tions ; that the provision for the free escape of infiammator}^ 
products made up for any slight fault in the operative tech- 
nique. Now, thanks largely to the work of Clark and others 
who have studied the question with great care, we know that, 
when employed as a routine measure, drainage is rather a 
means of sepsis than a measure of escape from its effects. 
Drainage of the peritoneal cavity is very rarely necessary. 
The point will be dealt with again when we come to speak 
of the various operations ; but, speaking generally, one may 
say that it is only for septic conditions that drainage is ever 
needed. 

Gauze, which is so often used as a "drain," is the worst ma- 
terial possible for such a purpose. Gauze is not a drain, it is a 
plug. It may with advantage be used when it is wished to set 
up a barrier shutting off a part, possibly infected, from the gen- 
eral peritoneal cavity, which remains unsoiled. The rapidity 
with which the omentum especially, and in less degree the in- 
testines, adhere to gauze is remarkable. Probabty within two or 
three hours any area surrounded by a few layers of gauze is thor- 
oughly isolated from the rest of the body cavity. There are cases, 
too, in which an oozing surface may need to be submitted to pres- 
sure to check or arrest the haemorrhage ; and for this purpose also 
gauze is more useful than anything else. But as a drainage ma- 
terial it is of very little value. For within a few hours its meshes 
are filled in with lymph, no liquid can be absorbed or transmitted 
by it, and any serous or other fluid which may collect is very 
probably pent up, quite unable to escape with any freedom. On 



PREPARATION OF THE PATIENT. 37 

the removal of such a strip or roll of gauze a gush of fluid is often 
seen to escape. If a little drain is required, as some sutures are 
required, for purely "hypnotic " purposes (so that the surgeon may 
sleep better at night), then a fine strip of dental rubber tissue will 
be found the best material of all. 

In cases where a larger drainage is necessary the split rubber 
tube may be used. This tube may be of any size up to a diameter 
of one inch. The tube is cut of adequate length and slit up with 
scissors; the terminal portion is cut slant-wise in order to give a 
wide inlet for the fluid to be drained through to the lumen of the 
tube. 

PREPARATION OF THE PATIENT. 

In all cases an adequate preparation of the patient is 
most necessary. There are certain surgical emergencies, 
catastrophes like the perforation of a gastric or a duodenal 
ulcer or the rupture of a tubal gestation, in which the 
urgency of affairs does not permit of any elaborate detail 
to be observed. But, whenever time and circumstance 
and opportunity render it possible, the preparation of the 
patient, both locally and generally, should be most scrupu- 
lously observed. It is said by some surgeons that strict 
preparations are absurd, but there can be no question 
that they repay one in better results. The patient should 
be kept in bed for the whole of the day preceding opera- 
tion, and for the afternoon and evening of the day before 
that. If the operation is to be done on, say, Wednes- 
day morning, the patient goes to bed on Monday after- 
noon. He is at once given five grains of calomel or any other 
aperient he prefers, which is followed early on Tuesday morning 
by a full dose of saline aperient. Later in the morning if these 
have not acted, an enema of soap and water is given, and if the 
bowels are at all loaded, or the patient has previously suffered from 
constipation, the enema is repeated late at night. The condition 
of the mouth receives close attention. Every patient is given 



38 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS 

a new tooth-brush and a bottle of antiseptic mouth-wash on ar- 
rival in the Nursing Home or hospital, and the nurse is instructed 
to see that a thorough cleansing of the mouth is observed every 
hour or two during the day. It is astonishing to what a degree 
of uncleanness even the better class of people will allow their 
teeth to go. Patients with gastric ulcer and its complications 
seem to suffer especially from bad teeth, indeed it has been as- 
serted by many that oral sepsis is the important factor in the 
causation of gastric ulcer. If the patient is in very feeble 
health, the nurse is instructed to clean the patient's mouth 
by frequent wiping with gauze or lint, and the patient subse- 
quently rinses the mouth out. It is possible, as the excel- 
lent work of Dr. Harvey Gushing has shown, by careful 
attention to the condition of the mouth, and by the sterilisa- 
tion of all foods, to render the alimentary canal comparatively 
aseptic. All patients from the moment they are received into 
hospital are fed on fluid diet, and everything given is sterilised, 
and the feeder or vessel from which the food is taken is 
also boiled. 

I am disposed to think that the occurrence of parotitis 
and perhaps of pneumonia after abdominal operations is 
largely due to infection from the mouth. In some cases 
so foul a condition of teeth and gums may be accidentally 
discovered as to make a little delay in operating imperative. 
In one patient I found, quite by accident, a degree of 
suppuration in the mouth and a foetor of breath that war- 
ranted a diagnosis of Riggs's disease. In such a case, 
and even in bad cases of carious teeth, an aspiration pneu- 
monia is not unlikely to occur, or an extension of inflamma- 
tion along Stenson's duct, unless a thorough and repeated 
cleansing is observed. 

The skin of the abdomen needs, and must receive, very 
careful preparation twenty-four hours before the operation. The 
hair is first shaved away from the whole abdominal wall and from 
the pubes. It is evidence of careless work to see only a patch 



PREPAIL\TION OF THE PATIENT. 39 

shaved, one-half of the pubic hair, for instance, remaining un- 
touched. It is weU to limit the operative field, of course, but 
the preparation of the skin must extend widely beyond it. 

A free washing with soap, and hot water frequently 
changed, is first necessary. The best material wherewith to 
wash is sterile gauze in large pads. These are moistened 
with hot water and rubbed with soap till a good lather 
is obtained. This washing should be continued for a 
quarter of an hour, the water and the gauze being fre- 
quently changed. An antiseptic compress is then applied 
and left on until immediately before the operation. The com- 
press consists of lint of two or three thicknesses, soaked in i per 
cent, formalin, i in 80 carbolic, or i in 2000 biniodide lotion. I 
prefer the former in the belief that there is by its means a deeper 
penetration of the skin and of the glands. Upon the operation 
table the skin is again washed with spirit soap and biniodide lo- 
tion, dried, and wiped over freely with a solution of spirit (70 per 
cent.) and biniodide of mercury (i in 1000). This is then dried 
away, and Harrington's solution is applied and is allowed to re- 
main for two minutes, when it is wiped off with a swab wet in 
spirit solution. No preparation will sterilise a skin so effectual^ 
as Harrington's solution, whose composition is as follows: 

Commercial alcohol 640 c.c. 

Hydrochloric acid, pure 60 c.c. 

Perchloride of mercury 8 gramme 

Water 300 c.c. 

The skin though thoroughly prepared is always covered as 
soon as an incision is made. This I do with " tetra " cloths held to 
the wound edge by the special forceps I designed for the purpose, 
which are depicted in Fig. 5. 

It is supremely important that the skin should not 
be roughened or chapped and that no irritative rash should 
be caused. Overpreparation to the extent of damaging 
the skin is almost as bad as no preparation at all. If 
there are any small furuncles or septic cracks on the skin 



40 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

within the operation area, these must be carefully disinfected. 
The only satisfactory method of doing so is by means of the 
actual cautery, the point of the hot metal being kept in con- 
tact with the infected spot until all the septic matter is des- 
troyed. When it is realised that the yellow spot in a furuncle 
may contain a pure culture of the Staphylococcus pyogenes au- 
reus, the complete annihilation of such a colony is seen to be a 
desirable thing. 

If the skin of the patient should be very rough, scaly, 
chapped, or cracked, its adequate preparation is almost impossi- 
ble. In these conditions, the "rubber dam" introduced bv 




Fig. 5. — Tetra cloths held in position by special forceps. 

Dr. J. B. Murphy, of Chicago, will be found of the greatest ser- 
vice. It consists of a strong, very adhesive material which is 
stretched and then placed on the abdominal wall, to which it 
clings most closely, becoming, in fact, for the time, an insepa- 
rable part of this wall. 

Through it the incision is made, and the hand lying 
outside, or any viscus escaping from the abdomen, lies, 
not upon the abdominal wall, but upon this sterile rubber 
dam. 

As a general rule, no more preparations than those in- 
dicated are necessary, but in some few the general con- 



OPERATION. 41 

dition of the patient may be so enfeebled that special 
precautions are needed. It is a matter of the highest 
importance in all cases to ensure that the heart and the 
kidneys are acting well. Inefficient kidneys are among 
the most serious obstacles to success in any major opera- 
tions, but especially in any abdominal operations. A routine 
and most exact examination of the urine for two or three 
days is therefore necessary. If the patient be feeble, or 
the heart so weak as to be a cause of anxiety, much good 
may be done by hypodermic injections of strychnine and 
digitaline for a few days before the operation. Five minims 
of the liquor strychninae may be given three or four times 
daily. If the patient has been accustomed to alcohol, 
his usual quantity may be allowed him. All patients who 
are submitted to any abdominal operations are clothed 
in a suit of gamgee pajamas made for them by the nurse. 
After being made, of appropriate size, the suit is well 
warmed and is put on a few hours before the beginning 
of the operation. It is worn until all risk from the opera- 
tion is past, and is then removed limb by limb. It is 
most important that all patients should be warmly clad 
in this way before, during, and after the operation, 

OPERATION. 

The operation, if possible, should be performed in a 
room specially furnished for the purpose. In a public 
hospital a well-equipped operation theatre is always pro- 
vided. In a nursing home or in a private house it is 
sometimes necessary to operate in the patient's bedroom. 
The advantage of this is that it is less of an ordeal to 
the patient, who is sometimes alarmed at the prospect 
of being taken to a special room, and that there is less 
of lifting or of carrying after the operation. These trivial 
advantages are, however, greatly outweighed by the disad- 
vantages, which are, that in the conversion of a bedroom 



42 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



into a theatre there is much traffic, many tables, instru- 
ments, etc., having to be taken into the room; that it is 
not possible to have all the needed appliances to hand 
with the same certainty, and that, finally, the smell of the 
anaesthetic clings to the room for many hours. An ordi- 
nary room in a nursing home can readily be converted 
into, and equipped as, an operation room to the great con- 
venience of the surgeon. Such a room should be cleaned 




Fig. 6. — Crile's method of anoci-association. The skin (not the subcutaneous 
tissue) is injected with a solution of novocaine i : 400. 



thoroughly and disinfected by formalin vapour at frequent 
intervals, and always after any septic operation. The op- 
eration table should have the foot towards the light, 
and should be of good height. ^lany of the tables are 
about three inches too low. If the table is high, it is 
more convenient and more comfortable for the surgeon, 
and if, for any brief manipulation, it is necessary for the 



OPERATION. 



43 



surgeon to be at a rather high level, a plain metal or 
wooden footstool can be used. 

The preparations for the operation must all be com- 
pleted before the anaesthetic is administered, so as to ensure 
that the patient is not kept under any longer than is absolutely 
necessary. The choice of the anaesthetic is no longer left to the 
administrator thereof, but the procedure which Crile has advo- 
cated for the production of the shockless operation by anoci- 



r 





Fig. 7. — The anterior sheath of the rectus muscle is infiltrated with novocaine. 



association is the one I now adopt. The investigations of Crile 
have shown that while inhalation anesthesia prevents the feeling 
of pain, it does not prevent the nerve impulses set up by a sur- 
gical operation from reaching the brain. These impidses cause 
exhaustion of the brain cells, and result in shock of a lesser or 
greater degree of severity. 

On the other hand, local anfesthesia, although it may block 
the nerve impulses originated by the surgeon's manipulations, 



44 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



cannot prevent the destructive psychic strain from which patients 
operated upon under a local anaesthetic must suffer. In order 
therefore to obtain true anoci-association both a local and a 
general ansesthetic must be employed. 

The anaesthetic technique for abdominal operations consists 
of a preliminary injection of one-sixth of a grain of morphine and 
one-hundredth of a grain of scopolamine and one one-hundred- 
and-twentieth of a grain of atropine about half an hour before 




Fig. 8. — The peritoneum is opened, the edges seized with long clips, and 
everted. A solution of quinine and urea hydrochloride (i in 150 or 200) is 
injected from within. 

the actual commencement of the operation. This quiets the pa- 
tient and prevents excessive anxiety. Inhalation anaesthesia is 
induced in the ordinary way with nitrous oxide gas followed by 
ether. As soon as the patient is unconscious and the transverse 
scratching of the skin made, to which I shall refer later, the 
hne of incision is infiltrated with I in 500 solution of novocaine, 
taking care to make the injection into the skin itself, and not 



OPERATION, 



45 



beneath it. The accurate attainment of this intradermal in- 
jection is signified by a white "pig skin" appearance along the 
injection line. 

Incision through this anaesthetised area exposes the rectus 
sheath, which is in turn injected somewhat widely, submitted 
to pressure to diffuse the solution, and then incised. The rec- 
tus muscle next receives a few injections. The peritoneum is 
now anaesthetised by passing the needle between the trans- 







Fig. 9. — The infiltration uf the jieritoneum is carried throughout the suture 
length of the incision and to a distance of lA in. from the cut edge. 



versalis fascia and the peritoneum itself. A pause is made while 
all bleeding points are ligatured. This pause should be sufficient 
to ensure complete blockage with the novocaine. The peri- 
toneum is now raised gently with forceps and incised for about 
i". The incised area is now infiltrated on the abdominal aspect 
and the incision then prolonged; the peritoneum being raised 
gently with forceps and each newly incised portion reinfiltrated 
over an area reaching 2" bevond the wound edge in everv direc- 



46 



ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 



tion. The solution used for this peritoneal injection is a ^/i per 
cent, solution of quinine and urea hydrochloride. If the injection 
has been successful a blister will be raised on the peritoneum at the 
site of each puncture. Pressure with the finger on these blisters 
ensures adequate absorption of the anesthetic. If the blocking 
has been complete it will be found that with a very light degree 
of ether anaesthesia there is no rise of intra-abdominal pressure, 
no tendency to expulsion of the intestines and no muscular 
rigidity. Before closing the abdomen the injections of quinine 
and urea into the peritoneum are repeated. 




Fig. lo. — The skin is closed by deep sutures -o'hich take all the layers of the 
abdominal wall, except the peritoneum, which is closed by a continuous catgut 
suture. 



The punctures made b}^ the skin tension sutures should be 
injected with novocaine. 

If malignant disease and acute infective conditions are ex- 
cluded infiltration of the meso-appendix, of the base of the gall- 
bladder, of the uterus and the broad ligaments, the round liga- 
ments, mesentery, or any portion of parietal peritoneum can 
be carried out. Novocaine is used for all the extraperitoneal 
injections; quinine and urea for the intraperitoneal. As much 
as 6 ounces of quinine and urea (/^ to 3<^ per cent.) may be 
used without danger. 



OPERATION. 



47 



The anaesthesia produced in this way lasts for about five days, 
especially if the quinine and urea injections into the peritoneum 
are repeated before closing the abdomen. In addition to mini- 
mising, or possibly entirely preventing, post-operative shock, 
it also lessens pain and necessitates the administration of a 
smaller quantity of inhalation ansesthetic. The post-operative 
rise of temperature with acceleration of the pulse and also the 




Fig. II. — The stitch punctures are injected with a solution of quinine and 

urea hydrochloride. 



abdominal distension and nausea, are very considerably mini- 
mised. 

A slight objection to this procedure is the tissue oedema which 
lasts for some time even after the healing of the wound. 

A competent assistant; a nurse to look after instruments, 
ligatures, etc. (this can be done by the surgeon himself 
if he so wishes) ; and a nurse who is to change bowls of 
saline solution, and generally fetch and carry, are all the 



48 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



staff necessary for any operation. The nurse who carries 
basins, etc., should be told to keep her hands away from 
contact with anything which is afterwards to be handled 
by the operator or assistants. Her hands, for example, should 
be outside a basin she is carrying; the thumbs should not be, 
as they often are, inside the edges of any vessel. 

The abdominal incision is made in accordance with 
the principles mentioned elsewhere. Before beginning the ab- 





Fig. 12. — The right way and the wrong way to carry a basin. 

dominal incision a few light transverse scratches are made with 
a needle, at distances of about one inch. The object of this is to 
afford a guide for the introduction of the deep stitches at the 
completion of the operation. Each scratch on one side exactly 
meets its fellow on the other, and a mathematical accuracy of 
apposition results. The great majority of the infections during 
the conduct of an operation come from the patient's skin. No 
method of skin preparation yet devised will ensure that the skin 
remains sterile for more than, say, half an hour. At the end of 



OPERATION. 49 

that time, indeed as a rule long before, organisms have been 
sweated up from the depths of the skin, and are ready to cause 
infection. The skin, therefore, even after thorough preparation, 
is kept entirely out of the operation field. This is best done by 
applying tetra cloths over the edges of the wound and fixing them 
there by means of the special forceps which I introduced for 
this purpose several years ago. By this means no hand nor any 
viscus need come into contact with uncovered skin from the be- 
ginning of the operation to the end. When the tetra cloths are 
removed upon the closure of the first layer of the wound a swab 
wet with spirit and biniodide lotion is used vigorously to wipe 
each side of the incision before any deep sutures are passed. 

As soon as the abdomen is opened, a complete, or at 
least an adequate, examination of all the parts concerned 
must be made. It is so easy to omit noticing points 
which are vital to the success of an operation. For exam- 
ple, an hour-glass stornach may well be overlooked; many 
such cases are recorded, owing to the fact that a dilated 
pyloric pouch has been mistaken for the whole organ. A 
single stricture of the intestine has been operated upon, 
when multiple strictures were present; and so with wounds 
of the intestine, — one has been sutured, another left undis- 
covered. The appendix has been removed and a growth 
in the intestine left unrecognized. A gall-stone has been 
removed from the gall-bladder, and another left in the 
common duct. And so the list might be increased. A 
few minutes spent in painstaking examination of all the 
parts affected, or likely so to be, is well repaid in better 
results. 

The lesion having been disclosed, the area to be operated 
upon is isolated. This should be done in a routine manner. 
In "packing off" the abdominal cavity from the parts 
immediately concerned, I use sterile gauze swabs of large size, 
well packed into position, so as to completely surround the field 
of operation. They remain unchanged throughout the operation. 



50 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

Each swab has a long gauze tape upon it, and to each tape a clip 
is fastened. On the inner side of this outer barrier of large 
swabs as many mackintosh cloths are placed, as are necessary 
completely to isolate the area of manipulation, both from the 
outer layer of large fiat swabs, and from the wound edges ; these 
are changed as soon as soiled. This method of having a double 
protection is, I feel sure, the most satisfactory of all, and is the 
most efficient in preventing any soiling of the parts. It is 
important, too, to remember that the wound edges require pro- 
tection just as much as the general peritoneal cavity and the 
viscera. The pus from an infected gall-bladder, or the f^cal 
matter from the intestine, if brought into even the slightest 
contact with the abdominal wall will result in a suppuration of the 
wound, and not improbably in a weakened scar and a ventral 
hernia. The swabs must therefore be made to ensure protec- 
tion for the wound edges, or better still, the mackintosh cloths 
which I have mentioned may be carefully folded over all wound 
edges so that all parts of them are invisible. The most dainty 
care should be exercised all the time. A very effective method 
of preventing soiling in septic cases is to smear the fascial and 
muscular layers of the abdominal wall with hot sterile vaseline 
containing i per cent, of formalin. This forms an efficient coat- 
ing for the tissues, preventing the penetration of septic material 
and lessening the area of subsequent suppuration. 

The swabs when introduced must be wrung out of hot 
sterile salt solution (temperature about io5°-iio°F.). 

Instruments when boiled may be kept in a flat dish 
containing hot weak carbolic lotion, or may be spread out 
upon a dry sterilised towel; preferably the latter, for all 
operative work should be kept as dry as possible. 

The operation should be conducted as speedily as is con- 
sistent with careful and complete work. An operator should 
always be speedy, never hasty. Speed should be the achieve- 
ment, not the aim, of the operator. 



THE TREATMENT OF ADHESIONS. 5I 

THE TREATMENT OF ADHESIONS. 

Adhesions are frequently encountered in all abdominal 
operations. They are, of course, the result of inflammatory 
conditions, sometimes recent, sometimes long past. The opera- 
tion may be called for by conditions which are due directly 
and solely to the adhesions, or the adhesions may be a mere 
incident in the operation which is primarily directed to the 
removal of a different condition. 

The question that arises is as to the manner in Avhich such 
adhesions should be dealt with, — are they to be separated al- 
ways ; may they be ignored sometimes ; or, after separation, 
shall something be done to substitute for one viscus another 
whose adhesion would be relatively unimportant ? 

When adhesions are encountered in a case of gastric ulcer 
it is almost always desirable to separate them. If, for example, 
an ulcer be attached by a stalk of adhesion to the under surface 
of the liver, the adhesion should be cut through, and probably 
the ulcer be removed. Such adhesions to the liver or the dia- 
phragm may be, and not seldom are, a cause of great distress, 
of pains which radiate to the chest or elsewhere. A constantly 
moving organ like the stomach cannot well brook interference. 
An anchoring of its walls to one spot is often the cause of much 
suffering. When such adhesions are separated, conditions re- 
main behind which may set up fresh plastic peritonitis and new 
adhesions result. Even if such new adhesions form, it is prob- 
able that they will be less crippling than the old ones. But, in 
order to prevent their formation between the stomach and a 
fixed point, such as the liver or the diaphragm, the omentum 
may be folded OA'er the bare or roughened area. 

If adhesions around the gall-bladder are present when it is 
necessary to perform the operation of choledochotom}', the 
propriety of ignoring or of dealing with adhesions depends upon 
a variety of circumstances. If the patient be old, or feeble, 
or ill suited to long surgical manipulations, it is best to ignore the 



52 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

adhesions altogether and to perform the manoeuvre of "rota- 
tion of the common duct" described elsewhere. Adhesions 
around the gall-bladder in a case of this kind are often very 
dense, exceeding^ complex, and may involve the colon, which 
tears not tmreadity if roughly handled. The gall-bladder in 
such a case has undergone sclerosis, and if stones be within it, 
they are of no great consequence. They have undergone, very 
often, what Mr. Rutherford Morison calls "the natural cure" 
and may safety be left undisturbed. These remarks only apply 
to the aged and enfeebled. In A^oung, or middle-aged and 
healthly people, it is better to separate the adhesions, and, in 
addition, to perform cholecystotomy or cholecystectomy, as 
may seem best. 

With regard to adhesions around the appendix, it is proper 
always to separate them and to remove the appendix. With 
the cause removed, adhesions, even if they re-form here, do not 
come in such denseness as before, and are probably only tran- 
sient. I have certainly seen them disappear when the^abdomen 
came to be examined later. 

Adhesions are often said to result from surgical manipula- 
tions within the abdomen. If they do, I believe they are due to 
one of two chief causes, — roughness in manipulation (that is, 
traumatism) or sepsis. In cases of carcinoma of the stomach 
when a preliminary^ gastro-entei'ostomy is performed, the ab- 
domen is reopened in a couple of weeks for the purpose of per- 
forming partial gastrectomy. In such cases I have not seen ad- 
hesions of any kind. The amount of handling that is necessary 
for most operations can be borne by the peritoneum without 
any inflammatory response. 

Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews has introduced an operation which 
he describes as " colohepatopexy or colon substitution." He 
considers that adhesions around the gall-bladder are unavoid- 
able after operations thereon, and points out that such adhe- 
sions are only serious when they involve the stomach or the 



THE TREATMENT OF ADHESIONS. 53 

beginning of the duodenum. When the colon is implicated, 
there are no symptoms. His technique is : 

1. A free incision, avoiding old scar. 

2. Careful inspection of the position and the mobility 

of the stomach and separation of adhesions. 

3. The transverse colon and the omentum are pulled up 

and thrust into the space between the pylorus 
and the liver. This new relation is maintained 
by suturing the colon and omentum to the gastro- 
hepatic ligament. 

He draws the following conclusions: 

1. Gall-tract adhesions are inevitable after disease and 

operations. 

2. They are beneficent, harmless, and symptomless in 

all but a few cases. 

3. These few represent malposition rather than trouble 

from adhesions, per se. 

4. The colon, gall-bladder, duodenum and pylorus can 

adhere to each other without impairing their func- 
tion. The other parts of the stomach cause trouble 
if involved. 

5. Such adhesions will re-form when separated unless 

the colon is substituted for the stomach. 

6. The causing of colon adhesions to the liver does not 

distiirb the function perceptibly. 

7. Certain vague gastric disturbances have probably been 

treated by gastro-enterostomy when the patients 
would have had more benefit from this operation. 

I have long held the view that the falciform ligament offered 
great help to the surgeon in these cases. It can be attached to the 
omentum close to the hepatic flexure in such manner as to form 
a veil or curtain separating the gall-bladder or its fossa, when 
cholecystectomy has been done, from the duodenum or stomach, 
and so preventing the formation of crippling adhesions. 

When adhesions are encountered they should be separated 



54 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

with great gentleness. This is best done by "wiping" them 
awav with a piece of sterile gauze. Traction should always 
be avoided as much as possible, for it is productive of muscular 
spasm dining the operation and of shock subsequently. Shock 
is ver\' often the response on the patient's part to manipulations 
which would have been recognised as productive of severe pain 
if the operation had been performed without an ansesthetic. 

If the omentum has been separated and a rough edge or a 
ligatiu-ed stump remains, this may be rolled in upon the omentum 
itself which is closed over by a stitch. This ensures that onl}^ 
smooth surfaces present on the outside. 

DRAINAGE AFTER ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 
The use of drainage in abdominal surger}' has been frequently 
and fully discussed, and has attracted the attention of many 
laborator}- workers. Opinion as to its worth has veered from 
one direction to another, almost at the caprice of fashion. At 
one time it was customan^ to drain after many of the simplest 
operations, if a few adhesions had been separated, or CA^en the 
slightest damage inflicted upon the peritoneum. Lawson Tait, 
whose emphatic pronouncements rightly carried great weight, 
wrote, ''When in doubt, drain." Doubt, in those early days, 
was the prevailing mental attitude and the result was, for a 
time, the almost constant employment of a tube. When a case 
"went wrong" if no drain had been introduced, the act of 
omission was held responsible for the disaster. The principles 
which underlie the use of drainage are now better understood, 
with the result that drainage of the abdomen has very largely 
fallen into disuse. When a drain is introduced into the abdomen, 
whether gauze or a tube be used, certain results are con- 
stantly obser^'ed. There is, for twelve to twenty-four hours, a 
fairly profuse discharge of a serous, perhaps slightly turbid, or 
blood-stained fluid. After this time, the quantity gradually 
lessens and the drain is then generally removed. If the drain, 
however, be kept in, suppuration follows, the result of an in- 



DRAINAGE AFTER ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 55 

evitable infection. Since a general infection of the peritoneal 
cavity does not occur, it is clear that the pus comes only from 
the lining membrane of the track. It has been shewn by ex- 
perimental work that the drainage material, whatever its nature, 
acts as an irritant. It is at once surrounded by the intestines 
and omentum from which a serous exudate occurs, and a local 
h3^per£emia is observed. Yates describes the changes thus: 
"As the inflammatory reaction increases a fibrinous exudate is 
formed and there is more intense local congestion and some 
oedema. The serosa loses its lustre and is finally covered with 
opaque plastic fibrin. This fibrinous surface persists in the 
presence of smooth drains for at least seven days. Gauze, how- 
ever, acts differently. The fibrin becomes incorporated in its 
meshes, followed by an ingrowth of granular tissue, so that, when 
the gauze is removed, instead of leaving a smooth, yellowish 
surface, it is rough and bleeding, with fibrin and superficial tags 
of granulation tissue still clinging to the more superficial portion 
of the gauze. " 

If the track left be examined after a gauze drain has been 
removed, some fine filaments of the cotton fibre are found. 
Infection of the canal filled by the drain is unfailing; it may be 
due to organisms escaping from the intestine, or to others which 
travel downwards from the skin. The organism most con- 
stantly found is the staphylococcus albus. Clark found, at 
autopsy, that infected pockets occasionally were found close 
to the drain track, and also that the organisms causing the 
peritonitis might persist in the drain track after the}^ had dis- 
appeared from the general peritoneal cavity. 

If, in dogs, a drain be introduced into the general peritoneal 
cavity and in eighteen or twenty-four hours a coloured solution 
be injected through a needle passed into the peritoneum just 
below the ensiform cartilage, none of the fluid passes out at the 
site of the drain, even when the general cavity is filled to its 
utmost capacity. A tube, it is clear, does not drain the general 
peritoneal cavity at all after this lapse of time. If during 



56 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

an operation for, say, general peritonitis due to appendicitis, 
tubes be placed in both the iliac fossse, and another through a 
median incision into the pouch of Douglas, a stream of salt so- 
lution introduced into the general peritoneum will flow from 
all the openings. Temporary drainage of the peritoneum is 
therefore clearly possible. Experience shews, however, that 
all drain materials are speedly isolated and cease then to do 
more than drain the cavity which they themselves have produced. 
Prolonged drainage of the general peritoneal cavity is a physical 
impossibility. The. tube or wick of gauze is almost immedi- 
ately isolated and it is not long before it is encapsulated. It 
provokes a copious thin discharge from the serous surfaces which 
surround it, forming, as Yates terms it, "a potential cavity 
which is speedily converted into an actual cavity ' ' by the action 
of a plastic fibrinous exudate, forming encapsulating adhesions. 
Yates, after a very comprehensive discussion of the whole 
question, comes to the following conclusions : 

Drainage of the general peritoneal cavity is physically and 
physiologically impossible. 

The relative encapsulation of the drain is immediate. 

The absolute encapsulation occurs early (less than six hours 
in dogs) and can be retarded but not prevented. 

The serous external discharge is an exudate due to the 
irritation of contiguous peritoneum by the drain. 

There is a similar inward current from the potential into the 
general cavity. 

This external exudate diminishes remarkably with the 
formation of encapsulating adhesions. 

These adhesions, under approximately normal conditions, 
form about any foreign body. 

Their extent and density depend on the degree and the 
duration of the irritation of this body. 

Primarily fibrinous, these adhesions become organised in a 
few days (three days in dogs). 

If the irritation persists, they become progressively more 
mature fibrous tissue. 

After irritation ceases, their disappearance depends princi- 



AFTER-TREATMENT. 57 

pally upon a mechanical factor, — the ability of the involved 
surfaces to pull themselves or to be pulled loose. 

Drains should be the least irritating, and should be gradually 
and finally removed as soon as possible. 

Irrigation through drains is futile to prevent adhesions, and 
dangerous. 

After a drain is inserted, all intra-abdominal movements 
should be reduced to a minimum. 

As soon as the drain is removed, intra-abdominal activity 
should be stimulated, to aid in the disappearance of the re- 
maining adhesions. 

Peritonitis, if not too severe, possibly aids in the rapidity of 
the encapsulation of the drain. 

A drain in the presence of infection is deleterious to peritoneal 
resistance, and should only be introduced to exclude more 
malign influences. 

Postural methods, unless destined to facilitate encapsulation, 
are both futile and harmful, as far as drainage is concerned. 

Peritoneal drainage must be local, and unless there is some- 
thing to be gained by rendering an area extraperitoneal, or by 
making from such an area a safe path of least resistance leading 
outside the body, there is, aside from hemostasis, no justification 
for its use. 

It is therefore clear that the use of gauze or rubber protective, 
or tubes of an}^ sort left in the abdominal wound, should be 
restricted to those cases where it is necessary to exercise pressure 
to arrest bleeding ; or to isolate a part of the peritoneum when a 
known infection has occurred; or when the escape of a fluid 
along a track isolated from, the peritoneum is anticipated (as 
in choledochotomy) ; or for temporary drainage of the general 
peritoneal cavity. The length of time during which drainage 
of the general peritoneum is possible has not been accurately 
reckoned, but it is almost certainly very brief, probably not 
more than twelve hours as a maximum. 

AFTER-TREATMENT. 

No small part of the success of all abdominal operations 
depends upon the after-treatment. 



58 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



As soon as the patient is returned to bed he is ahowed 
to lie quite fiat or witli one small pillow for an hour or 
two, until the effect of the anaesthetic is passing away. 
Then two or three or more pillows are given and the patient 
is propped up with them. After all operations upon the 
stomach and after some upon the gall-bladder, the patients 
are almost in a sitting position. This is generally far 
more comfortable for them, and does much to prevent 




.\ 



Fig. 13. — Position of a patient in bed immediately after the performance of 
gastro-enterostoni5\ As soon as the patient conies round from the anaesthetic 
he is propped up in this way. 

the backache which many patients after abdominal opera- 
tions complain of as their chief trouble. 

Thirst is sometimes distressing within the first twenty- 
four hours ; it is relieved by allowing the patient to flush 
the mouth out frequently with water, soda water, or Giess- 
hiibler water. Nothing is given to drink until the feeling 
of sickness due to the anaesthetic is over, but after that 
there is no restriction as to quantity. A few sips of 



AFTER-TREATMENT. 59 

water are given at first, tentativel}" ; if these are retained 
and there is no nausea, the quantity is rapidly increased, 
and after twenty-four to forty-eight hours a couple of 
pints of fluid may be given during the daytime. I do 
not think there is need to stint the patient in the matter 
of fluids, as was at one time the universal practice. It 
seems to me not improbable that death took place in some 
of the cases I saw^ in my earliest experience, literally from 
starvation. There is no harm done, so far as I have been able 
to determine, by allowing the patient to drink freely, provided 
the risks of vomiting are over. The need for fluid is greater in 
patients who are weak and in much enfeebled health. In old 
patients, especially in malignant cases, I have often given a cup 
of tea, or some other favourite drink, to the patient within three 
or four hours of the completion of the operation of gastro- 
enterostomy, or partial gastrectomy, and nothing but good has 
resulted. 

After the first twenty-four hours, milk, soups, and a 
little jelly or pudding may be given. The giving of solid 
food I generally delay for five to ten days, according to 
the condition of the patient and the nature of the opera- 
tion. A few grapes or the juice of an orange may be 
given from the first, and, as a rule, are much appreciated. 
In the choice of fluid food during the first few days I 
leave much to the patient, giving her or him those things 
which by earlier questioning we have found to be liked. 

If fluid food is withheld, as was formerly the custom, 
the amount of urine excreted is often ver}^ small. In a 
long series of cases operated upon in the Leeds Infirmary 
during the time I was a resident officer, I found that 
between ten and twelve ounces was the average amount 
passed in the first twenty-four hours. The excretion of 
urine is always diminished after an}^ abdominal operation, 
but over a pint should be passed in the first twenty-four 
hours. 



6o ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

I do not allow the catheter to be passed, as a rule. 
If there is difficulty in voiding urine a hot fomentation 
will generallv be helpful. If no urine is passed at the end 
of twenty-four hours or if the patient is uncomfortable, 
the catheter is passed, with all the usual precautions. Some 
patients are found to pass a small quantity of urine, 
three or four ounces, frequentl}^ It will generally be 
found that they have an overdistended bladder, and cathe- 
terism will then be necessary. 

An exact record should be kept of the amount of urine 
passed until all danger from the operation is over. 

Rectal injections of saline solution are given almost 
invariably for twenty-four or forty-eight hours, until, that 
is to say, the patient is getting a fair quantit}^ of fluid 
b}^ the mouth. I do not give an}^ form of nutrient enema. 
Salt and water, one teaspoonful to a pint, with or without 
brandy, forms the usual enema. In quantit}^ I give ten ounces 
or more as seems desirable, every three or four hours. Glucose 
may occasionally be given in the enema. It is water that is 
needed by the patient, and anything else given in a so-called 
nutrient enema is of no value. 

Among the most important recent additions to the after- 
treatment of patients submitted to abdominal operations of any 
kind, the method of proctoclysis introduced by J. B. Alurphy 
is undoubtedly the chief. The abundant supply of fluid by the 
rectum alters the whole aspect of a difficult and dangerous case; 
the appearance of the patient is greatly improved: the lips are 
red and the eyes clear; the skin acts freely; thirst is lessened or 
abolished and the pulse keeps full and slow. The amount of 
fluid which can be absorbed in this way is very remarkable. I 
have on many occasions administered 15 pints or more within 
twenty-four hours. Probably this is more than is necessary or de- 
sirable; 10 or 12 pints should be all that is needed. If a large 
quantity is absorbed the face and hands may become oedematous. 
The strain thrown upon the kidneys, especially if they are not fully 



AFTER-TREATMENT. 6l 

competent, by the administration of so much water and so large 
a dose of salt, may be a factor not always to be ignored; never- 
theless in my own experience nothing but good has resulted from 
this lavish administration of fluids. It is possible that the colon 
ceases to absorb when the needs of the body are satisfied. 

The mode of administration best adapted for the purpose is 
that originally introduced by Murphy: there have been several 
subsequent modifications by other surgeons, but no improve- 
ments. The cannula which lies in the rectum should reach a 
little above the sphincter; it should have a slightly bulbous end 
with large holes. The size of the holes, as Murphy insists, is of 
the first importance; for through ample apertures not only can 
the saline flow into the rectum easily, but flatus can escape 
through them, or the saline be forced back in an effort of strain- 
ing, so that no fluid is expelled by the side of the tube. More- 
over large openings are less likely to be blocked by faeces than 
small ones. The fluid is introduced approximately at the rate 
of I pint an hour for the first six or eight hours, then more slowly 
if the patient's needs are being satisfied. I employ the method 
in a great many cases : indeed, in all of any formidable character. 
(See "Lancet," August 17, 1907.) 

Every twenty-four hours the rectum is washed out with 
a pint of hot water and soap. If flatus cannot be passed 
freely, a tablespoonful of turpentine is added to the enema. 
I find an enema of two ounces of glycerine and two ounces of 
water useful occasionally. The majority of abdominal cases are 
given one ounce of paraffin night and morning on the second and 
subsequent days. 

The rectal tube is passed occasionally if thought necessary. 

In the great majority of cases no bandage is needed. Three 
or four narrow layers of gauze are applied over the wound in all 
its length. Over these a large square piece of gauze is placed, 
and its edges are sealed to the skin by the application of a formalin 
and gelatin mixture. One ounce of gelatin sterilised by heating 
to 100° C. oh three successive days in a test-tube is warmed until 



62 ABDOMINAL OPER.4TIONS. 

it is liquid. To it are then added 20 miniins of a 4 per cent, 
solution of formalin, and as quickly as possible the solution is 
spread over the edges of the gauze, where it speedily "sets." 
The dressing never slips. 

The administration of morphine after an operation is rarely 
necessar}' nowadaA'S. More especially since the introduction 
of Crile's method ("anoci-association") the pain after any opera- 
tion has been quite inconsiderable. As a rule when this method 
is carefully and scrupulously carried out, the patient complains 
of no pain, unless he moves suddenly or coughs violently. If he 
Hes tranquilh^ in bed he is free from pain, and looks quite himself. 
In some cases, however, especially for example in secondary gall- 
bladder cases, the injection can hardly be done thoroughly, and 
some relief from post-operative pain may be urgently requested. 
I never withhold morphine if the patient is suffering. In the 
old days we w^ere all afraid of morphine, and surgery was often 
cruel. An injection of ^ or yl, gr. of morphine on the night after 
the operation will give a peaceful night and the patient wakes 
refreshed, and cheered b}^ the repose he has had. I do not think 
that this amount of the drug causes any flatulent distension of 
the intestines ; indeed I think by relaxing a spasm of the bowel 
it may aid in the exptdsion of gas. It is rare for a second dose of 
morphine to be necessary: but in old people who are apt to be 
wakeful there is no reason against its administration. Aspirin 
will occasionally give much relief from pain, and I have in former 
days very often administered it in 10 gr. doses. These are ques- 
tions which each surgeon will decide for himself. My own chief 
desire is to rob surgery of its terrors. Crile's method may prove 
to be the most powerful agent in effecting this; morphine and 
aspirin are useful auxiliaries in the severer cases. To give com- 
fort to the patient by these means is not in the slightest degree 
to add to his dangers. It was the repeated administration of 
opium and morphine in the olden days that led to these drugs 
being discredited. Today we use them sparingly, but to the 
great advantage of our patients. 



AFTER-TREATMENT. 63 

If there should be trouble from flatulence, and as a rule this 
is the only trouble that is met with, relief may be gained by the 
hypodermic administration of yij,j gr. of eserine sulphate. 

In those serious cases of intestinal obstruction in which the 
over-distension of the bowel has almost paralysed the muscular 
coats of the bowel, great, indeed magical, relief may occasionally 
follow the injection of pituitary extract. The infundibular ex- 
tract has been shewn by Blair Bell ("Brit. Med. Jour.," Dec. 4, 
1909) to possess several properties: it raises the blood-pressure, it 
excites powerful contractions in the pregnant, puerperal and 
menstruating uterus, and it acts upon the intestinal muscle. In 
relation to the last of these Blair Bell writes: "I have now used 
this extract for intestinal paresis in a fair number of cases — fortu- 
nately with modern methods this complication is not so common 
as it used to be — and I have never known it to fail ; " and again : 
' ' I myself venture to think that in infundibular extract we have 
at last found a reliable agent for the treatment of paralytic dis- 
tension of the bowel." I have tried this substance in perhaps a 
dozen cases and my experience of it is that it is without doubt a 
valuable, if a capricious, remedy. It would appear that the 
greater the need for the remedy the more speedily and power- 
fully will it act. In cases of slight distension it has seemed to 
have no effect upon the intestine though the blood-pressure has 
been raised and the pulse rate lessened. In one case of intestinal 
obstruction operated upon after four days of complete closure of 
the gut, which had become enormously dilated, the patient who 
had a large and flabby heart died within a few minutes of the 
administration of the usual dose of the infundibular extract. 
Dr. Blair Bell subsequently warned me of the danger of giving 
the drug to a patient whose heart was in this condition. 

The time during which the patient is kept in bed varies 
of course considerably, not only in different operations, but 
in different patients upon whom the same kind of operation 
has been performed. I find that it is a general custom 
to keep all patients in bed much longer than is necessary. 



64 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

If all is going well, the sooner a patient is up the better. 
A patient, for example, after the removal of an appendix 
may be out of bed in six or seven days and may return 
to light work in a fortnight. A feeble patient, after the 
operation of gastro-enterostomy, — an old man with malignant 
disease, for example, — may be allowed to sit up in a chair 
on the fourth or fifth day. One patient, a medical man 
upon whom I performed gastro-enterostomy and chole- 
cystotomy, was seeing patients on the fifteenth day after 
his operation, and, though this was done without my sanc- 
tion, no ill effects followed. In all cases, however, the 
discretion of the surgeon must decide the practice in each 
individual case; no hard-and-fast rule can be laid down. 
All that can be positively said is that, provided all symp- 
toms are favourable, there should be no unnecessary delay 
in allowing the' patient to sit up. 

If a patient is much enfeebled and wasted, I frequently 
order massage to the extremities within the first few days 
after operation. This is found most grateful to the patient, 
and prevents a feeling of extreme weakness when he is 
allowed to get out of bed. 

During the whole of the time that the patient remains 
under treatment after operation the most scrupulous atten- 
tion is bestowed upon the toilet of the mouth. The teeth 
are brushed frequently and some fragrant mouth-wash is 
used as often as possible. If the mouth is kept clean, the 
feeling of thirst is less noticeable. All fluid foods given are 
sterilised, both before and after the operation. ' 

When drainage is employed, the tubes will need daily 
attention. If a drainage-tube is left in the wound, to drain 
the gall-bladder or the common duct, its outer end is fitted 
into a bottle of about ten ounces capacity which is jfixed by a 
safety-pin to the side of the dressing. During the first few 
hours bile may flow in very small quantity, especially in cases 
where the action of the hepatic cells has been in part sup- 



AFTER-TREATMENT, 65 

pressed by the tension and sepsis in the common and hepatic 
ducts, as a result of the occlusion of the duct by a stone. 
The bile that first flows may be muddy or turbid, but after 
a few days the bile flows in greater quantity and it becomes 
gradually clearer. The tube will then be removed if the 
stitch with which it is fixed has loosened. 

If gauze packing has been used as a barrier around the 
gall-bladder in cases of acute cholecystitis, or elsewhere, it may 
be left until it has loosened — say, for eight days. Its removal 
then is almost painless. If the condition which has necessitated 
drainage is septic and oft'ensive, a split rubber tube will per- 
haps have been introduced ; this tube may be left in several days 
and shortened daily before its complete removal. Into the 
track left after its removal sterile vaseline or paraffin may be 
poured. 

REFERENCES. 
Yates, "Surgery, Gynaecology and Obstetrics," December, 1905, p. 473 (where 

a full list of references is given). 
Clark, "American Journal of Obstetrics," 1S97, PP- 481. 650. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS OF ABDOMINAL 
OPERATIONS. 

There are chiefly six: 

1. Peritonitis. 

2. Liing complications. 

3. Parotitis. 

4. Post-operative haeniatemesis. 

5. Acute dilatation of the stomach. 

6. Phlebitis and thrombosis. 

Peritonitis. — The occurrence of peritonitis after abdom- 
inal operations has almost been abolished by the careful 
methods of modern surgery. In some cases, however, the 
risk of it cannot be avoided, for the operation ma}^ involve 
the handling of the lumen of the stomach or intestine 
which is septic, and from which the escape of organisms 
cannot w^hoUy be prevented. 

The careful preparation before operation will often effect 
a great reduction in the number and virulence of organisms 
in the stomach and the upper part of the intestine, as 
is elsewhere pointed out, but an adequate preparation is 
not always possible — as, for example, in cases of malignant 
disease of the stomach or in any form of acute disease 
of the stomach or intestine requiring urgent operation. The 
methods of preparation, the use of clamps to prevent leak- 
age of contents in such operations, and the details of an 
aseptic operation faithfully observed have, however, done 
much to prevent the occurrence of any septic infection of 
the peritoneum. Nevertheless, peritonitis does occur, and is 
perhaps the most serious, if the least frequent, of all the 
complications of an abdominal operation. 

66 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 6/ 

It has long been a matter of earnest enquiry among 
surgeons as to whether it would not be possible, by some 
preventive inoculation, to render a patient more capable 
of withstanding the infection, during an operation, with 
any septic organisms. Experiments have been performed 
in the hope of discovering some means by which the danger 
of a peritoneal infection can be greatly diminished, and 
among these means prominence must be given to the pro- 
duction of hyperleucocytosis. The first investigators were 
Loewy and Richter, who attempted, by the injection of 
albumoses, especially spermin, to produce a hyperleucocy- 
tosis, and thereby to make the animals capable of resisting 
infection by pneumococci. Jakob, by the intravenous and 
subcutaneous injection of albumose into rabbits, made them 
proof against pneumococci and the organisms of mouse 
septicaemia. It was noticed that after each injection a 
hypoleucocytosis occurred first, to be followed speedily by 
hyperleucocytosis. If the infection was brought about 
during the time w^hen the leucocytes were diminished, the 
animals without exception died; if, on the other hand, 
the infection was introduced during the time when the 
leucocytes were increased, the course of the disease was 
influenced in the most favourable way. Hahn succeeded 
in shewing that during the stage of artificial hyperleu- 
cocytosis, produced by nuclein and tuberculin, the blood 
of men and dogs possessed a higher bactericidal value 
than normal blood. Hofbauer, in Vienna, has obtained fa- 
vourable results in undoubted puerperal septicaemia by the 
administration of five or six grains of nuclein by the mouth. 
After reviewing these facts Professor von ^Mikulicz, from 
whom they are quoted, writes (" Lancet," July 2, 1904): 

"The question arises whether artificial hyperleucocytosis 
may not be of value in practice as a prophylactic. Ac- 
cording to the above-mentioned experiments of Loewy and 
Richter, of Jakob and Halm, one cannot exclude the pos- 



68 ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 

sibility that, by a parth^ anticipated mobilisation of great 
masses of leucocytes, the latter may overcome the bacteria 
which had obtained entrance in the first instance in 
relatively small masses with greater ease than if the leuco- 
cytes delay their attack in force until the number and 
virulence of the bacteria in the tissues have markedly 
increased." 

A series of experiments conducted by J\Iiyake and au- 
thorised by Professor ]\likulicz resulted in evidence that 
the injection of nuclein in animals prior to the infection 
of the peritoneal cavity by organisms had an undoubted 
effect in lessening the occurrence of peritonitis. Some of 
these experiments ' ' consisted in performing a laparotomy 
and forcing through an opening in the stomach or intestine 
as much of their contents as could be obtained from the 
immediate neighbourhood of the incision. Of five control 
animals which had not been previously prepared, four died 
from peritonitis between five and sixteen hours after the 
operation. The fifth became extremely ill, but finall}' 
recovered, but the amount of intestinal contents which 
was transferred to the peritoneum was less in this case 
than in the others. Ten animals were prepared. These 
recovered without exception. The preparation consisted in 
three intraperitoneal injections of nucleic acid, two injections 
of neutralised nucleic acid. In each case laparotomy was 
performed seven hours after the injection. These experi- 
ments are such as to excite our interest in the highest 
degree, for by subcutaneous injections of nucleic acid it 
was possible to raise the resistance of the peritoneum to 
such an extent that even a considerable quantit}^ of in- 
testinal contents could be placed in the peritoneal cavity 
without causing damage, whilst without previous treatment 
an acute, rapidly fatal peritonitis followed almost without 
exception. This opens out a new field for the surgeon 
in preventing post-operative peritonitis." 

In adopting the results of these experiments for the 
purposes of operations upon man, Mikulicz has administered 
fifty cubic centimetres of neutralised nucleic acid, 2 per cent., 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 69 

and has finally settled upon allowing a period of twelve 
hours to elapse between the injection and the operation. 

In view of the novelty and importance of this subject, 
I may be permitted to quote the following summary of 
his experiments from Professor Mikulicz's article: 

"The number of my experiments is not sufficient to 
permit me to form a definite judgment upon these points 
and to give an unguarded reply. We cannot, in the case 
of man, as we do in that of the lower animals when in- 
troducing infective material into the abdominal cavity, 
give a certain multiple of the minimum lethal dose in 
order to see how far a preventive treatment has succeeded. 
We set all our apparatus in action, in spite of preven- 
tive inoculation, to reduce infection to the minimum. Since 
this method fortunately succeeds in the majority of cases, 
even without preventive inoculation, in guarding the patients 
from a fatal peritonitis, a small number of satisfactory 
results do not prove much; but, on the other hand, one 
or two unsatisfactory results most certainly cannot condemn 
the method, for this method gives not absolute certainty 
like a specific immunisation, but only increases the natural 
immunity, and this may, in certain circumstances, even 
when increased to thirty-fold, nevertheless be insufficient. 
I have, however, the impression that the cases hitherto 
treated have given more favourable results, not only in 
the number of cases that recovered, but also in the progress 
of the individual cases, than the analogous cases of earlier 
date where the operation was performed without this prepa- 
ration. In 10 cases of resection of the stomach for car- 
cinoma, 9 recovered, 6 of them without the slightest com- 
plication. The progress was marked by a smoothness 
that was quite exceptional before this treatment w'as adopted. 
Two cases which presented exceptional difficulty in the 
removal of the carcinoma did undoubtedly within twenty- 
four hours develop peritonitis, with a pulse up to 160, 
which, according to our usual experience, foretold the most 
dismal prognosis. The patients fortunately survived this 
peritonitis. In the ninth case which recovered, the progress 
was disturbed from the fourth day by broncho-pneumonia. 



70 



ABDOMINAL OPERATION. 



The tenth case died; after seven days of uninterrupted 
progress he developed pneumonia, to which he succumbed 
three weeks after the operation. Of the remaining opera- 
tions I should like to refer first to 22 cases of gastro- 
enterostomy and entero-anastomosis, 12 of which were for 
carcinoma. Of these cases, 19 recovered and 3 died. In 
all 3 cases death was most certainly not due to post- 
operative peritonitis, but in i case to perforation of an 
ulcerated carcinoma of the stomach two weeks after the 
operation; in another case, to continued haemorrhage from 
a carcinoma of the stomach sixteen days after the opera- 
tion; and in the third, to peritonitis arising ' from a tuber- 
culous granuloma in the intestine four weeks after opera- 
tion. Of 6 cases of resection of the intestines at one 
operation, 4 recovered and 2 died. In i case death oc- 
curred from collapse on the second day after a very pro- 
longed operation of double resection for carcinoma; in 
the other case, where the injury was a bullet wound, death 
took place on the tenth day from hemorrhage from the 
vena cava. In neither of the cases was there any peri- 
tonitis. One case of opening the stomach and stretching 
the cardiac orifice, performed on account of spasm, recov- 
ered. So also did 6 cases of operation on the bile-duct, 
7 other operations upon abdominal organs without open- 
ing the intestinal tract, and 3 extra-abdominal operations. 
The last to be mentioned are two cases of nephrectomy, 
which were treated before the operation with nucleic acid. 
In both cases, in order to remove the suppurating kidney, 
the peritoneum had to be widely opened. One case re- 
covered; the other died twelve days after the operation 
from hsemorrhage from the renal artery. In this case, 
too, there was no peritonitis. We therefore have 45 lapa- 
rotomies in which the abdominal cavity was exposed to 
infection by the contents of the stomach or intestines or 
by some other infectious secretion; 38 of these cases re- 
covered, and in none of the 7 fatal results was peritonitis 
the cause of death." 

In addition to these measures there are others which 
have been used for the purpose of warding off an attack 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 7 1 

of peritonitis or of combating its effects in the earlier 
stage. The chief among them is the inoculation with 
antistreptococcic serum. The use of this has been vaunted 
by Kader, but the general experience of surgeons tends to 
shew that it is of very little value, if, indeed, it has any 
value at all. 

The free lavage of the peritoneum with hot saline solu- 
tion, of which a large quantity is left within the abdomen 
when the wound is closed, has been shewn to lessen the 
likelihood of peritoneal infection, and to render the peri- 
toneum better able to deal with the organisms which attack 
it. It has become a practice among many surgeons of 
great experience, ]^Iikulicz among them, to employ this 
drenching of the peritoneum more and more. It is not 
a method which has ever appealed to me, and it is not 
my practice to flush the peritoneum except in infected 
cases where there are gross particles either of septic material, 
lymph, or of food stuffs. 

Peritonitis is to be suspected when, after operation, 
pain, instead of subsiding, graduall}' becomes more and 
more intense, when the abdomen becomes prominent and 
tympanitic, and the intestines distended and motionless. 
In such circumstances the pulse gives the surest indication 
of the patient's condition. When the pulse rises steadily 
in frequency and its quality becomes progressively poorer, 
a most serious condition is present or impending. AVhen 
the pulse-rate is below loo there is, as a rule, no cause 
for anxiety; but with a pulse-rate rising gradually from 
1 20 to 140 or even higher, in the absence of chest com- 
plications, the existence of peritonitis may be confidently 
predicted. The patient, as a rule, looks anxious and care- 
worn and wears a frowning expression. Cyanosis and cold, 
clammy extremities indicate approaching dissolution. As 
a rule, there is some elevation of temperature in the early 
stages ; but later the temperature may be normal or subnormal. 



72 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

It is a factor of little importance. The patient lies with 
his hands above his head and his knees drawn up ; straight- 
ening the thighs causes an increase in the abdominal pain. 
A^omiting and hiccough are sometimes persistent. An ounce 
or two of fluid, perhaps stained black by digested blood, 
may be vomited every few minutes, and, though lavage 
relieves this symptom for a time, it is almost certain to 
return. As the toxaemia deepens the patient gradually 
becomes numbed to his pain, and will often express himself 
as feeling much easier; this is a bad sign. The skin is 
dr}^ until near the end, Avhen a cold sweat covers the 
patient. The tongue is dry and coated, and the secretions 
all are scanty. It is, however, the steadily increasing 
rapidity in the pulse-rate, together with a steady fall in 
the character of the pulse, that gives most cause for anxiety. 

As soon as the indications of a commencing peritonitis 
are observed, measures must at once be taken to secure 
a free action of the bowels. If a copious evacuation of 
flatus or fasces can be compelled, the great probability 
is that the patient can be saved. Unfortunately, the ad- 
ministration of any aperient by the mouth is little likely 
to be of use, for the drug will often be vomited within 
a few minutes. Enemata containing turpentine or enemata 
of oil introduced high into the colon are the chief measures 
upon which reliance must be placed. One of the things 
most needed in therapeutics is an aperient that can be 
administered hypodermically. Sulphate of eserine in y^^ gr. 
to jr^jj gr. doses may be employed or pituitary extract, as first 
advised by Blair Bell. 

Is it worth while, in cases of general peritonitis, to 
reopen the abdomen and to attempt to cleanse and to 
drain it? The infection which underlies the symptoms 
mentioned above is so universal that any operative treat- 
ment would be in itself a most hazardous procedure, when 
applied to a patient who has already borne the strain 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 73 

of a serious operation. In the early stage of these cases 
one has hope of being able to cut short the disease by 
brisk purgation. When this has failed, the patient's con- 
dition is such that little hope of relief can be entertained. 
There are cases, however, — though in my opinion they 
are few, — when a reopening of the abdomen is not only justi- 
fied, but is absolutely necessary if the patient is to be saved. 
These are the cases where the infection can be traced with 
reasonable certainty to a definite source; such as, for example, 
leakage from the giving way of an anastomosis accomplished by 
the Murphy button or by suture, or soiling due to the escape of 
infective material from the intestine during the operation. In 
such circumstances the continued infection must be stopped by 
appropriate measures of repair, and the soiled parts must 
be thoroughly cleansed, and, if need be, drainage must be 
established. Should a generalised post-operative peritonitis 
occur, the treatment does not differ from that of peritonitis due 
to an appendix, a perforated ulcer, or any other lesion, — namely, 
suppression of the cause, little or no irrigation and no free hand- 
ling of intestines ; Fowler's posture should be adopted to facilitate 
respiration and to collect fluid in the pelvis and thus preserve ' 
the most absorptive portion of the serosa. Proctoclysis here is 
invaluable and gastric lavage may be necessary. 

Lung Complications. — Chest complications formerly oc- 
curred frequently after abdominal operations. In the surgery 
of the present day their occurrence, though greatly dimin- 
ished, is still far greater than it should be. 

The following lung complications are known to follow 
any abdominal operation: pneumonia; pleurisy; bronchitis; 
oedema of lungs ; abscess of lung ; massive collapse ; pulmonary 
embolism ; gangrene of the lung. Any one of these may follow 
a simple or a serious operation, a short, or a prolonged one. The 
cause of the lung implication has been closely investigated, and 
a variety of explanations have been offered. The suggestion 
was long ago put forward with confidence that the anaesthetic 



74 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

was the responsible agent. The chilling and irritating effect of 
ether upon the mucous membrane of the respiratory tract 
resulted in a profuse secretion from the inflamed surface. The 
aspiration of saliva has also been blamed. It was not long, how- 
ever, before it was found that all these chest troubles might fol- 
low upon operations which were performed under local anees- 
thesia alone. 

It is well known that for a few days after any ab- 
dominal operation the wound may feel stiff and sore, though 
it is not actually painful. The taking of a deep breath or 
the act of coughing causes a sudden "stitch" in the wound, 
and the patient feels as though a free effort at coughing 
would tear the wound edges apart. It was suggested then 
that the immobilisation of the abdominal muscles, in the 
unconscious protection of the wound area by the patient, 
resulted in an accumulation of the bronchial secretions in 
the lung. A deep breath was not taken; the breathing 
remained thoracic in type, and the air-passages were not 
cleared in the act of coughing. The lung then became 
irritated and waterlogged by retained secretions. In favour 
of this suggestion is the fact that all forms of chest in- 
volvement are more frequent after operations performed 
in the upper abdomen. Statistics from Korte's clinic shew lo per 
cent, pulmonary complications in operations above the umbilicus 
and 6.6 per cent, in operations where the abdomen was opened 
below the umbilicus. W. Pasteur ("Lancet," Oct., 1910) believes 
massive collapse of a lung after abdominal operations to be a di- 
rect result of reflex inhibition of the diaphragm causing deflation of 
the pulmonary bases. He writes: "Whenever — whether as the 
result of paralysis or of temporary reflex inhibition of muscular 
action — the distending force acting on the lungs becomes less than 
that of the elastic and muscular agencies which tend to cause its 
contraction, these latter, so to speak, take charge, with the result 
that the affected portion of the lung rapidly empties itself of its 
contained air." It is quite possible that in patients operated 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 75 

upon for conditions in the upper abdomen pleurisy is often the 
result of a post-operative inflammatory reaction extending to the 
diaphragm and pleura. 

A factor which is, without question, one of great im- 
portance is the chilling of the patient before, during, and 
after the operation. It was, at one time, the custom in 
many hospitals to send all the patients to the bath on 
their arrival. After the bath, a thin cotton shirt w^as 
given to them — no matter what form of clothing had been 
worn on admission. Furthermore, during the operation, 
in a room perhaps not overwarm, a considerable part of 
the patient's body was exposed, and if the cleansing of 
the skin were done by a house-surgeon fond of a splash, 
a pint or two of lotion was allowed to run down under- 
neath the patient. A thinly clad patient, most of whose 
abdomen was exposed, was, therefore, lying on a cold, 
damp table for perhaps an hour — a most unsatisfactory 
condition of things. 

The patient should have warm clothing on arrival; 
before the operation he should be clad in a suit of gamgee 
pajamas ; as little of the abdomen as possible (though as 
much as is necessary) should be exposed; the operation 
room should be well warmed; if necessary, the table should 
be a hot-water table ; operations should be done expedi- 
tiously. There should, moreover, never be undue exposure 
or handling of viscera, so that no unnecessary shock may 
be caused. 

In some cases I feel sure that the cause of the lung 
implication is to be found in the inhalation of septic matter. 
This septic matter may come from the patient's own mouth, 
or it is conceivable that a dirty inhaler may be responsible 
for it. Of the necessity for cleanliness in both these direc- 
tions there is no further need to speak. 

In some cases the pneumonia has been proved to be 
due to embolism, the septic emboli being derived from 



76 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

the operation area. In operations upon the stomach or 
intestine in particular, thrombosis of veins may result from 
unduly rough handling or from infection of the wounds. 
Neatness and a certain dainty fastidiousness and the utmost 
cleanliness in all operations are things to be cultivated. 

There can be little doubt, I think, that in some cases 
the long continuance of the Trendelenburg position in 
pelvic operations is productive of harm. The viscera are 
pressed against the diaphragm, whose freedom of action 
is thereby limited. There is congestion of the lungs as 
a result of the gravitation of blood to the dependent parts. 
It is my custom to perform the early and late steps of 
any pelvic operation with the patient in the usual hori- 
zontal position. As soon as the Trendelenburg position is 
necessar\^, the table is altered b}^ the anesthetist in a 
moment; as soon as the pelvic part of the operation is 
completed, the table is again made horizontal. The patient,- 
therefore, remains the briefest possible time in this con- 
strained position. 

It has become a general custom, more especially among 
resident officers, to give intravenous saline injections to 
all patients who are suffering in any serious degree from 
shock. The custom has much to recommend it, but I 
am strongly disposed to think that it is not seldom provo- 
cative of harm, for, in some cases, when large quantities of 
fluid are injected, an acute oedema of the lung, with copious 
frothy expectoration, occurs. On postmortem examination 
of such cases it can be seen that there is an acute oedema 
of both lungs; the lungs, in fact, are waterlogged. Saline 
infusions are remedies we cannot afford to do without, 
but a little more discretion than seems to be generally 
customary should be exercised in their administration. 
Above all, it should be seen that the fluid injected is of 
proper temperature, that no air is allowed to get into 
the vein, and that the quantity injected does not exceed 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. ']'] 

three pints. As much as five or six pints have been fre- 
quently given; but I do not think that as much benefit 
results from one large injection as from two smaller ones 
given with an interval of twelve or twenty-four hours. 

Professor Mikulicz used to order all his patients, after ab- 
dominal operations, to breathe deeply for a few minutes 
two or three times daily in the belief that the tendency 
to stagnation in the lung bases is thereby relieved and 
broncho-pneumonia prevented. 

From the foregoing discussion it will be realised that, 
though the possible causes or influences giving rise to the 
lung complications after abdominal operations are many, 
it is not to any one of them that paramount importance 
can be attached. The surgeon's part, therefore, must be 
to safeguard his patient by all the means in his power 
from all these harmful influences ; and he will find that 
by so doing the risk of the occurrence of these most 
serious disasters will be greatly lessened, if not entirely 
abolished. 

The treatment of the lung complications following ab- 
dominal operations does not differ from that which is 
observed in the cases as they are ordinarily seen. 

I have come to place much reliance upon the frequent 
use of the steam inhaler with or without tincture of benzoin 
or other stimulant. The patient always expresses himself 
as much relieved by it, and a copious expectoration generally 
results from each use of the inhaler. A mixture contain- 
ing digitalis, vinum ipecacuanha, and carbonate of ammo- 
nium generally gives relief. In 5835 major operations at the 
Mayo Clinic pulrnonary complications occurred in 89 cases or 
.015 per cent. 

Bibergeil ("Archiv f. klin. Chir.," Bd. Ixxviii, Heft 2, and 
"Brit. Med. Journ.," Epitome, March 17, 1906, p. 41, No. 170) 
publishes the results of an analysis of 3,909 abdominal oper- 
ations, including those for strangulated and reducible hernia, 



78 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

practised in Korte's clinic, and points out what he concludes to 
be the most hkely causes of postoperative pneumonia in this 
class of cases. Notwithstanding the protection afforded by 
modern aseptic methods against peritoneal infection, this 
pulmonary complication occurs, it is stated, more frequently 
after laparotomy than after any other major operation. Pneu- 
monia followed in 135 of the collected cases, and presented in 
10 instances the croupous or lobar, in 98 the lobular, and in 
the remaining 27 the hypostatic form. Other complications, 
such as pulmonary embolism and abscess, bronchitis, pleurisy, 
and empyema, occurred in 147 other cases. In this study of 
the causes of pneumonia in abdominal surgery, the author finds 
that the occurrence of this complication is not influenced in any 
wa}^ b}^ the condition of the wound. Of 10 cases of the croupous 
and distinctly septic form of pneumonia, 8, so far as the seat of 
operation was concerned, were aseptic, and 2 only were septic. 
Careful study of the collected cases of postoperative pneumonia 
has led, he states, to rejection of the views that this complica- 
tion may be due to infection by way of the lymphatics, and to 
such causes as exposure to cold of the surface of the body or of 
the peritoneal cavity to abdominal irrigation, and to direct 
action of a general anaesthetic. The lobular form, or broncho- 
pneumonia, which is most frequently met with after laparotomy, 
is regarded as being usualh^ the result of autoinfection due to 
aspiration of secretions from the mouth and pharynx whilst 
the patient is under the full influence of an anaesthetic. It is 
pointed out that the interference with free breathing and ex- 
pectoration resulting from pain at the seat of operation and im- 
peded movements of the incised abdominal wall, must favour 
very much the development of lung disease after laparotomy, 
whilst the resistance to the inflammatory attack is in many 
cases much impaired in consequence of the enfeebled condition 
of the patient. In concluding, the author recommends, as suit- 
able prophylactic measures, thorough cleansing of the mouth and 
throat and irrigation of the stomach before the operation; a 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 79 

cautious administration of the anaesthetic, the patient's face 
being turned to one side to permit a free external flow of oral 
secretion ; prevention of chilling of the surface of the abdomen 
during and after the operation; the application of thick and 
warm compresses to the wound, and avoidance of tight bandag- 
ing; frequent change of the patient's position in bed during the 
after-treatment ; and as speedy a release from the recumbent 
posture as the state of the wound will allow. 

Parotitis. — An acute attack of inflammation in one or both 
parotid glands ma}^ follow upon an operation upon any 
abdominal organ. I feel sure that the frequency of this most 
trying complication is decidedly less than it was. 

In 1887, Stephen Paget collected the records of 10 1 cases, 
and investigating their causes, found that in — - 

10 cases parotitis arose after disease or injury of the urinary tract. 

18 " parotitis arose after disease or injury of the alimentary canal. 

23 " parotitis arose after disease or injury of the abdominal wall, peri- 
toneum or pelvic cellular tissue. 

50 " parotitis arose after disease or temporary derangement of the gen- 
erative organs. 

The preponderance in this series of cases following upon 
operations upon the ovaries was doubtless due to two facts, — 
one, that at the time these cases were recorded abdominal sur- 
gery was confined very largely to the pelvic organs ; the other, 
that the starvation of the patient was considered a necessary 
incident of success ; no drop of water was given, perhaps for 
days, and the mouth was parched, the tongue dry and hard. 
In those days the surgery of the stomach and gall-bladder was 
in its earliest infancy. Operations were few, and patients 
were not often fortunate enough to survive to develop parotitis. 

The time of the appearance of the inflammation is usually 
towards the end of the first week after operation, but cases 
are recorded in which the inflammation began at the end of six 
weeks. In about one-third of the recorded cases both glands 
have been aftected, the involvement of one preceding that of 
the other by two or three days, as a rule. 



8o ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 

The causes of secondar}^ parotitis remained long obscure. 
It was at first regarded merely as a A^ariety of mumps, or primary 
parotitis, until experience shewed that there were two very 
marked differences between them, — primar}^ parotitis being an 
infectious and non-suppurative disease, secondar}^ parotitis 
being non-infectious and prone to suppurate. Three chief 
theories have been held with regard to the nature of this disease. 

For able discussions of this subject see Dyball, "Annals of 
Surgery," vol. xl, p. 886, and Rupert Bucknall, "Lancet," vol. 
ii, 1905, p. 1 1 58, to both of whom I am indebted for some of 
the following particulars : 

I. The PycBmic or Embolic Theory. — This was the first of 
the theories to receive general approval. It was universally 
recognized at one time that secondar>^ parotitis occurred in as- 
sociation with operations where suppuration took place, and it 
was not unnaturally supposed that the incidence of this phe- 
nomenon was due to septic embolism of the parotid vessels, the 
infected clots being derived from the neighbourhood of the 
suppurating wound. But the objections to this view were soon 
recognised to be two, — secondary parotitis was known to follow 
operations where no obvious infection had occurred, when no 
evidence of thrombosis was present; and in fatal cases, even 
when there had been suppuration in the original wound, there 
was sometimes no sign of venous thrombosis, and no discoverable 
source there, or elsewhere, of septic emboli. 

Undoubted instances of pyemic infection of the parotid gland 
have occurred, but the glandular infection has only developed 
at a late stage of the disease and long after other parts have 
suffered. 

The known facts, therefore, with regard to secondary paro- 
titis were that it occurred apart from other pyaemic manifesta- 
tions in the great majority of cases ; that, in fatal cases, no source 
of infected emboli could be discovered; that in cases where 
metastasis undoubtedly occurred other parts than the parotid 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 8 1 

were affected, and were affected at an earlier stage. Bucknall 
writes : 

' ' More recently the question of embolic origin has been def- 
initely proved to be incorrect, for it has been shown by micro- 
scopic examination that the conditions present are different 
in secondary parotitis, and in parotitis of pysemic origin. In 
the former instance the process of inflammation begins around 
the ducts in the centres of the lobules, and, moreover, many 








Vii<g>jT|3 




-■viT 



-^-JSES.-,.iSi^-**'" 



Fig. 14. — Parotitis, early stage. Vessels normal; small duct blocked with 
debris; walls breaking down; tissue around inflamed and infiltrated with small 
round cells; large duct blocked with debris, containing organisms to high 
power; blood-vessel unaffected (Rupert Bucknall). 

lobules are simultaneously affected. In the latter the inflamma- 
tion begins around the arteries which run in the perilobular 
tissue and the inflamed mass is a single one, involving the area 
of gland-tissue supplied by the particular vessel which has 
become blocked with septic clot. " 

2. The Sympathetic or Reflex Theory. — This theory owes its 
origin, or at least its chief advocacy, to Stephen Paget. It 
rests upon a supposed sympathy existing between the parotid 



82 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS 



glands and the generative organs, and in support of it is quoted 
the known relationship existing between mumps and orchitis 
or ovaritis. Such a view^ as this, however, is not in accordance 
with modem pathological views. A closer investigation of the 
so-called "sympathetic" affections shews that it is infection, 
and infection alone, which is the cause of the acute inflamma- 
tory manifestations. The appearance of a theory such as this 
was perhaps not surprising at a time when, as I have said, 







Fig. 15. — Parotitis, more advanced. Infected ducts and adjacent central parts 
of lobule breaking down to form abscess cavities (Rupert Bucknall). 



almost all abdominal operators were concerned with the genera- 
tive organs of the female. 

3. The Duct-infection Theory. — The suggestion that secondary 
inflammation of the parotid was due to direct infection of the 
gland by the invasion of the duct by organisms from the mouth 
was made by Hanau and Pilliet in 1889. So good an account 
of this view is given by Bucknall that I take the liberty of 
quoting it in full: 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 



83 



They found on microscopical examination of sections of the 
parotid (i) that the ducts were choked with debris containing 
micro-organisms; and (2) that the inflammatory processes pres- 
ent invariably began around the ducts in the centre of each 
lobule and only spread later to the periphery of the lobule and 
the perilobular connective tissue in which the blood-vessels are 
situated. They concluded, therefore, that secondary' parotitis 
could not be of embolic origin, or else the inflammation would 




Fig. 16. — Parotitis, late stage. Gland tissue destroyed and replaced by in- 
flammatory products, which are breaking down to form abscess cavities; vessels 
not thrombosed or specially inflamed (Rupert Bucknall). 



have originated around the vessels, and that the fact that in- 
flammation began simultaneously in the centres of many lob- 
ules at once, pointed to an ascending infection of the ducts 
as the real source of the affection, — a conclusion which was 
further borne out by the actual presence of micro-organisms in 
the ducts themselves in such cases. 

Additional evidence of dift'erent kinds has been subsequently 
brought forward in support of this view. 



84 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

(i) Microscopic sections serve to show that in all cases of 
secondary parotitis the disease pursues the following course : (a) 
The ducts become blocked with debris containing micro-organ- 
isms, (b) Inflammation first begins in the centre of each lobule 
around the ducts, and at a point farthest away from the vessels. 
(c) Many lobules are simultaneously affected; they each be- 
come centralty necrosed and then, finally, by extension they fuse 
to form a multilocular abscess cavitv. 




Fig. 17. — Parotitis, late stage. Shewing multilocular abscesses in sites of ducts, 
and general small-cell infiltration of lobules (Rupert Bucknall). 

(2) Bacteriological examination, first carried out by Girode, 
has served to prove: (a) That several different kinds of or- 
ganisms may give rise to secondary parotitis, the commonest 
being the staphylococcus, the next frequent the pneumococcus, 
and after that the pneumobacillus, the typhoid bacillus, the colon 
bacillus, and the streptococcus, in order of frequency. (6) 
That on taking cultivations from the gland itself, the pus con- 
tained in it, the orifice of Stenson's duct, and the oral cavity 
respectively, the organisms found at each spot are invariably 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 85 

identical in each individual case, a fact which supports the con- 
clusion that the infection of the gland spreads from the mouth 
via the duct, (c) That the organism giving rise to secondary 
parotitis is by no means invariably the same as that giving 
rise to the primary disease during the course of which the 
attack of parotitis has arisen. Thus, in the cases complicating 
pneumonia the organism causing parotitis may be the pneu- 
mococcus or the staphylococcus ; in typhoid fever it may occa- 
sionally be the typhoid bacillus, but it is much more com- 
monly the staphylococcus or pneumococcus. In embolic par- 
otitis due to pyaemia, on the other hand, the organism in the 
parotid is invariably identical with that giving rise to the pri- 
mary disease and the abscesses in other parts of the body. 

Microscopical or bacteriological evidence of direct or ascend- 
ing infection has been brought forward by the following ob- 
servers: Girode (12 cases), Prantois (2 cases), Diaz, Swain, 
Bosquier, Morley, and Subkovski. Toupet, Testa, Subkovski 
and Fischel found the pneumococcus in the gland in cases of 
lobar pneumonia, and Janowski and Lehmann found the ty- 
phoid bacillus in cases of enteric fever. Girode, on the other 
hand, found the staphylococcus to be the cause of the parotid 
infection in a case of pneumococcus pneumonia, and the 
pneumobacillus to be present in the gland in a case of 
puerperal septicemia of streptococcus origin. Various observ- 
ers, moreover, have shown that parotitis complicating enteric 
fever is far more frequently due to the staphylococcus than 
the typhoid bacillus. 

Post-operative Haematemesis. — Hsematemesis which follows 
upon operations upon the stomach, and is obviously due 
to the improper or imperfect application of sutures in the 
formation of an anastomosis between the stomach and the 
duodenum and jejunum, is not considered in the following 
remarks. 

Post-operative hasmatemesis follows far more frequently 
upon operations involving the opening of the abdomen 



86 ABDOMINAL OPER-\TIOXS. 

than upon any other operations. It is true that cases 
of even fatal hgematemesis have occurred after operations 
upon the bladder or urethra, upon the head, and upon 
the extremities; but all these cases together do not, in 
number, form a tithe of those which are seen after abdom- 
inal operations. 

In the majority of instances heematemesis begins within 
twenty-four hours of the operation. The blood which is 
vomited has always been in the stomach a sufficient length 
of time to become partly digested, the result being that the 
vomit is always black. "Black vomit" is the name by 
which the condition is chiefly known by nurses. The pa- 
tient may or may not have suffered from ether or chloro- 
form sickness; but, whether he has or not, there is usually 
an inter^-al between the cessation of this and the com- 
mencement of the hsematemesis. As a rule, the amount 
vomited is small; there are rarely more than two to five 
ounces at a time. The characteristic condition is for an 
ounce or two to be vomited at frequent intervals. The 
vomit is often intensely acid, and bums the patient's mouth, 
throat, and lips. In many cases a broad, red mark on 
the chin or cheek will shew where the vomited fluid has 
run down to the basin, and the lips often become swollen, 
red, and very tender, for the patient makes little or no 
effort to expel the fluid, allowing it to trickle away from 
his mouth. 

The general condition of the patient is always bad. 
The aspect indicates a condition of profound depression. 
The pulse is small and rapid, the skin cold and moist, 
the limbs clammy with sweat. The temperature is often 
subnormal. There is, as a rule, a rapidly progressive col- 
lapse. Indeed, in the severest cases one cannot but feel 
that the patient is the victim of a profound toxaemia — 
that a poison of unusual virulence is killing him. Patients 
are often curiously sensitive to all impressions in the early 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 87 

Stage — their mental alertness is remarkable, but their com- 
ments soon become spasmodic and jerky, and mal a propos, 
and lethargy, dulness, and general inertia rapidly follow. 

In a very large number of the recorded cases a fatal 
issue has occurred. In a series of twenty-nine cases re- 
ferred to by Purves (" Edin. Med. Jour.," March, 1902) the 
death-rate was equivalent to 69 per cent., and this estimate 
is approximately that which is given by the majority of 
writers, though from my own experience I believe it to 
be a gross exaggeration. Heematemesis follows upon any 
abdominal operation, but is more especially to be looked 
for when the stomach, duodenum, or bile-passages are 
the seat of disease. The time of onset, though usually 
within the first forty-eight hours, may be delayed for as 
long as ten days. 

The cause of the h^matemesis is not definitely known. 
A great variety of theories have been suggested. Among 
them are the following: 

Firstly. — It has been suggested that the anesthetic is 
the cause of the bleeding. It is, however, an undoubted 
fact that precisely the same symptom may be observed 
when the operation has been performed under cocaine. 

Secondly. — Distinct injury to the stomach or duodenum 
is said to result in ulceration, from which the blood comes. 
In some cases an ulcer or several ulcers have been found 
on postmortem examination. It is suggested that the 
damage done to the stomach produces a local necrosis, 
and that the gastric juice then digests the slough, and an 
ulcer results. Kronlein, however, has shewn that, in order 
to produce ulcers ■ in this manner, several days must elapse 
between the time of the receipt of the injury and the 
time when an ulcer is found. Though this explanation 
may be acceptable for some cases, it cannot, therefore, 
apply to them all. 

Thirdly. — The suggestion put forth by von Eiselsberg — 



88 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

who, in 1899, first drew prominent attention to this symp- 
tom — was that injury to the omentum was the immediate 
cause. Rough handhng or twisting or Hgation of the 
omentum produced a thrombosis of the omental vessels 
followed by embolism in the wall of the stomach, and 
in consequence ulceration of the stomach resulted. Purves 
writes on this point: 

"In reference to the stomach, in particular, von Eisels- 
berg considers that, after ligature of the omental branch 
of the epiploic artery, the vessel becomes thrombosed and 
the thrombus extends back to the origin of the vessel. 
The vessels lie at right angles to one another, and he 
conceives that a portion of the thrombus projecting into 
the epiploic may be swept off into the passing stream and 
carried on into some of the branches going to the stomach- 
wall, there to form a thrombus and ultimately a digestive 
ulcer. He considers that this is the most prominent etio- 
logical factor in the production of post-operative hasmat- 
emesis." 

The suggestion is one which, doubtless, contains some 
measure of truth, but it is not, of course, applicable to 
all cases. 

Fourthly. — W. L. Rodman has suggested that sepsis is 
the chief cause. This seems to me to be the most likely 
of all the explanations that have been given, though it 
cannot be denied that in some instances the obvious evi- 
dences of sepsis elsewhere are wanting. In some of these 
cases it may be that the sepsis is of such a character 
as to produce a rapidly fatal toxemia, the poison acting 
so rapidly, indeed, that local evidences — peritonitis, etc. — 
have no time to develop. 

In this connexion recent inquiries conducted at the London 
Hospital are of the greatest interest. They shew more clearly 
than any other pathological records of which I have knowledge 
how dependent a severe hsematemesis may be upon lesions which 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 89 

are primarily unconnected with the stomach. Hutchinson records 
24 cases of fatal haemorrhage from the stomach after opera- 
tions of various kinds upon the abdominal viscera. Of these 24 
no less than 21 were cases of appendicitis with septic complica- 
tions, localised abscess, or diffuse peritonitis. In three cases re- 
cent acute ulcers were found in the stomach (twice) and in the 
duodenum (once) ; in the remaining cases only ' ' hemorrhagic 
erosions" were found. The origin of this serious and profuse 
bleeding is ascribed to a profound alteration in the blood due in 
most cases to toxins of septic origin. The experiments of Wilkie 
would make it appear probable that a retrograde venous embolism 
from the original septic focus may be responsible for the develop- 
ment of acute ulceration in the stomach or duodenum. 

Fifthly. — Mayo Robson, disputing the theory suggested 
by Rodman, writes: "The only explanation that seems at 
all feasible is that the haemorrhage is dependent on a reflex 
nervous influence." The apt comment of Purves on this 
statement is: "This is no more easy to prove than the 
other suggestions ; but, if it were a true solution of the 
question, it is, I think, admissible to suppose that sepsis 
would, in many cases, determine the onset of the reflex 
or prolong the duration of its action, and thus render 
the condition more serious." 

The treatment of hsematemesis will depend in part 
upon the condition of the patient. In those whose con- 
dition is fairly good, lavage of the stomach with a tepid 
solution of bicarbonate of soda will generally arrest the 
sickness and give relief. The bow^els should be compelled, 
if possible, to act freely; high enemata of soap and water 
or oil must be given. Sips of water containing adrenalin 
chloride solution — ten minims to a teaspoonful — should be 
given every half -hour; the general and the local eft'ect of this 
drug are both desirable. Calomel may be given in doses 
of one-half grain every half-hour. 



90 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

The abdominal bandage should be applied firmly — as 
firmly, indeed, as the patient can bear it. 

If the symptoms of toxcemia are well marked, an intra- 
venous infusion of saline solution will prove of value. 

Reichard has reopened the abdomen in two cases for 
the purpose of searching for the source of the haemorrhage 
in the stomach. This is a futile and useless procedure. 

Acute Dilatation of the Stomach. — This is among the least 
frequent but most serious complications Avhich may follow 
upon an abdominal operation. A large number of cases have 
now been reported, and an excellent review of many of them 
published by Campbell Thomson ("Acute Dilatation of the Stom- 
ach;" Bailliere, Tindall & Cox, London, 1902). 

Symptoms. — The symptoms appear as a rule rather insid- 
iously after an abdominal operation. The chief of them are pain 
in the epigastrium, constant, effortless vomiting of a thin greenish 
or greyish turbid fluid, a rapid and steadily increasing pulse-rate, 
and s3^mptoms of collapse or exhaustion. The act of vomiting 
is not often distressing though its frequent repetition may be 
exhausting. As Henr}^ ]\Iorris remarked of one of his cases, the 
vomit is brought up "in large gulps without straining." The 
surgeon's attention should be drawn to this complication by 
the repeated vomiting and the constantly increasing pulse-rate. 
An examination of the abdomen will then reveal a tight dis- 
tension of the epigastrium, and when the bandages are removed, 
the outline of the grossly inflated stomach may be marked. 
The passage of the stomach tube allows a huge volume of gas 
to escape, often with a miniature "report," and a large A'olume 
of thin greyish fluid will be evacuated. As soon as the tube is 
withdrawn, the stomach may begin almost at once to refill, and 
within half an hour its distended form may be recognised upon 
inspection of the abdomen. AVhen the stomach distension 
becomes, as it may, gigantic, the bulging of the abdominal 
wall is mostly to the left and in the lower half ; the right hypochon- 
drium by contrast has been said to be flattened or excavated. 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 9I 

In other cases, though the abdomen is large, tense, and resisting, 
no special bulging at any point can be seen, while in yet others 
the abdomen may be, as in Henry Morris's case, retracted. In 
this instance, at the postmortem examination, although the 
stomach was enormously dilated and occupied the greater part 
of the abdomen, its anterior surface was said to be flattened. 

The general condition of the patient is recognised as being 
serious from the first. The respirations are frequent and shallow ; 



Fig. 18. — Acute dilatation of the stomach (Campbell Thomson). 

the pulse is rapid, thready, and of poor quality ; the aspect of the 
patient shows that his tissues are starved of water ; he is pinched 
and careworn and old in appearance, and the limbs are often cold 
and clammy. Thirst is intolerable and unquenchable; the pa- 
tient is restless, and at times irritable and weary. Diarrhoea has 
been occasionally observed. The amount of urine in nearly 
every instance in which special attention has been given to the 
point has been very considerably reduced in cjuantity, or the 
secretion entirely abolished. 



92 ABDOMINAL OPEIL\TIONS. 

Pathology. — The appearances presented on postmortem ex- 
amination are curiously similar in almost all cases. The stomach 
is enormously distended, and is sharply bent upon itself, so as 
to form a gigantic U-tube, whose distal limb is rather shorter 
and less thick than the proximal. At the lesser curvature there 
is therefore a sharp kink. The stomach seems to occupy the 
greater part or even the whole of the abdomen, cutting off from 
sight and severely compressing all the small and large intestine. 
The walls of the stomach are tightly stretched and thinned, in 
one case seeming no thicker than a single layer of peritoneum. 
The thinning of the walls is not equally distributed; very thin 
patches are sometimes seen, the greater part of the stom- 
ach remaining normal, or nearly so. In 12 cases out of 44, 
the dilatation was not limited to the stomach, but involved 
the duodenum also, and in one case the upper few inches of 
the jejunum. Box and A¥allace have shown that the con- 
dition found in acute dilatation of the stomach can be exactly 
reproduced on the cadaver. They write : 

' ' We have found by actual experiment on the cadaver that 
the stomach can be enormously distended by water pressure, 
with the jejunum cut right across and lying patent in the 
abdomen. Moreover, the stomach remains thus distended. 
The same result can be attained after the superior mesenteric 
vessels and the peritoneal folds in their neighbourhood ha^'e all 
been divided. If, however, by introduction of the finger well 
behind the distended stomach a little to the left of the mid-line 
of the spinal column, the fundus and posterior wall of the 
stomach be gently raised, the excess of fluid will at once flow 
freely away from the stomach through the cut jejunum. If the 
part of the duodenum which lies on the right side of the spine, 
behind the peritoneum, be first incised, the tense distension of 
the stomach cannot be produced. We therefore feel justified 
in assuming that the tense distension is due to actual pressure 
of the stomach on the part of the duodenum which crosses the 
third and ascends Iw the side of the second lumbar vertebra to 
end in the jejunum. 

"We woiild suggest, therefore, that in producing the train of 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUPXS. 93 

symptoms miet with in acute dilatation of the stomach two 
factors come into play. There is, first, a paralytic condition 
of the viscus which leads to distension, and then, at a certain 
stage, the distended stomach actually produces obstruction by 
pressing on the duodenum on the front and to the left of the 
spinal column." ("The Lancet," November 9, 1901, p. 1260.) 

A large number of more or less ingenious hypotheses have 
been suggested to explain the incidence of acute gastric dilata- 
tion, but none of them are completely satisfying. 

By Fagge and others an excessive secretion of the stomach 
was considered the primary factor, the organ being "paralysed 
from overdistension, and unable to rid itself of its burden." 
Henry Morris, who considered the excess of secretion to be an 
important determining cause, suggested the name "gastro- 
succorrhoea" for this disease. In several cases, however, the 
distension of the organ is not by any means wholly or even 
chiefly due to the fluid contents ; for when the stomach is emp- 
tied of gas by a stomach tube, and before any fluid has escaped, 
the viscus may return almost to its normal size. Campbell 
Thomson writes : 

"It is, of course, a difficult matter to establish precisely the 
relationship which exists between the distension and the secre- 
tion, but it seems probable that they must be looked upon as 
two distinct processes. 

' ' The most likely explanation seems to be that the stomach 
wall becomes paralysed — the possible causes of which will be 
discussed further on — and then, later on, the organ becomes 
distended by gas or excessive secretion. Moreover, the fact 
that excessive secretion is not present in every case makes it im- 
possible to consider it as the primary cause ; in some cases there 
is very little fluid found after death, the stomach being almost 
entirely distended with gas." 

Pepper and Stengel suggest that the immediate cause of 
the dilatation is a spasm of the pylorus; but if this were so, 
the not infrequent implication of the duodenum would be still 



94 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

to explain. Wiesinger considers that there is a volvulus of 
the stomach, and that the distension is similar to that found 
in a twisted sigmoid flexure. 

Albrecht was the first to suggest that the constricting agent is 
the superior mesenteric arter\", which, owing to the downward 
dragging of the intestines, presses upon and obstructs the third 
portion of the duodenum. Kundrat, Ewart, and others have 
offered evidence in support of this view, and there is little 
doubt that in some cases, at least, the explanation is satis- 
facton*. Albrecht points out that if the descending portion of 
the duodenum be opened and the finger passed onwards into 
the transverse portion, and with the other hand traction be 
made upon the mesentery by pulling the intestines towards 
the pelvis, the constricting power of the superior mesen- 
teric arter}' will be clearly recognised. In Jessop's case, 
and in others, the distended duodenum was abruptly narrowed 
at or near the point of crossing of the arten^ ; but in other cases, 
and these form a majority, there was no constant point at which 
the stricture was found. 

T. Ordway ("Bost. Aled. and Surg. Joum.," Alarch 5, 1908) 
writes as follows describing the post-mortem report upon a case 
of acute dilatation in a moribund phthisical patient: "The mes- 
enteric attachment which crosses the last part of the duodenum 
is tense. It presses the duodenum against the spinal column 
and this produces complete obstruction. Above this obstruc- 
tion the duodenum is markedty dilated and continuous with the 
stomach. Below this point both small and large intestines are 
coUapsed and apparently empty." 

An interesting point in connexion with the clinical history 
of this case is that although the vomit frequently amounted to 
two quarts within ten or fifteen minutes, there was no abdominal 
distension; on the other hand, there was marked retraction and 
muscular rigidity. 

The view which seems to be most highly favoured by the 
majority of writers is that the paralysis of the muscular wall 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 95 

of the stomach is primary. Carrion and Hallon ("Semaine 
Medicale," August 21, 1895) have shown that the section of the 
pneumogastric nerves in the dog leads to dilatation of the 
stomach, and to symptoms resembling in many cases those of 
uraemia. It is clear that in some instances, as soon as the stom- 
ach has reached a certain size, it is almost impossible for it to 
recover, either because there is some kinking or rotation at the 
pylorus, or because pressure is exerted, as Box and Wallace 
suggest, upon that part of the duodenum which crosses the 
third and ascends by the side of the second lumbar vertebra in 
the left side. 

Attention has been specially drawn by P. Miiller ("Deut. 
Zeit. f. Chir.," August, 1900) to dilatation of the stomach following 
upon abdominal operations. In some of these cases the gastric 
distension is only a part of a general involvement of the intestinal 
canal, due to peritonitis. The septic condition induces a paresis 
of the bowel walls, and distension of the gut rapidly follows. 
In other cases, and it is these to which Miiller draws particular 
attention, the dilatation of the stomach is due to the pressure 
upon the duodenum of the superior mesenteric artery. When a 
large ovarian tumour or a fibroid tumour of the uterus is re- 
moved, the intestines, compressed for many months or years to 
the upper part of the abdomen, sink down into the pelvis, and so 
drag upon the superior mesenteric artery as to compress the 
duodenum in the manner already described. 

L. A. Conner ("Medical Record," i, 1907), who has analysed 
102 cases of acute dilatation, concludes that the condition oc- 
curs most frequently after operation under general anaesthesia, and 
is usually associated with a constriction at the lower end of the 
duodenum, between the root of the mesentery and the vertebral 
column. That this constriction can be brought about when trac- 
tion is made on the mesentery by the small intestines hanging 
over the brim of the pelvis ; that it is favoured by the dorsal posi- 
tion, a long mesentery, and a collapsed state of the gut. He gives 
the mortality as 72 per cent. 



96 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

Treatment. — Treatment should be directed, early to the relief 
of this condition. Indeed, if the case progresses far without 
recognition, the issue is almost inevitably fatal. Recourse must 
be had at once to the stomach tube, and the viscus must be emp- 
tied and washed out with an abundance of hot sterile salt solu- 
tion. If, as is likely, the stomach begins quickly to refill, the 
tube must be again passed, and if necessary be left in for 
several hours. 

In my own few cases, relief has always been given by changing 
the position of the patient. He must be placed prone in bed, 
with a pillow beneath the pelvis. One acts upon the supposition 
that there is compression of the duodenum by mechanical traction 
upon the superior mesenteric vessels. Whether the hypothesis 
be right or wrong, relief is undoubtedly afforded, sometimes 
in a most remarkable manner, by the change of posture. In 
the severer instances opening and drainage of the stomach may 
be necessary; or the operation of gastro-enterostomy may be 
considered. 

Phlebitis and Thrombosis. — The occurrence of thrombosis 
of veins is not very infrequent after any form of abdominal 
operation. It follows most commonly upon pelvic operations, 
especially abdominal hysterectomy, but also after operations 
involving the upper part of the abdomen, such as gastro-enteros- 
tomy or cholecystotomy. 

The thrombosis of the vein may be due to or may precede 
phlebitis. If thrombosis is the primary condition, which is 
probably very unusual, it is attributed to heart weakness, and 
consequent slowness of the blood current, impoverished con- 
dition of the blood as a result of long illness, or repeated haemor- 
rhages (the "marasmic thrombosis" of Billroth), and to an in- 
crease in the coagulability of the blood due to an excess of calcium 
salts. 

In the very great majority of the cases, however, it is probable 
that phlebitis occurs first, and that the formation of a thrombus 
is secondary. The phlebitis is due, almost certainly, to in- 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 97 

fection, though many of the recorded examples occurred when 
it is said that the wound remained aseptic. 

A thrombophlebitis is dependent upon the quantity and qual- 
ity of the circulating blood and the condition of the vascular 
endothelium. For coagulation to take place there must be fibrin- 
ogen and fibrin ferment. Fibrin ferment does not exist normally 
in circulating blood as such, but results from a combination of 
thrombogen and thrombokinase in the presence of calcium salts. 
Thrombokinase is probably produced from the breaking down of 
the blood-platelets or of the white blood-corpuscles. Under 
normal circumstances the vascular endothelium appears to be 
able to deal with small quantities of thrombokinase, but its abil- 
ity to do so is diminished by injury to, or inflammation of, the 
blood-vessels, retardation of the blood current, sepsis, increase in 
COo in the blood, by general conditions, such as chlorosis and the 
other anaemias, where the vascular nutrition is poor, and by the 
specific fevers. 

The etiology of thrombophlebitis is still as obscure as it was 
twenty years ago. 

Clinically, thrombosis may occur in cases of acute or chronic 
inflammation of the vascular endothelium after trauma, in con- 
ditions where there is marked slowing of the blood stream, in 
cases of cardiac weakness, in the ansemias, or following infec- 
tion. 

This complication is found most frequently after abdominal 
hysterectomy (30 per cent, of the cases). This is an operation 
in which there are many ligatures left behind, a septic cavity 
is opened, and no drainage is provided. During an interval 
operation for appendicitis, there may be disturbance of those 
veins in the mesoappendix in which clots have already formed 
in the earlier stages of the disease. We know now that many 
of the wounds which run an "aseptic" course really contain 
organisms throughout the time of their healing. Infection, 
therefore, as a cause of phlebitis, cannot be excluded. To me 
it is the most likely explanation in all cases, though I quite rec- 



98 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

ognise that a contran^ opinion to this is held by surgeons of con- 
siderable authorit}', such as Maurice Richardson and others. 

The veins most frequently affected are the saphenous and 
femoral of the left side. The enormous preponderance of the 
cases on the left side has never been adequately explained. Dr. 
W. W. Keen suggested that the passage of the left common iliac 
vein under the right common iliac artery might lead to a retarda- 
tion of the blood in the left vein, and thus act as a cause of 
venous thrombosis. This anatomical arrangement doubtless 
plays some part in the causation of the condition, and it is well 
to note also that when there is any congenital anomaly in the 
venous system below the diaphragm, it is almost invariably 
found upon the left side. Varicose veins of the lower extrem- 
ity are far more frequent upon the left side than the right. 
But it is doubtful whether the merely mechanical conditions which 
can be brought about by any of the circumstances mentioned 
would suffice to determine the so frequent incidence of the 
inflammation upon the left side. 

We may summarise the main facts with regard to thrombosis 
following abdominal operations in this way: Thrombosis occurs 
most frequently after operations upon the lower part of the abdo- 
men; it is estimated to happen in 2 percent, of all cases; it is first 
noticed about two weeks after the operation ; it is more apt to 
afflict patients who are debilitated by long illness, or whose con- 
dition is poor as a result of frequent hasmorrhages ; it is found in 
great preponderance upon the left side, where it affects the 
saphenous and femoral veins; as a causative factor sepsis can 
rarely be excluded; phlebitis precedes the thrombosis, as a rule. 

Cordier ("Journal of the American Medical Association," vol. 
ii, 1905, p. 1792) has collected records of 232 cases. He gives 
the following table, which shews the number of cases following 
various operations: 

Nephrorrhaphy 9 

Appendicitis, mostly so-called aseptic cases 27 

Cholecystotomy 4 

Oophorectomy (cystic, cirrhotic, etc.) 16 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. 99 

Hysterectomy fibroids, so-called aseptic cases 69 

Vaginal operations, character not stated 8 

Alexander's operation 3 

Hernia 4 

Pyosalpinx 7 

Pelvic operations, not specified 9 

Abdominal and pelvic, character not stated 56 

Ectopic pregnancy 4 

Vaginal hysterectomy for cancer 9 

Suspension of uterus 7 

.Splenectomy i 

Special Features. 
In 213 cases, left saphenous or femoral veins were affected. 
In 8 cases, both left and right veins were affected. 
In 1 1 cases, right veins alone were affected. 
In 182 cases, proximial part of vein first affected. 
In 36 cases, distal part of vein first affected. 
In 14 cases, portion of vein affected not mentioned. 
In 166 cases, sepsis was not present at time of the operation. 
In 56 cases, no mention of sepsis or asepsis was made. 
In 10 cases, there was pus present at time of operation. In the great 

majority of cases the first symptoms appeared from the loth to 

the isth day. 
In 6 cases, pleuritic and lung complications. 
In 3 cases, sudden death occurred. 

Cordier gives a good description of the clinical course. He 
writes : 

"The usual onset of this condition is marked by a gradually 
increasing pain along some portion of the long saphenous vein, 
usually the left, and most frequently just below the saphenous 
opening in the fascia lata. This pain may extend along the 
whole course of the vein and, as a rule, does follow the vessel below 
the knee. An elevation of temperature of from 2 to 3 degrees is 
noticed and a proportionately increased pulse-rate is also ob- 
served. The pain in limb is increased by moving the limb or 
by permitting it to remain in a dependent position, and is 
partially relieved by elevating the leg and thigh. On examining, 
in many cases, there will be noticed a redness along the course 
of the inflamed vein or veins. If seen early, no perceptible 
swelling of the limb will be noticed, but within a few days, if 
the case is a severe one, the whole limb will be swollen, but 
more particularly the calf of the leg. This swelling is uniform, 
and free from discolorations or redness; in fact, the surface is 
blanched. Pressure along the course of the vein elicits tender- 



100 ABDOMINAL OPER-\TIOXS. 

ness, and in the calf of the leg the tenderness is found all over 
the posterior surface. The vein is hardened and rolls under the 
fingers like a tendon, in many cases. Pressure, if continued for 
scA'eral minutes, may produce pitting, but not so well marked 
as in the dropsical affections. Except along the course of the 
superficial portion of the vein, which may feel unnaturally 
warm, there is a death-like temperature of the surface to the 
examining hand. ' ' 

Grant f'Jour. Amer. Aled. Assoc," 1907, i, 567) has pub- 
lished a report embodying the opinions of 30 American surgeons 
with regard to post-operative thrombosis in the lower extremi- 
ties. Amongst the various hypotheses put for^^ard, bacterially 
infected blood, recumbent posture, the anatomical situation of 
the vein and the quality of the blood are said to be the most im- 
portant. 

E. H. Beckman ("Annals of Surgery," 1913, i. May), report- 
ing on the complications following 5835 surgical operations in the 
IMayo Clinic in 1912, writes under the head of Thrombophlebitis: 
"The total number of cases having a phlebitis as a complication 
following operation was 16. Although we continualty have a 
certain number of phlebitis cases following operation, we have not 
been able to determine any causative factor in this annoying 
complication. We have always taken a middle course, so far as 
getting the patients out of bed early is concerned. Most laparot- 
omy^ patients are kept in bed from eight to twelve days, except 
those having simple appendicectomies, who are allowed to get 
up on the sixth or seventh day following operation. It will be 
seen from the following table that exactly three-fourths of these 
cases of phlebitis were in the left femoral or internal saphenous 
vein and one-fourth in the right. None were double. This is 
about the usual proportion in our Clinic. 

It has not been definitely determined that patients that have 
an infected wound or are infected at the time of the operation are 
more susceptible to phlebitis than so-called clean cases. We are 
often surprised to find a phlebitis develop in a patient who has 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS lOI 

otherwise had an ideal convalescence. In only one of the present 
series was there an infected wound. 

Appendicectomy i left i right 

Appendicectomy, curettage and perineorrhaphy . . i left 
Cholecystostomy, internal Alexander; curettage. . i left . . 

Drainage of pelvic abscess . i left . . 

Total abdominal hj^sterectomy i left i right 

Gastrectomy i left 

Cholecystostomy and appendicectomy i left 

Cholecystectomy i left 

Kraske; colostomy i left 

Tube and ovary, appendicectomy i left 

Ovarian cyst i left 

Mayo's operation for prolapse i left 

Ventral hernia i right 

Cholecystostomy i right 

12 4" 

L. B. Wilson ("Annals of Surgery," Dec, 19 12) gives a statis- 
tical record of all the cases of fatal post-operative embolism 
occurring in the Mayo Clinic during the years 1 899-1 91 1 inclusive. 

During these twelve years 63,573 major operations were per- 
formed, with 47 cases of fatal post-operative embolism. Au- 
topsies were made in 41 of the fatal cases. 

The total number of deaths from all causes was 864, of which 
the fatalities from embolism represent 5 per cent. 

The total mortality from embolism was therefore 0.07 per 
cent. 

After 1372 operations on blood-vessels 2 deaths, or 0.14 per cent. 

After 3266 operations on the thyroid 2 deaths, or 0.06 per cent. 

After 2281 operations on the mouth i death, or 0.05 per cent. 

After 2391 operations on the stomach and duo- ' 

denum 3 deaths, or 0.12 per cent. 

After 4597 operations on the gall-bladder 9 deaths, or 0.19 per cent. 

After 389 operations on the small intestine i death, or 0.26 per cent. 

After 9908 operations on the appendix 4 deaths, or 0.04 per cent. 

After 2530 operations on the colon and rectum 5 deaths, or 0.02 per cent. 

After 4501 operations for hernia 5 deaths, or o.ii per cent. 

After 900 operations on the kidney i death, or o.ii per cent. 

After 601 operations on the prostate 4 deaths, or 0.66 per cent. 

After 7993 operations on the uterus, tubes, and ovaries 10 deaths, or 0.13 per cent. 

Of the 47 cases, 25 were males and 21 females; the youngest 
was twenty-five and the oldest seventy-two. 



102 ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 

19 of the fatalities occurred within the first week. 
21 of the fataUties occurred within the second week. 
4 of the fataHties occurred in the third and one each on the twenty- 
sixth, thirtieth, and sixty-fourth days. 

In 36 cases the embolism was pulmonary, in 10 cerebral, and 
in I coronary. 

In 28 of the 41 cases examined post-mortem the location of 
the primary thrombus was in the field of operation or in the fem- 
oral veins; in 4 cases the emboli were probably cardiac; in 9 
cases the seat of origin was not determined. 

Summing up, Wilson writes: 

"The most important factors concerned in extensive post- 
operative thrombosis are as follows: 

" (a) Injury to the vascular walls. Rupture of the intima by 
cutting, ligaturing, or clamping causes a rapid deposit of a 
fibrinous thrombus, which, however, is normally confined to an 
area close to the injury. Over this the endothelium quickh' 
extends, covering the thrombus within a few days. It is probable 
that such small terminal thrombi, when covered b}^ endothelium, 
rarely, if ever, become detached and form emboli. There can 
be no question, however, but that the constantly present small 
thrombi in injured vessels form a nucleus for the subsequent de- 
velopment of large, loose thrombi through the activity of other 
factors. 

" (b) Slowing and stagnation of the blood stream. After 
operations the rapidity and volume of the current in the veins 
are materially lessened for a considerable distance proximal to 
the first incoming venous radicles. Furthermore, the patients 
are usually kept quiet in a recumbent posture, thus reducing the 
force and rapidity of the heart's action and causing a general 
slowing of the blood current throughout the entire vascular sys- 
tem, including the heart. When the blood stream is slower or 
when a part of the vascular system is incompletely filled, a dis- 
arrangement of the blood-cells occurs, the white cells and plate- 
lets reaching the periphery of the stream and tending to attach 
themselves to the vascular walls. 

"(c) Disintegration of the corpuscles of the blood from toxic 
substances. 

"While such toxic substances are not definitelv known, their 



THE COMPLICATIONS AND SEQUELS. IO3 

presence is assumed from their apparent action in the severe 
secondary anasmias and hepatic diseases. It has been suggested 
that this factor may account for the high percentage of post- 
operative emboH following operations on the gall-bladder. It 
has also been suggested that toxic substances reaching the cir- 
culation from extensive carcinomata may in this manner cause 
marked post-operative thrombosis. In this connection, however, 
we must not forget the rarity of post-operative emboli follow- 
ing extensive operations for mammary carcinomata. 

"(d) Bacteraemia. That bacteria and their toxins are the 
chief causes of extensive post-operative thrombosis as well as 
thrombosis occurring in the course of infectious diseases is now 
fairly well established. By no means all post-operative thrombi 
occur in the field of operation. Phlebitis and a resulting throm- 
bus are all too frequent. The last decade has seen a very marked 
extension of our knowledge of the frequent infection of the blood 
stream by bacteria. This is particularly so in chronic diseases 
with local infection. It is readily conceivable that bacteria 
within the blood stream may have their virulence sufficiently 
reduced to prevent their setting up a local phlebitis until aided 
by operative traumatism of the intima, post-operative slowing 
of the blood current, or perhaps even the effect of a prolonged 
general anaesthetic on the leukocytes." 

As soon as the condition is discovered it must be treated 
very seriously, and the patient warned of the risks of disturbance 
of the limb. 

The affected limb should be elevated on a couple of pillows , 
and some warm and comforting dressing applied. Lead and 
opium lotion, or warm boracic fomentations, are soothing and 
grateful to the patient, but they must be applied without disturb- 
ing the limb. If a long many -tailed bandage is placed from the 
buttock to the heel, the front and sides of the limb can be ex- 
posed, and the fomentations applied to them without moving the 
leg. Flannel bags loosely filled with bran, and made hot in the 
oven, keep warm for a couple of hours; they may be laid over a 
thin wrap of gamgee tissue and changed as often as necessary, 
without anv disturbance. 



104 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

Local treatment must be continued so long as there is tender- 
ness in the course of the vein, and the first movements must be 
made with great gentleness and caution. It is not possible to 
fix arbitraril}^ any time for the commencement of movements, 
but in most cases four or six weeks must be allowed to elapse 
from the time w^hen the last extension of inflammation oc- 
curred, before movement is permitted. 

Lennander suggested some years ago that, in cases where 
thrombosis of the veins was feared, the patient should be kept 
in the Trendelenburg position for a few days. It is certainly 
an advantage in some cases slightly to elevate the foot of the 
bed, and to instruct the nurse to gently rub the patient's legs 
from the heel upwards for a few minutes two or three times daily. 

Stasis and sepsis, probably the twin causes of phlebitis, are 
both preventable. The latter is perhaps not under our control 
so completely as we think, but the former can always be counter- 
acted. In some six or seven cases of phlebitis following suppura- 
tive appendicitis I have used the intravenous injections of collar- 
gol with a degree of success which will urge me to use it in 
like cases in the future. 

The possibility of detachment of a part or the whole of the 
thrombus must never be forgotten or minimised. Sudden death 
has occurred upon the patient first attempting to stand, or to 
move in his chair, as a result of pulmonary embolism. 

The question of the association of thrombosis with post- 
operative pneumonia and pleurisy is discussed elsewhere. 



CHAPTER IV. 

ABDOMINAL INCISIONS. 

I DO not think that, though much thereon has been 
written, it is yet adequately recognised that the steps 
in the making and in the repair of an abdominal wound 
are of the very greatest importance. I doubt whether it 
is any exaggeration to say that the circumstances con- 
nected with the incision are among the most important 
in the whole range of abdominal surgery. For, if the 
incision be improperly made, by the free division of mus- 
cular fibres or the wilful and unnecessary severing of nerve- 
trunks, a weakened area is left in the belly-wall the results 
of which may be of even greater severity than those con- 
ditions which first made the operation advisable. Too 
great care cannot therefore be exercised in the proper 
choice of a method of incision and of the means of its 
securest closure. It is a cardinal rule that there shall 
be no division of muscular fibres unless it is absolutely 
necessary for a sufficient exposure of the operation field; 
muscular fibres are always to be separated, never to be 
cut. Nerves, likewise, are things to be treated with respect, 
and in many cases a little tact in the arrangement of 
a wound will result in the avoidance of any injury to 
them. As an example of the damage that may result 
from nerve division, I may quote the case of a patient 
upon whom an abdominal nephrectomy had been performed 
through the right linea semilunaris ; several nerves had 
been divided, and, as an inevitable consequence, the rectus 
muscle supplied by them had wasted to the point of almost 
complete disappearance. An enormous hernia had developed, 
which no operation could possibly cure. In some instances 

105 



I06 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

when the fibres of the rectus have been spht in the per- 
formance of cholecystotomy or gastro-enterostom}^ without 
reference to the position of the nerves, that part of the 
muscle to the inner side of the incision has undergone 
atrophy, and a hernia has consequently developed. At 
Czemy's instance Assmy investigated the after-results of 
cases in which a wide vertical splitting of the rectus fibres 
had been performed, and shewed that an atrophy of that 
part of the muscle dissociated from its nerve supply always 
followed. In cases of gastro -enterostomy, therefore, and in 
the operation of gastrostomy as performed by Hartmann 
and Kocher, the rectus muscle is not split at all. The 
anterior sheath is divided, the whole of the muscle is pulled 
to the outer side, and an incision is then made through 
the posterior sheath, on a line directly behind the skin 
incision. When the operation is completed, the muscle 
falls back into its normal position. 

The splitting of muscular fibres is readily and safely 
accomplished in the operation of gastrostomy, as was first 
shewn b}^ Howse ; in the operation of removal of the ap- 
pendix, as was shewn by McBumey; in the operation of 
removal of the kidney, as was shewn by Edwards, and 
later by Abbe; in the operation of left inguinal colotomy, 
and so forth. If, in any incision, a division of fibres can 
be effected in only a part of the wound, it is to that 
extent an advantage over an extended division of the 
fibres. 

The principles which guide the surgeon in the making 
of incisions elsewhere must guide him here also. The 
cut must be perfectly clean; the edges of the muscle when 
separated or divided must be sharply defined; there must 
be no fraying of the edges, due to clums}^ or untidy work. 
Furthermore, any rough handling of the wound during 
intra-abdominal manipulations must be expressly avoided. 
If a difficult manipulation is performed through an opening 



ABDOMINAL INCISIONS. 



107 



which cramps the surgeon's hands, the wound edges will 
be bruised, perhaps soiled with escaping fluids ; indeed, so 
great damage may be done that a proper healing of the 
wound is impossible. All incisions must, therefore, be of 
adequate, though never of undue, length, and as soon as 
the abdomen is opened a protection to the lips of the 
incision must be afforded by a covering of flat swabs, 
small linen squares, or other soft material which has been 
thoroughly sterilised 
and wrung out of hot 
sterile salt solution. 
Wounds heal more 
kindly the greater the 
respect with which 
they are treated. I 
feel sure that some of 
the cases in which a 
stitch abscess seems 
incapable of explana- 
tion may be ac- 
counted for by the 
fact of rough hand- 
ling and bruising of 
the cut edges of the 
wound. The method 
of incising the peri- 
toneum between a 
clip and a pair of forceps is shewn in flgure 19, the slitting 
up of the peritoneum on the forefinger in figure 20. 

The special incisions used in each region will be dis- 
cussed in detail in each section. 

In the suture of incisions great care is also necessary. 
When muscular fibres have been separated and pulled forci- 
bly apart, the moment the retractors are withdrawn the fibres 
come together and close the temporary gap. How strongly 




Fig. 19. — Incision of the peritoneum. The 
clip is held by the assistant, the dissecting for- 
ceps by the surgeon. 



io8 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



the muscles act in securing the closure of such a wound can 
be realised if the finger happens to be therein when the patient 
is straining, vomiting, or coughing. The finger is gripped 
in a sort of vice. Nevertheless I usually put in one or two 
sutures, uniting the separated edges, to ensure perfect accuracy 
of apposition. When a muscle is divided — say, the rectus 

— or an incision is made 
in the middle line, the 
wound should always be 
stitched up in layers. I 
generally use three lay- 
ers of sutures passed in 
the following manner : 

A Hagedorn needle 
armed with a long 
thread of No. 2 catgut 
is used; the first stitch 
is taken at the top of 
the wound, and picks 
up the peritoneum and 
the fascia transversalis 
and the posterior sheath 
of the rectus, above the 
umbilicus; this stitch is 
continuous and extends 
from the top to the bot- 
tom of the wound. The 
needle is then laid aside, 
to be presently resumed. A series of silkworm-gut sutures are 
now passed through all the thickness of the abdominal wall 
which is not embraced by this first catgut suture; that is 
to say, that the skin and subcutaneous tissues, the ante- 
rior sheath of the rectus, and the bulk of the muscular fibres 
of the rectus are all included. A series of these stitches are 
passed, at intervals of about three-fourths of an inch, along 




Fig. 20. — Division of the peritoneum. 



ABDOMINAL INCISIONS. 



109 



the full extent of the wound, using the transverse scratches marked 
on the skin with a needle, before the incision was made, to ensure 
accurate apposition. The ends are left loose on each side, and 
are there seized by a clip. These interrupted silkworm-gut 
sutures being introduced, the needle armed with catgut just laid 
aside is taken up again. The same suture, without knotting or 




Fig. 21. — Suture of abdom- 
inal wall, shewing the continuous 
suture of catgut. 



Fig. 22. — The interrupted sutures of silk- 
worm- o'ut. 



interruption, then returns from the lower end to the upper, pick- 
ing up the anterior sheath of the rectus and a few of its muscular 
fibres. This stitch is pulled with sufficient tightness to get a 
good apposition of the anterior sheath of the rectus. When the 
upper end of the wound is reached, the end of the stitch is tied 
with the original end which had been left long, and the ends are 
cut short. The condition on section is shewn in figure 24. 



no 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



The interrupted silkworm-gut sutures are now threaded 
through pieces of fine rubber tubing cut to the correct length, tied, 
and cut short. The rubber "bridges" prevent the deep tension 




Fig. 23. — Suture of abdominal wall, the continuous suture returning and pick- 
ing up the anterior sheath of the rectus. 




Fig. 24. — Suture of the abdominal wall. Section shewing the position of 
the stitches: a and a are the different parts of the same continuous suture; 
b, b, interrupted sutures. 

sutures from cutting into the skin and marking it. For the exact 
apposition of the skin edges I have frequently used Michel's clips. 



ABDOMINAL INCISIONS. 



Ill 



In some cases where the abdomen is very lax there may 
be need of a sHght overlapping of the cut edges of the ante- 
rior sheath of the rectus. It has been shewn that the greater 
part of the strength of the scar lies in the anterior sheath of 
the rectus; if good healing is obtained in that, the cicatrix 
is not likely to yield. The overlapping adds greater strength, 
therefore, to the scar. The methods of securing this overlap- 
ping are shewn in the figures. 

With regard to the material which is used for the buried 
suture, nothing can be better than medium catgut adequately 
sterilised. The use of silk for 
buried stitches, though advocated by 
Kocher, possesses no single advan- 
tage over catgut, and it, question- 
less, possesses more than one dis- 
advantage. The fallacy which sup- 
poses that a non-absorbable suture 
continues its functions perpetually 
has been exposed times without 
number. The wandering of such 
sutures away from the place of 
their introduction is a matter of 
common observation. If, therefore, 
they cease after a time to perform 
their necessary functions, they are, 
for their purpose, less to be com- ^. ^, , . 

^ ^ Fig. 25. — Ine overlapping 

mended than sutures which, having of the aponeurosis of the rec- 

achieved their purpose, disappear. tus in the suture of an abdom- 

■^ mal wound (Noble s method). 

The weight, both of argument and 

"experience, is, so far as I can ascertain, entirely on the side 
of those who use catgut rather than a non-absorbable material 
for their buried sutures. 

The method of suture of the wound just described has been 
found to give perfectly satisfactory results. It possesses the 
advantage of giving easy and accurate apposition to all the 




112 



ABDOMINAL OPER-\TIOXS 





bo 



ABDOMINAL INCISIONS. 



113 



layers of the abdomen, and it especially supports the aponeu- 
rosis of the rectus, in that through this structure there are 
sutures of apposition and of wider support. 

To obtain clean and perfect healing and permanent 
strength in the wound, it is necessary, therefore, to have 

(a) clean-cut, neat incisions, 

(b) an absence of teasing or fraying of the muscle edges, 




Fig, 27. — Method of holding a curved needle. 

(c) protection to the lips of the wound from damage by in- 

struments, hands, or discharges, 

(d) perfect asepsis throughout, 

(e) accurate suturing in layers, sutures of apposition and su- 

tures of support both being used, 
(/) an absence of tension in the wound. 



VOL. I — s 



CHAPTER V. 
PENETRATING WOUNDS OF THE ABDOMEN. 

A DISTINCTION has been drawn between penetrating and 
perforating w^ounds of the abdomen, but the distinction is, 
for cHnical purposes, neghgible, for, in the great majority of 
instances, complete penetration of the abdominal wall im- 
plies also a perforation of some viscus. The wounds in which 
the greatest damage to viscera is inflicted are generalh^ below 
the umbilicus. 

The viscera are injured in the following order of fre- 
quency: the small intestine, the liver, the stomach, the large 
intestine, the other solid viscera. As soon as the intestine 
is wounded, if the wound is small, there is a prolapse of the 
mucous membrane, which temporarily blocks the opening 
and prevents a discharge of the intestinal contents. It is gen- 
erally supposed that the leakage of the contents occurs in- 
stantly upon the solution of continuity in the bowel, but this 
is not the case. A temporary sealing is the rule. The two 
conditions which aid in extravasation are intestinal disten- 
sion and the manipulations of the surgeon. When the injury 
is inflicted upon the intestine, the damage is of such a 
character as to cause a local stunning or paratysis of the bowel ; 
movement is, therefore, arrested, and the pouting of the 
mucosa temporarily blocks the opening. When distension 
occurs, and when the power of movement returns, then leak- 
age may occur. ^^lurph}^ has pointed out forcibty that ex- 
travasation occurs chiefly on manipulation. AVhen the solid 
viscera or the mesentery are wounded, haemorrhage occurs, 
often in profuse quantity. 

114 



PENETRATING WOUNDS OF THE ABDOMEN. II5 

Douglas writes: 

"The effects of any given penetrating wound of the 
abdomen are problematicaL Their nature is uncertain; the 
tract is always septic; the number of perforations, unknown; 
compHcations cannot be foretold. If a ball of average ve- 
locity enters the abdominal cavity, perforation is to be 
expected. That it may find its way between the interstices of 
the intestines we have previously admitted as a possibility; 
but that it may produce perforations of the intestines from 
one to twenty-eight in number is a recorded fact; that, if 
solid viscera lie in its course, it will traverse these and, in all 
probability, will wound other viscera. Multiple perforations occur 
most frequently in the ileum, and are oftenest made by bullets 
that pass through the abdomen obliquely from side to side." 

The following is the method of operating: The abdomen 
is opened through a median incision under all circumstances 
— lateral incisions must not be used, for some part of the neces- 
sary investigation cannot be conducted through them. 

The escaping blood-stained discharge is cleared away as 
speedily and completely as possible, and if there is evidence 
of haemorrhage occurring at the moment, the solid viscera, 
liver, spleen, kidneys, and the mesentery, must be first exam- 
ined. If injuries thereof be found, they must be dealt with 
forthwith, for injuries of the hollow viscera are far less urgent 
in their need for attention. 

Wounds in these viscera may be treated by suture, by cau- 
terisation, or by packing with gauze. The liver and the 
kidney both hold sutures well; the spleen generally tears awav 
under the tension of a stitch. In extensive wounds of either 
spleen or kidney the organ may have to be excised. The 
sutures used for the control of the haemorrhage are passed 
with an ordinary large intestinal needle, or, in the case of 
the liver, by Kousnetzoff's special instrument. If the kidney 
be injured, posterior drainage is needed. 

The solid viscera having been dealt with, the intestine 



Il6 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

must be methodically examined. Starting from a fixed point, 
— the duodenojejunal flexure or the csecum, — the whole of the 
small intestine is rapidly passed through the fingers, and, as 
a rent is exposed, it is at once sutured. Two or three rents 
may lie close together, but if so, it is better to suture them 
than to excise the damaged length of gut. Resection is at 
times necessary, but it should be adopted only when simple 
suture is impossible. As a rule, there is no need to turn the in- 
testines out of the abdomen, but this may be done if necessar\\ 

As the bowel is examined, the mesenter}^ is carefully 
searched for a wound. If one of small size be found, it may 
be closed with a single suture. If there be a large one, paral- 
lel to the bowel, the segment of gut supplied b}^ the torn ves- 
sels will have to be excised. All rents in the intestine are 
closed by a double layer of sutures in the usual way. 

Other organs are now examined— the bladder, large in- 
testine, pancreas, etc. — with equal care. Though a detailed 
examination of all parts is tedious and time-consuming, it 
cannot be neglected with impunity. Disaster follows per- 
functory work. 

Lavage and drainage are adopted in the manner and under 
the circumstances already described. It is safer always to 
drain. 

The experience of surgeons in America is far greater in this 
matter than that of any European surgeon. I cannot, there- 
fore, do better than quote from Dr. Douglas's admirable work 
on "The Surgical Diseases of the Abdomen" the following 
paragraph on the general surgical indications in cases of gun- 
shot wound of the abdomen: 

"The indications in any given case of gunshot wound of 
the abdomen are to relieve shock, control haemorrhage, re- 
move infectious matter, re-establish the continuity of the in- 
jured viscera, and provide direct or indirect drainage. If 
the patient is in great pain, a hypodermatic injection of mor- 
phin should be immediately given, and he should be moved 



PENETR-VTING WOUNDS OF THE ABDOMEN. II7 

with greatest care to his home, or preferably, to a hospital. 
Preparations should be in progress for an abdominal section. 
Stimulants may now be indicated. If penetration is not 
obvious, this question should be determined by enlarging the 
wound of entrance under cocain anaesthesia. If penetration 
is found, or if, from the location of the wound, course of the 
bullet, and the symptoms, it seems at all probable, a general 
anesthetic, preferably ether, is administered, and laparotomy 
at once undertaken. The abdomen is opened through the 
line a alba preferably, as the track of the bullet is always sep- 
tic. The location of the wound and known course of the bul- 
let may justify lateral opening. When the peritoneum is 
opened, if there has been much haemorrhage, its free escape 
intensifies the existing shock. To overcome this, the assist- 
ant, who has previously exposed a vein and introduced a 
cannula, now proceeds with the intravenous infusion of normal 
saline solution, the surgeon having by this time secured the 
principal bleeding points, which is the first indication on open- 
ing the abdomen. If, while searching for these, he meets with 
intestinal perforations, they should be surrounded with gauze 
to mark them and to prevent extravasation. The increased 
vascular tension due to the saline infusion will develop 
bleeding points Avhich might otherwise escape notice. This 
known action of the saline prohibits its use until the abdomen 
is opened and the chief bleeding points are controlled. Our 
methods of hasmostasis are ligature, suture, actual cautery, 
and gauze packing. The next step is to repair the injured 
viscera by the special methods which will be emphasised 
under their several headings. Unless there has been wide- 
spread extravasation of visceral contents, the peritoneal cav- 
ity should not be flushed, but all material removed by gen- 
tle sponging with gauze. After the intestinal perforations 
are closed, an ounce of "saturated solution of sulphate of mag- 
nesium should be introduced through a cannulated needle into 
a coil of the intestine remote from the wound, and this punc- 
ture closed by suture. The question of drainage in gunshot 
wounds of the abdomen is sub jiidice. Tifl-'any, Coley, and, 
indeed, the majority of surgeons, .advise drainage in all cases 
in which viscera are injured. Fenner's personal experience 
in 6 cases with 5 recoveries and i death, all treated without 



Il8 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

drainage, and my own experience in 8 cases with 2 deaths, 
lead me to the conclusion that drainage is not desirable if 
there is little or no extravasation and if the operation has been 
done within six hours. In operations after that time and in 
all cases where the general cavity has been irrigated multiple 
gauze drains should be employed. The bullet wound in the 
parietes, either of exit or entrance, should be excised and 
closed by sutures or left open and drained with a strip of 
gauze." 

Dr. Fenner ("Annals of Surgery," vol. xxxv, p. 15) reports 
six cases of penetrating wounds of the abdomen treated by 
operation, and gives statistical tables of 152 cases treated at 
the Charity Hospital, New Orleans, between January, 1892, 
and January, 1901. There were 96 cases of gunshot wound 
of the abdomen with visceral injury. Of these, 71 died — • 
a mortality equivalent to 73.95 per cent. 

This subject is discussed further in the chapters dealing 
with the injuries of the several viscera. 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE SURGICAL TREATMENT OF ACUTE PERITONITIS. 

Cases of acute peritonitis may be classified into three 
groups : 

1. Those in which the inflammation is locaHsed, and an 

abscess, definitely and sharply separated from the 
rest of the peritoneum, is present. 

2. Those in which the peritonitis is spreading away from 

the original source of infection, but in which some 
part of the peritoneum is demonstrably healthy. 

3. Those in which the affection of the peritoneum is uni- 

versal. 

The following remarks apply to the last group. The prin- 
ciples of treatment in the first and second groups are dealt 
with elsewhere. 

OPERATION IN ACUTE PERITONITIS. 

In cases of acute general peritonitis operation is indicated, 
firstly, for the purpose of giving vent to the products of 
inflammation — pus, sero-pus — and the escaped contents of 
wounded viscera; secondly, for the purpose of removing, or 
of otherwise dealing with, that organ or viscus from which 
the inflammation originally started; thirdly, for the purpose 
of cleansing, so far as is possible, the walls and recesses 
of the infected cavity ; fourthly, for the purpose of emptying, and 
if need be draining, the intestine whenever it is paralysed in over- 
distension ; and, fifthly, for the purpose of proA'iding for a further 
discharge by free drainage (which can only be of a temporary 
character) , or for shutting oft' by gauze packing the most infected 
part of the cavity. I do not think that in any abdominal opera- 
tions ever undertaken b}'' the surgeon the need for speed, com- 



I20 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

bined with aptness, can be greater than in these. Slow opera- 
tions mean death from shock; imperfect operations mean death 
from a continuance of the acute inflammation. Perfunctory 
work and slow work are both out of place. 

It must be the surgeon's duty, therefore, to ensure that 
every precaution is taken to lessen or avoid the incidence of 
shock, and to see that absolutely everything needed in the 
operation is ready before the ansesthetic is administered. 

As a rule, an enema of lo or 12 ounces of warm water 
with an ounce of brandy and a hypodermic injection of 10 
minims of liquor strychninae will be given. The cleansing of 
the abdomen can generally be done before the ether is given. 
The abdomen is opened by a free incision in the middle line. 
As soon as the peritoneum is incised, the character of the es- 
caping fluid is noticed. The fluid in the case of perforated 
gastric ulcer is generally turbid, abundant, and flakes of lymph 
or of food are floating in it. When the duodenum is perfor- 
ated, the fluid may be bile-stained. In both, the gas, which 
is also present free in the peritoneal cavity, is odourless; this 
is a point of considerable diagnostic importance, for if the gas 
be of strong odour, perforation in the stomach or duodenum 
can almost certainly be excluded. If the fluid be darkish 
brown and offensive, a low perforation of the intestine will 
be suspected. In cases of typhoid fever in which an ulcer 
perforates the fluid is turbid, contains brownish material and 
particles of curdled milk or other food. The characters of 
the fluid are not always such as to give help to the surgeon. 
Pus may result from a variety of conditions, and its abomi- 
nable offensi\'eness, though suggesting a perforation of the ap- 
pendix more decidedly than any other lesion, is not pathog- 
nomonic. 

.The hand or three fingers are now introduced within the 
abdomen with the most scrupulous gentleness and care. The 
damage done by clumsiness now may be irreparable; the 
rough and forcible pushing of the hand indiscriminately within 



SURGICAL TREATMENT OF ACUTE PERITONITIS. 121 

the abdomen may rupture the thin and tender peritoneum 
tightly stretched over an inflamed intestine, and leakage of 
highly infective organisms through these rents may produce 
a fatal inflammation. 

The search within the abdomen is purposeful. The 
caecum is first sought, in order to ascertain the condition of 
the appendix, and in order to discover the condition, as to dis- 
tension, of the c^cum itself. If the appendix be discovered 
to be gangrenous, it is dealt with at once in the usual manner. 
If the caecum is found distended, it is clear that the lesion, 
if of an obstructive character, is in the large intestine. The 
sigmoid is then sought; if that too is distended, the condition 
(if the rectum be unobstructed, which, presumably, it is 
known by previous experience to be) is one of general par- 
alytic distension of the intestine due to a universal inflam- 
mation. If a search has so far proved ineffective and the con- 
dition of the patient permits a further investigation, a close 
scrutiny should be made in order to discover any thick local- 
ised deposit of lymph. This, in the majority of instances, 
will lead to the discovery of the source of ofl:ence, for the first 
and instant response of the peritoneum to injury is the abun- 
dant outpouring of lymph and fluid. If it be noticed that 
though fluid is everywhere present a thick, "wash-leathery" 
deposit of lymph is conflned to one area alone, in that area 
the perforation or other source of irritation may confldently 
be sought. 

The primary disease having been discovered and having 
been dealt with as seems best, the question next arises as to 
the surest means of cleansing the peritoneal cavity. With 
regard to this matter there are still widely divergent opinions 
among surgeons of great experience. Some advocate the 
free universal flushing of the peritoneum; others are convinced 
that this is largely a measure of harm, and are content w4th 
gentle sponging, while still others rely solely upon the inser- 
tion of drains of rubber tubing. 



122 ABDOMINAL OPEIL\TIONS. 

M3' own practice in cases where there are particles of food, 
lymph, or a very turbid exudate is at once to make a second in- 
cision in what seems the most appropriate place for affording free 
drainage — in the case of the appendix, the incision is made 
over the iliac fossa. Through this incision a piece of large 
rubber tubing attached to a funnel is introduced, and a free 
irrigation of hot sterile salt solution is begun. If both renal 
pouches are affected and a copious deposit of pus is found in 
them, incisions are made into them from above the iliac crest. 
Incision and drainage in these places may serve to prevent 
a subphrenic abscess. I frequently make three, and occasion- 
ally even five, incisions into the abdomen, each large enough 
to take a split rubber tube. It is impossible to drain the whole 
peritoneal cavity through a simple opening — the difficulty, in- 
deed, is to drain it adequately through many openings. Such 
drainage is only temporar}^ owing to the rapid encapsulation of 
the tube. None the less it is of supreme advantage and im- 
portance. 

It is constantty said that the lavage of the peritoneal 
cavity is largely futile because the recesses and complexities 
of the peritoneum are such that no flushing, however care- 
fully executed, can possibly clean out all the collections. I 
am disposed to doubt the accuracy of these observations. 
With a supple rubber tube of good diameter, a free flow" of 
saline solution, and easy means of escape b}^ tubes introduced 
into other incisions, a reasonably complete cleansing is cer- 
tainly possible. 

It is the practice of man}^ surgeons to leave as much fluid 
as possible in the peritoneal cavity. Whether much or little 
is left seems a matter of indift'erence, for if much be left, there 
is probably an easy escape for it within a very short 
time through the various incisions, each holding its own drain- 
age-tube. As a rule, I mop gently any specially infected part 
of the abdomen and empty away all excess of fluid. A rub- 
bing of the peritoneum, when gauze swabs are introduced for 



SURGICAL TREATMENT OF ACUTE PERITONITIS. I23 

mopping purposes, is to be expressly avoided, for this rough 
friction probably does more hurt to the peritoneum than any- 
thing else. 

As a rule, only the original incision needs to be sutured; 
the other openings are purposely made of a size no larger than 
is necessary for the easy introduction of the drainage-tube. 

The making of the multiple incisions in this manner does 
not in the least weaken the abdominal wall, for the surgeon 
is careful to split through the muscles everywhere, and not 
to cut them rashly; and is careful, also, to avoid the section 
of nerves. 

There are many surgeons of ripe experience who advise 
that in order to secure more complete cleansing of the perito- 
neum the whole intestine should be brought outside the inci- 
sion, or at least well into the w^ound, loop by loop, and 
thoroughly cleansed by washing or wiping "with consider- 
able force" the entire surface of bowel and mesentery. I have 
never carried out this advice, and I cannot think that it is 
one likely to advance the patient's chances of survival. It 
is a little too heroic. 

J. A. Blake (" Amer. Jour. Med. Sci., " 1907, vol. i), in a paper 
on the treatment of diffuse suppurative peritonitis, has advo- 
cated a less universal adoption of peritoneal drainage in these 
cases. He lays down the following operative rules : 

1. Remove as rapidly as possible through a small incision 
the origin of the inflammation. 

2. Wash or irrigate the peritoneal cavity with a double irri- 
gator. 

3. Drain as little as possible, and do not attempt to drain 
the general peritoneal cavity. 

After the lavage has been completed he closes the incision, 
leaving a small opening for wound drainage. The drain simply 
passes through the wound, and just enters the abdomen, allow- 
ing the excess of the irrigating fluid to escape and preventing 
wound suppuration. 



124 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

If deep drainage is necessary, owing to imperfect removal of 
the cause of the peritonitis, insecure closure of a perforation, or 
necrotic material, a suitable drain is carried down to the site in a 
manner similar to that adopted when there is no diffuse peri- 
tonitis. Blake writes: 

"With regard to drainage, if after irrigating one can feel as- 
sured that there is nothing left in the peritoneum but what can 
be absorbed, there is no need of drainage. If there is something 
left which probably will not be absorbed, one should drain, but 
should only drain down to the doubtful substance." 

He gives the following statistics: 

Cases of Diffuse Peritonitis Due to Appendicitis 
Deaths 15 

Not drained 7 

Drained 8 

7 to stump of appendix, i to pelvis 
Recoveries 63 

Not drained 31 

Drain to stump of appendix 28 

Drain to pelvis 4 

Total 78 

Cases Due to Gastric or Duodenal Extravasation 
Deaths 4 

Not drained 2 

Drain to suture 2 

Recoveries 9 

Not drained 4 

Drain to suture 4 

Drain to pelvis i 

Total 13 

Typhoid Perforations 
Deaths 4 

Drained 3 

Drain of pelvic abscess i 

Recoveries 4 

Not drained 2 

Drained 2 

Total 8 

A further point to be considered in all these desperate 
cases, when distension, even to paralysis of the gut, is present, 



SURGICAL TREATMENT OF ACUTE PERITONITIS. 1 25 

lias reference to the need for evacuating the contents of the 
intestine by enterotomy or enterostomy. Tliere can be no 
question that in many cases a free evacuation of the stagnant 
gas and faecal material is entirely an advantage. The intes- 
tines are little likely to regain their power of contraction when 
distension has passed beyond a certain point, and when this 
power returns, there seems to be a return also of the rapidity 
of absorption of the intestinal contents. These are of an in- 
tensely toxic character, as we know by abundant painful ex- 
perience and by the experiments of Kader. The emptying 
of the intestine should, therefore, be considered an almost 
routine practice. If carried out in the manner described else- 
where, with the help of a glass tube inserted into the bowel, 
upon which the gut is drawn, the emptying of the intestines 
is a simple, speedy, and satisfactory matter. The opening, 
of course, is made as low down in the intestine as possible. Len- 
nander makes two or three openings in the intestines at various 
levels, establishing at each a "Witzel fistula." The lowest 
of these fistulas leads into the caecum, and is used, if need 
be, for administering liquid food by the colon. 

Dr. Andrew McCosh has suggested — and I have frequently 
acted upon this important suggestion — that a large dose of 
sulphate of magnesia should be introduced into the intestine, 
high up, for the purpose of ensuring a return of peristalsis. 
Dr. McCosh (Intern. Soc. of Surgery, Sept., 1905) wrote: " Though 
I still employ this method I am less enthusiastic as to its value. 
Some surgeons, however, regard it with favour and I am still 
inclined to believe that it is often beneficial. If the source of 
the peritonitis has not been removed it of course should never 
be employed. " 

As soon as the patient returns to bed, he is propped 
up almost in the sitting posture. This is far more comfort- 
able for him, allows drainage down towards the pelvis, and 
aw;ay from the diaphragm, and thereby lessens the risks of 
that most serious complication, subphrenic abscess. 



126 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

B. H. Buxton ("Jour. Med. Research," Boston, March, 1907) 
has shown that bacteria, when injected into peritoneal cavity, 
even in minute doses, reach the circulation in a few minutes by 
way of the lymphatics of the diaphragm. If these results be 
applied to man, then the Fowler position is indicated to avoid a 
rush of bacteria toward the diaphragm and flushing the abdom- 
inal cavity is not indicated. 

Of late years irrigation in cases of acute peritonitis is less fre- 
quently adopted than formerly. Surgeons have learnt the im- 
portance of respecting the diaphragmatic area, the risk of washing 
away phagocytes by indiscriminate irrigation. 

Warmth should be freely applied to the patient; rubber 
bottles filled with hot water and swathed in flannel should 
be placed close to the body and extremities. Care is, of course, 
taken to ensure that the patient is not burnt by these. In 
many cases, especially if vomiting has been a troublesome 
and persistent symptom, the stomach must be washed out 
before the patient leaves the operating-table, and, if neces- 
sary, an ounce or two of hot water, in which some Rochelle 
salts or sulphate of magnesia is dissolved, is allowed to re- 
main in the stomach. If vomiting persists after the opera- 
tion, the stomach may again be washed out, with great re- 
lief to the patient. 

If collapse occurs or deepens, the infusion of about i^ 
to 2 pints of saline solution into the median basilic or other 
accessible vein will help the patient to rally. This may be 
repeated at the end of twelve to twenty-four hours if necessary. 

I have used, with striking success in many cases, the 
method, introduced by Kocher, of continuous subcutaneous 
infusion. Two needles connected by india-rubber tubes and a 
Y tube, with a funnel, are introduced into the subcutaneous 
tissue, one into each thigh or one into each axilla. Normal 
saline solution is poured into the funnel and drains slowly into 
the tissue. About one pint in an hour is the best quantity to 
introduce. Care must be taken to keep the fluid at the proper 



SURGICAL TREATMENT OF ACUTE PERITONITIS. 12/ 

temperature (about 105° F. in the fininel). To the first pint 
of the saHne solution (0.9 per cent.) ma}^ be added 2 to 8 per 
cent, of glucose and ^ to 2 per cent, pure alcohol; subsequently, 
saline solution only is given. For many cases continuous rectal 
injection acts equally well, and it is easier to keep at the proper 
temperature. 

The bowels should be encouraged to act as soon as pos- 
sible by the administration of turpentine enemata or by the 
injection of glycerine. 

Hypodermic injections of str}^chnine, say 5 minims every 
four hours, can often be given with advantage. 

It is worthy of note that the method above described does 
not meet with universal sanction. There are surgeons who 
do not use the method of flushing the peritoneal cavity, be- 
ing content with incision and drainage; and there are others 
who follow Dr. Joseph Blake, of New York, in his practice 
of free irrigation of the peritoneum without drainage. 

Dr. Blake writes : "I was formerly a warm advocate ol 
abundant drainage; later I became convinced of the uttei 
impossibility of draining every part of the peritoneal cavit>', 
for it was evident that the drains were soon isolated by ad- 
hesions, so I next confined myself to the drainage of the field 
of operation, and then, perceiving that the other similarly 
affected regions of the peritoneum took care of themselves, 
I omitted drainage almost entirely and only employed it when 
the presence of necrotic tissues or haemorrhage demanded it." 

My own practice in these cases is to ensure, as far as pos- 
sible, cleansing by free lavage, free drainage, and, if need be, 
emptying of the intestine by enterotomy or enterostomy. 



CHAPTER VII. 
TUBERCULOUS PERITONITIS. 

Three forms of tuberculous peritonitis are recognised: 

1. The ascitic or miliary form. 

2. The fibrous form. 

3. The suppurative (ulcerative) form. 

It is of the first importance from the surgical point of view 
to bear constantly in mind the fact that the various forms of 
tuberculous peritonitis are secondary, and not primary, diseases. 
The invasion of the peritoneum occurs from some organ within 
the abdomen which itself has been attacked by a tuberculous 
process. Just as acute septic peritonitis is due to the spread of 
infection from some organ which has been first attacked (the 
appendix, for example), so in tuberculous peritonitis the peri- 
toneal invasion starts out from some organ which has been 
primarily affected by the disease. The importance of this 
knowledge of the secondary character of the tuberculous 
process in the peritoneum, so far as concerns treatment, cannot 
well be exaggerated. 

I. In the ascitic form the peritoneal cavity is filled with a 
clear serous efl:usion. The peritoneum, both parietal and vis- 
ceral, is covered with small nodules, which are placed as close 
together as is possible. Wherever one looks or feels it is the 
same, — the peritoneum is thickly studded with fine rough gran- 
ules. A piece of intestine, allowed to escape from the wound, 
shews a peritoneal surface that has lost all its smoothness and 
polish. The surface is rough, congested, red, and thickened. 
If carelessly handled, it is apt to bleed, or some of the outer coat 
may slither away beneath the finger. The fiuid is free in the 
peritoneum, there are no loculi, and there are no adhesions, 
as a rule. 

12S 



TUBERCULOUS PERITONITIS. I29 

In a certain number of cases the deposit of tubercles may 
be so thick that a definite, palpable tumor may be formed. 
Thus the omentum may be an inch or even more in thickness, 
and it may be shortened and puckered upwards to the greater 
curvature of the stomach. The primary source of infection, a 
Fallopian tube, the appendix, an ulcer in the intestine, or a 
mesenteric gland, may be recognised or may be securely walled 
off in a mass of protective adhesions. 

2. The fibrous form is comparatively rare. It is due to a 
similar deposit of tubercles to that already described, but there 
is a complete absence of serous effusion. The opposing peri- 
toneal surfaces have everywhere become adherent, until, at the 
last, there is no peritoneal cavity left. However extensively 
adhesions are separated, adhesions still are met with. It is 
quite exceptional to find even a few drops of serous effusion. 

In certain rare instances a combination of the conditions 
described above may be found. There is a localised cystic swell- 
ing whose walls consist solely of fibrous tissue, wdth a deposit of 
tubercles universally distributed, separating the fluid from the 
intestines which lie immediately outside. The peritoneal cavity 
elsewhere is obliterated by adhesions, and tubercles may be seen 
scattered everywhere. I have recently operated upon such a 
case, — a cystic tumour without pedicle enucleated from a bed 
formed by the intestines, which, in other parts, were so adherent 
that separation was impossible. Cystic swellings may develop in 
the pelvis of women and form tumors resembling ovarian cysts. 
Their walls are fibrous and thick, and into their cavity the patu- 
lous end of a tuberculous Fallopian tube will be found to open. 

3. The suppurative form is found in those cases in which the 
tubercles, deposited in the peritoneum, have undergone case- 
ation. As the result of a mixed infection, suppuration occurs. 
In such circumstances it is constantly found that the pus becomes 
localised. A general distension of the peritoneal cavity with pus 
is rare ; the rule is to find one or more loculi completely separate 
one from another, each containing fluid. In all, the fluid may be 

VOL I Q 



130 ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 

purulent, or pus may be found in one, and clear or turbid fluid 
in another. The visceral walls bounding an abscess cavity are 
often attenuated, even to such a degree that the gentlest hand- 
ling may result in rupture. This form of the disease is more 
common in children. 

The question as to the advisability or necessity for surgical 
treatment has excited great interest and frequent discussion. 
The opinion of surgeons is now almost unanimously in favour of 
operation in the ascitic form of the disease, and against operation 
in both the fibrous and the ulcerous forms. In the ascitic form 
the results, both immediate and remote, are good; the immedi- 
ate results are, indeed, very often surprising. The patient al- 
most at once makes haste to improve; he eats better, puts on 
weight, and his appearance improves almost beyond recognition. 
The permanent results are, perhaps, not quite so remarkable. 
After a period of the brightest health, the patient's vitality may 
flag ; other deposits than that in the peritoneum may take on a 
great activity, and patches of disease in the lungs, or pleura, or 
the generative organs, may grow apace. This is especially the 
case when the primary source of the disease has been allowed 
to remain. If the abdomen has been merely opened, emptied 
of fluid, and closed, the primary source of infection, the Fallo- 
pian tube or the appendix, may continue to pour out its supply 
of active bacilli into the peritoneal cavity as it did before. The 
effusion reappears, and a second, or a third, or a fourth operation 
may be necessary. When, however, the primary disease has 
been removed, the results are very much more satisfactory. 
"Recurrence," so called, of tuberculous peritonitis, means con- 
tinued infection. 

Before reckoning up the advantages of surgical treatment 
in this disease it is necessary to recall the fact that tuberculous 
disease of the peritoneum tends not rarely to spontaneous re- 
cover^^ Patients may remain ill from the disease for months, 
but under careful nursing, with generous but prudent feeding 
and a plentiful supply of fresh air, they may slowly return to 



TUBERCULOSIS PERITONITIS. I3I 

health. Borchgrevink comes to the conclusion that approxi- 
mately one-third of all cases recover spontaneously or under 
careful medical treatment. This estimate is probably in excess 
of the truth, and it does not take into account the cases in which, 
after months or even years of apparent relief, the tuberculous 
process spreads to other parts and, by its increase, causes death. 
The results of surgical treatment haA'C been studied by 
many writers. Rorsch, writing in 1895, gave the result of his 
examination into the histories of 358 cases. Thirty-two pa- 
tients died as a result of the operation; 51 patients died within 
eighteen months as a result of a recurrence of this disease, or of 
an extension of disease in areas affected before the operation 
was undertaken. The remaining 275 cases all shewed improve- 
ment ; in 63 of these, over two years had elapsed from the time 
of the operation, and all these patients were in good health 
and free from obvious disease. 

Wunderlich, in a series of 344 cases, found that 81 patients 
died as the result of the operation. Of the remainder, 80 
patients had remained well for over three years. 

Margaracci reported 250 cases of laparotomy in Italy with 
85 per cent, of recoveries; Adossides, 405 operations with 75 
per cent, of recoveries. 

These lists undoubtedly include cases all of which were not 
suitable for operation. If those patients suffering from the as- 
citic form are alone treated by operation, the results will shew 
a permanently good result in at least 50 to 60 per cent, of cases. 
In Czerny's clinic 40 to 50 per cent, of cures are reported, and 
in recent years these results ha^-e been surpassed. 

Operations performed upon patients aff'ected by the fibrous 
form of disease are rarely productive of any good result, and some 
harm may undoubtedly be done by the attempted separation 
of adherent coils of bowel. 

In such cases, the intestine may be wounded when the ab- 
dominal incision is made, for there may be a firm agglutination 
between the bowel and the parietal peritoneum. 



132 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

In a few instances circumscribed pseudocysts may form 
between the adherent coils of intestine; often small, they may 
at times increase in size rapidly and come at the last to form 
cysts having a capacity of several pints. Such C3''sts have no 
walls other than the walls of the bowel around them; their 
remoA-al is then impossible. When opened, they should be emp- 
tied, wiped out carefully, and not drained. As Murphy points 
out, these cyst-cavities are easily infected, and once infected 
the\^ continue as suppurating sinuses for months. 

The suppuratiA'e form of the disease is often secondary to a 
suppurative disease in the Fallopian tube or in the intestine. 
AYhen treated by operation, the results are sometimes disastrous, 
for faecal fistula may be caused by the gentlest handling of the 
bowel, or the gut, already w^eakened by disease, ma}^ burst, 
either at once or in a few days, into the abscess cavity after the 
pus has been allowed to escape. 

There are cases, however, of localised suppuration which are 
rightly treated b}^ operation. They are the cases in which a 
circumscribed cyst formation, as previously described, has oc- 
curred, and the suppuration is due to a mixed infection. These 
cysts should be opened, gently cleansed, mopped out with weak 
formalin solution, and closed. Murphy relates an extreme case 
of this kind. He writes: "In one of my cases there were 
no intestines except the descending colon and the rectum below 
the umbilicus, a firm diaphragm of adhesions having formed 
across the abdomen at the umbilical level. The peritoneum 
above this diaphragm was free from tuberculosis ; below the dia- 
phragm was one large empyema of the peritoneum. After 
opening and draining the cavity, this wall proved so dense and 
firm that there was verv^ little contraction and the patient suc- 
cumbed to the toxaemia of the mixed infection. The abdomen 
should have been closed after the exploration and repeatedly 
aspired and injected with a solution of formalin-iodoform- 
glycerin." 

To sum up: vSurgical measures should be adopted only in 



TUBERCULOUS PERITONITIS. I33 

those cases of tuberculous peritonitis in which there is effusion 
of fluid into the general peritoneal cavity. In these cases a 
decided benefit results from the operation; the immedate effect 
is often remarkably good, and the number of cases in which a 
permanently satisfactory result is obtained is probably 50 per 
cent, of the whole. The fibrous and the suppurative forms of 
peritonitis are rarely suited to treatment by operation ; opera- 
tion in most of these cases almost certainly does harm rather 
than good. 

It is certainly desirable that operation should be practised 
in an early stage of the disease, or at least should not be postponed 
until the patient has become so wasted and exhausted that the 
shock of the operation is likely to be serious. After a trial 
of general medical treatment for three to six months after the 
onset of a fluid effusion, surgical measures should certainly be 
advocated. 

OPERATION. 

The operative treatment of tuberculous peritonitis is due to 
Spencer Wells who, in 1862, opened the abdomen of a patient 
whom he supposed to be suffering from an ovarian cyst. Tu- 
berculous peritonitis was found and the abdomen was closed. 
To everyone's surprise the patient rapidly improved after opera- 
tion, and was soon cured of her disease. The first formal advo- 
cacy of laparotomy as a therapeutic measure is, however, due 
to Konig, in 1884. 

The surgical indications in dealing with tuberculous peri- 
tonitis by operation are, as stated b}^ ]\Iurphy: 

1. To remove or shut off the source of supph^ of the tuber- 

culous material ; that is, to remove the primary focus 
of the disease. 

2. To remove the products of the infective process from the 

peritoneum. 

3. To increase the tissue proliferation for the encapsulation 

of the foci already present. 

4. To avoid mixed infection. 



134 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

The operation in the ascitic form of the disease is of the 
simplest character: The abdomen is opened in the middle line 
below the umbilicus, an incision of about four inches being 
made. Care is necessary when the parietal peritoneum is being 
incised, for the membrane is often greatly thickened, and a 
coil of intestine may chance to be adherent to its under surface. 
As soon as the peritoneum is incised, some fluid will escape. 
The fluid should be emptied as completely as possible; as soon 
as the flow from the wound has ceased, the edges of the incision 
are held apart and a sterile gauze swab is passed into the pelvis 
and into the kidney pouches, so as to mop up any fluid that lies 
there. In doing this all rough manipulation must be avoided ; 
the peritoneum must be gently patted with the swab, and not 
rubbed by it. Friction will only start a slight but troublesome 
bleeding from many points. 

In these manipulations it may become evident that the ori- 
gin of the disease lies in some special portion of the abdominal 
contents in the Fallopian tube, intestine or appendix. If the 
surgeon feels assured of this, he should not hesitate to remove 
the source of offence, for a complete healing of the disease is 
then more likely to result. Resection of a diseased part of the 
intestine or short-circuiting may therefore be necessary. If 
the patient is a woman, it is well to place her in the Trendelen- 
burg position as soon as the fluid is emptied away. A free 
examination of the pelvic organs is then possible, and an affected 
tube or tubes can be at once removed. In cases of the ascitic 
form of the disease an operation should not be considered com- 
plete which leaves unexamined any of those areas which are 
known to be commonly the primary sources of infection. In 
women undoubtedly the peritoneal inflammation is secondary 
to tubal disease in a very large number of cases, and in all such 
the affected tube must be removed. The very significant patu- 
lous condition of the fimbriated opening of the Fallopian tube 
should always be remembered. As Murphy has shewn, it in- 
dicates invariably the presence of tuberculous disease within 



TUBERCULOSIS PERITONITIS. I35 

the tube. The exposure of the tube and its removal may be 
extremely difficult. The adhesions are so complex, the adher- 
ent bowel so thin and friable, that the utmost care is needed in 
detaching the tube. It may be that the anatomical landmarks 
are obliterated in a bewildering mesh of adhesions. The round 
ligament must then be sought at the internal abdominal ring 
and traced backwards to the uterus. Little by little, adhesions 
are separated with the utmost gentleness, until the tube is well 
exposed. 

The cavity being rendered as dry as possible, the abdominal 
wound is closed by suture in the usual manner. Drainage 
should not be practised, — it is of no advantage, and it is not 
unlikely to do harm by causing adhesion of the drainage ma- 
terial to a piece of bowel which may subsequently give way. 

Some surgeons advocate the introduction into the abdomen 
of iodoform; others, the washing out of the peritoneal cavity; 
others again, drainage through the vagina in the female. All 
these are unnecessary. Simple opening, emptying and closing 
of the abdomen, with removal of the primary focus, are all 
that are necessary to ensure success; and, throughout, the 
utmost gentleness is needed. 

In cases of all kinds, but more especially in those where the 
quantity of fluid in the abdomen is small, the introduction of 
warm sterile white paraffin, in the largest quantities possible, is a 
great advantage in preventing the reformation of adhesions. 
Sterile warm oil or vaseline may also be used, or possibh^ the 
formaline-gelatine solution used in experimental work by Archi- 
bald. I have no personal experience of anything but paraffin. 

The reason for the success of simple evacuation of the fluid 
is not quite clear. On the whole, the explanation given b}^ 
Gatti seems the most reasonable. He believes that the fluid 
poured out by the peritoneum after closure of the wound, like 
the fluid found in the general peritonium when a localised ap- 
pendicitis is present, is actively bactericidal, and that it exerts 
a potent deleterious influence upon the tubercle bacillus. It is 



136 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

certain that in many cases, probably in all, an effusion does 
occur into the peritoneum in sufficient quantit}^ to be easily 
recognised on palpation and percussion. Hildebrandt lays 
stress upon the occurrence of postoperative hyperaemia, which 
causes a plastic outpouring around the tuberculous nodules, 
resulting in their fibrous encapsulation. This is a method of 
"cure" constantly seen elsewhere. 

Murphy writes: "If the peritoneum be inspected three or 
foiu- days after the laparotomy, as I have had opportunity to do 
on more than one occasion, it will be found intensely congested, 
its A'ascularity greatly increased, its gloss almost or quite abol- 
ished, and the fluid, not fresh, clear serum, but cloudy or sero- 
punilent, showing the most active proliferation. It is this 
tissue proliferation which overwhelms and encapsulates the 
tubercular foci on the surface of the peritoneum." If the 
primar}' focus is the tube, removal of the fluid allows the open 
tube to fall against the peritoneum, to contract adhesions, and 
at last to become seciu-eh' walled off from the general peritoneum. 
Here, as in so many other parts, the "cure" of tuberculous areas 
means the encapsulation of the bacilli in the firm grasp of newly 
formed fibrous tissue. 

[I would refer readers interested in this subject to two ex- 
tremely valuable papers, Dr. J. B. Murphy's "Tuberculosis of 
the Female Genitalia, " and Dr. AV. J. ]\Iayo"s article in the "Jour- 
nal of the American ^Medical Association," April 15, 1905.] 



CHAPTER VIII. 

SUBPHRENIC ABSCESS. 

An abscess beneath the diaphragm, between it and the 
Hver, may be either intraperitoneal or extraperitoneal ; it 
may lie to the right or to the left of the suspensory ligament 
of the liver. The intraperitoneal form is decidedly more fre- 
quent than the extraperitoneal, and the abscess is more com- 
monly found upon the right side. 




Fig. 28. — Subphrenic abscess (riglit side). 

The upper and posterior surfaces of the liver are partly 
covered by peritoneum, partly devoid of any serous covering. 
The suspensory ligament forms an oblique partition, divid- 
ing the liver into a larger right, and smaller left, portion. 

An abscess which lies to the right of the falciform liga- 
ment begins generally in inflammation affecting the gall-blad- 
der, the liver, the kidney, or the appendix. An abscess 
which lies to the left of this ligament starts, in the majority 



138 ABDOMIXAL OPERATIONS. 

of cases, from a perforating ulcer of the stomach or duo- 
denum, or from inflammation in the pancreas, intestines, 
spleen, or left kidney. The commonest source of infection I 
formerlv believed to be the appendix, but recent statistics do not 
support this view. Korte reported a series of 60 cases upon 




Fig. 29. — Subphrenic abscess (left side). 



which he had operated, 40 patients recovering. The origin of 
the abscess was in the appendix in 2 7 cases ; in the stomach in 
9; the duodenum in i; the spleen in 5. He gives the follow- 
ing statement : 

Source of Abscess. XuiiBER of Cases. Recox-ered. Died. 

Appendix 27 18 q 

Stomach 9 5 4 

Duodenum i o 1 

Spleen 5 3 2 

Kidney 4 2 2 

Liver and gall-bladder 2 2 o 

Pleura 4 3 1 

Costal 2 2 o 

Pancreas i i o 

Hydatid 3 3 o 

Undetermined 2 i i 

60 40 20 



SUBPHRENIC ABSCESS. 1 39 

Perutz ("Cent. f. d. Grenzgebiet. der ]\Ied. und Chir.," 1905, 
Nos. 4 to 10, inclusive) has collected the records of 208 cases. 
He gives the following table to shew the starting-point in his 
own series of cases, and in IMa^^dl's and Korte's: 

In Perutz's In Maydl's In Korte's 

Series Series Series 

Stomach 67 35 9 

Duodenum 3 8 i 

Appendix 55 25 27 

Liver and bile passages 17 20 2 

Hydatid 5 17 3 

Intestine 7 5 o 

Pancreas 4 o i 

Spleen • 4 o 5 

Kidney 7 ir 4 

Ribs I 3 2 

Intrathoracic 8 9 4 

Female generative organs 6 o o 

Traumatic 8 6 o 

Metastatic 5 11 o 

Various and unknown ; 11 11 2 

Total 208 179 60 

E. R. Hunt ("Lancet," Dec. 17, 1904, p. 1718) reports 38 cases 
of subphrenic abscess occurring at St. Mary's Hospital. In 
19 cases the primary lesion was situated in the stomach. The 
other probable causes were : duodenal ulcer in 3 ; hepatic ab- 
scess in 4 ; appendicitis in 3 ; perityphlitis in 4 ; malignant 
disease of the stomach in 2 ; renal calculus in i ; splenic ab- 
scess in I ; and injury in i . Left-sided subphrenic abscesses 
were met with more frequently than right-sided, and in only 
I of the 19 cases consequent upon gastric ulcer did right-sided 
abscess occur. 

"The pus was situated between the left lobe of the liver, 
the diaphragm, and the spleen. Sometimes the pus was situ- 
ated to the left of the spleen, between that organ and the 
diaphragm. Of this group there were seven examples, all 
due to perforation through the posterior wall of the stomach. 
More rarely the abscess might be in front of the stomach 
and liver, being bounded in front by the diaphragm and ab- 



140 



ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 



dominal wall and behind b}^ the left lobe of the liver and the 
stomach; of this group there were three examples. Right- 
sided subphrenic abscesses were nearly always situated be- 
tween the liver and the diaphragm, their spreading left and 
right being prevented b}^ the falciform ligament and the tho- 
racic wall. They tended to extend downwards and backwards 
in a large number of instances, not infrequently reaching as 
far as the right kidnev." 





Fig. 30. — Subphrenic abscess in front 
of the liver. 



Fig. 31. — Subphrenic abscess in the 
lesser sac. 



The inflammation from the appendix may spread up- 
wards, within the peritoneal cavit^^ along the outer side of 
the colon, in the manner already described, or it may pass 
upwards in the loose cellular tissue behind the colon. 

When an ulcer of the stomach destroys, by slow degrees, 
the entire thickness of the wall, a ''chronic perforation'' 
occurs and a perigastric abscess results. In many cases this 
abscess lies immediately beneath the diaphragm. 



SUBPHRENIC ABSCESS. 



141 



Disease of the gall-bladder, bile-ducts, and intrahepatic 
ducts may all lead to diffuse suppuration between the liver 
and the diaphragm. Abscesses, at first within the substance 
of the liver, may, in a later stage, and in their gradual 
enlargement, burst through the bounds of the liver and be- 
come subphrenic. 

In the majority of cases a subphrenic abscess contains 
gas, which is derived, as a rule, from the action of gas-form- 
ing bacteria, but may also come 
from a hollow viscus. For this reason 
gas is more often found to be pres- 
ent in an abscess on the left side 
than in one on the right. 

The diagnosis of subphrenic ab- 
scess is often difficult, especially if 
there be no free gas within the cav- 
ity. When there is fluid, serous or 
purulent, at the base of the right 
lung, this difficulty is considerably 
enhanced. The physical signs that 
may be elicited are the following: 

On the right side posteriorly 
there will be dulness at the base of 
the chest. If there be no free gas 
within the abscess, the liver dulness 
will merge above into the dulness 
produced by the overlying pus. The 
upper edge of this dull area will be convex. The physical 
signs are, therefore, the same, in such a case, as in a case of 
abscess of the liver. When, however, gas is present within 
the abscess, the signs are most characteristic. Percussion 
reveals three zones of different resonance, one above the 
other. The upper is the normal resonance of the lung ; in the 
middle there is the tympany due to the gas within the 
abscess; in the lower, the dulness due to the fluid within 




Fig. 



32. — Subphrenic abscess; 
retroperitoneal. 



142 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

the abscess; this latter dulness merges into the dulness of 
the Hver. 

Abscesses on the left side, coming as they do from the 
stomach or duodenum, contain gas; the physical signs, there- 
fore, are generally those which have just been described. 

When pleuritic effusion is present above the subphrenic 
abscess, four zones of var^dng resonance may be encountered. 
The topmost is the normal resonance ; the next is a dulness 
due to the pleuritic fluid; the next, a tympany due to the 
gas of the abscess; and, lowest of all, a dull area due to the 
pus in the abscess cavity. 

An abscess on the right side may push the liver down- 
wards. On both sides a bulging of the chest-wall or of the 
anterior abdominal wall may be seen. 

The diagnosis in all cases must be verified by the exami- 
nation of the chest with an exploring needle of fair size and 
of good length. As a rule, the most sensitive part of the dull 
area is selected for the introduction of the needle; repeated 
introduction of the needle may be necessar\^, for the pus is 
often thick and will not run easily through even a stout 
needle. In some cases there is a thick, tenacious layer of 
lymph on the upper surface of the liver, and this blocks the 
needle instantly. 

The frequency of the association of pleural complications in 
cases of subphrenic abscess can only be gauged with certainty 
in cases which are operated upon b}' the transpleural method, or 
in those fatal ones where a postmortem examination is made. 
In Korte's series of 60 cases (reported by Gruneisen) pleural 
complications were found in 40. In Perutz's series of 208 cases 
it is noted that pleural affections were observed in 55, but in 
many cases the abscess was opened by median or lateral abdom- 
inal incision. In some no operation was performed; in some 
the clinical record is brief. Korte makes the interesting observa- 
tion that in the cases where he performed a transpleural opera- 
tion the pleura ''was seldom free from disease." 



SUBPHRENIC ABSCESS. 1 43 

OPERATION. 

Subphrenic abscesses may be opened in one of four ways: 

1. By incision through the anterior abdominal wall. 

2. By incision along the lower costal margin. 

3. By incision through the chest-wall and diaphragm. 

4. By a combination of the thoracic and abdom- 

inal incisions. 

1. Incision through the anterior abdominal wall is suited 
to those cases of large abscess which bulge forward in the epi- 
gastrium. These are, almost without exception, due to per- 
foration of the stomach. 

The abdomen having been opened, the abscess is reached, 
and its contents, often of amazing offensiveness, are evacu- 
ated. After the gas and much fluid have escaped, a pool of 
pus will be found to lie far back in the cavity. This must be 
m.opped up with swabs and the posterior limit of the cavity 
defined. It will then generally be found necessary to make 
a counter-opening into the abscess from the loin in order 
to ensure efficient drainage. Both anterior and posterior 
wounds are drained. I have found the split rubber drain, of a 
diameter of an inch and a half, the best of all forms to use. 
The cavity may, if thought desirable, be w^ashed out with hot 
saline solution or with a solution of peroxide of hydrogen. 

2. The incision along the costal margin is carried through 
all the muscles of the abdominal wall. The further deepen- 
ing of the wound is accomplished with great care, by blunt 
dissection with the finger, until the limits of the abscess are 
reached. A small opening is then made into the cavity and 
gradually enlarged in the direction in which it is clear that 
no harm can be done. This method is advocated by von 
Mikulicz for extraperitoneal abscesses on the right side. 

3. The transpleural operation is that most often employed. 
An incision, five or six inches in length, is made over the 



144 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

ninth or tenth ribs, on the right side, and over the seventh 
or eighth on the left side, the middle of the incision being at 
the point from which pus has been withdrawn by the explor- 
ing needle. The ribs are exposed, and about 3I or 4 inches 
of each are excised. The condition of the pleural cavity is 
then determined. If it is empty or contains onty clear fluid 
in small quantity, it must be protected from infection, either 
by packing the wound tightly with gauze and postponing the 
completion of the operation for twenty -four hours, or by the 
introduction of stitches which include the diaphragm, both 
layers of the pleura, and the chest-wall. After the stitches 
have been passed, a little gauze packing is pressed around 
the edges of the wound so as to form a sort of barrier. The 
diaphragm is then incised, the cut edges seized with forceps 
and drawn forwards (this is generally easily accomplished as 
the diaphragm is pushed well upwards by the abscess beneath 
it), and the cavity emptied, washed out gently, and drained 
with a large cigarette drainage-tube. 

4. A combination of the thoracic and abdominal incisions 
is in some instances an advantage in that it secures a more 
certain drainage. The thoracic incision is carried on to the 
abdomen, and the cavity above the liver freely opened. An 
abundant supply of gauze is introduced into the cavity and 
frequently removed in order to ensure free drainage and a 
speedy healing. 

Perutz gives the following tabular statement of the results of 
cases treated by operation in the three series already mentioned : 



SUBPHRENIC ABSCESS. 
TABLE OF CASES TREATED BY OPERATION. 



145 



Stomach 

Duodenum 

Appendix 

Liver and bile passages 

Hydatid 

Intestine 

Pancreas , 

Spleen 

Kidney 

Ribs 

Intrathoracic 

Female organs 

Traumatic 

Metastatic 

Various and unknown. 

Total 



In Perutz's 
Series 



47 

I 

40 

12 

4 
6 

3 
3 
6 

I 
6 
S 
7 
S 
9 



IS5 



33 
o 

30 
II 

3 



14 



116 



In Maydl's 

Series 



39 



14 

5 

14 



In Korte's 
Series 



74 



39 



35 



60 



9 


5 


I 





27 


18 


2 


2 


3 


3 







I 


I 



40 



The two most striking facts brought out by this table are the 
diminution in the mortaHty during the last few years, and the 
small mortality in those cases where the abscess depended upon 
diseases of the liver- or bile-passages. The cases in Maydl's 
series were treated up to the year 1894, in Perutz's series from 
1894 to 1904. The mortality in the first series was 48 per cent.; 
in the second 26 per cent. 

Perutz also analyses the 53 cases in which no operation was 
performed. Of these 44 died and 9 recovered, a mortality of 
about 85 per cent. In Maydl's unoperated cases, 104 in number, 
there were 98 deaths. 

H. L. Barnard ("Brit. Med. Jour.," 1908, i, pp. 371, 429) 
has analysed 76 consecutive cases of subphrenic abscess and has 
written an exhaustive paper on their incidence, etiology, path- 
ology, anatomical relationships, and treatment. He classifies 
the subphrenic fossae as follows : 

Right anterior. 

Right posterior. 

Left anterior. 

Left posterior. 

Right. 

Left. ■ 



Intraperitoneal 



Intraperitoneal 



146 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



The division of these spaces being made by the coronan^ falci- 
form, and the right and left hepatic ligaments. The falciform 
ligament divides the subphrenic space into right and left com- 
partments ; each of these being again subdivided into a larger an- 
terior and a smaller posterior part by the corresponding lateral 
ligament. The right extraperitoneal subphrenic space lies be- 
tween the layers of the coronary ligament and is really only a 
potential space. The left extraperitoneal subphrenic space is in 
the neighbourhood of the upper pole of the left kidney. The fol- 
lowing is an anatysis of Barnard's cases. 

ANALYSIS OF CASES. 
Anatomical Varieties. 



A. IXTRAPERITOXEAL. 

I. Right: 

(a) Anterior 

(b) Posterior ...... 

IL Left: 

(a) Anterior 

(b) Posterior 

B. Extraperitoneal. 
I. Right 

II. Left 

Not classified. . . . 



No. OF Cases. 



3° 



19 
4 



Simple. 



13 
4 



Compound. 



16 



Simple = One cavity only involved. 
Compound = Two or more cavities involved. 

Anatomical Varieties According to Causes. 



Anatomical Variety. Ulcer'*^ Appendicitis. 


Hepatic Duodenal 
Abscesses. Ulcer. 


Intraperitoneal right anterior . . 4 10 
Intraperitoneal right posterior. . i 6 
Intraperitoneal left anterior. .. . 16 i 
Intraperitoneal left posterior . . 2 

Extraperitoneal right j 

Extraperitoneal left i 


7 I 
I 2 
I I 

15 2 







Etiolo(;s". 

Cases. 

Gastric ulcer 21 

Gastric cancer 2 

Appendicitis 12 

Liver: Suppurating hydatid 8 

Liver: Tropical abscess 6 



SUBPHRENIC ABSCESS. I47 

Cases. 

Liver : Abscess i 

Pylephlebitis i 

Suppurative cholansjitis i 

Duodenal ulcer (anterior) 3 

Duodenal ulcer (posterior) 2 

Splenic abscess 3 

Pya?mia 3 

Parturition 3 

Thoracic pneumonia i 

Thoracic bronchiectasis i 

Thoracic empyema i 

Periostitis of vertebras 2 

Operations, resections 2 

Pancreas cancer i 

Kidney cystic i 

Intestine ruptured i 

Typhoid i 

Gall stones i 

Pyosalpinx i 

No cause found 2 



Age of 


75 Cases of Subphrenic Abscess Arranged in Decades. 


Age 


0— 10 


10—20 20—30 30—40 40—50 50—60 1 60—70 


Cases 


6 


5 29 : 15 


13 ^ \ ^- 





Sex of 76 Cases of Subphrenic 


Abscess. 




Cases. 


Per Cent. 


Male 




43 

33 

76 


56.6 

43-4 

100 


Female. . . . 
Total 





The Spontaneous Rupture of 23 Cases of 76 Subphrenic 

Abscesses. 

Into — Cases. 

A bronchus 4 

The pleura, right 2 

The pleura, left 3 

The general peritoneum i 

The stomach 8 

The intestine i 

The colon 2 

The skin (a) umbilicus i 

(6) right hypochondrium i 

23 



148 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

Micro-organisms Found in Pus of Subphrenic Abscesses. 

Cases. 

Number examined 12 

Sterile 3 

B. coli communis 3 

Staphylococcus aureus .2 

Streptococcus i 

Pneumococcus i 

B. pyocyaneus i 

B. typhosus I 

Onset in 76 Cases of Subphrenic Abscesses. 

Acute 40 cases = 62.6 per cent. 

Subacute \ ^^ cases = 47.4 per cent. 

Chronic J 

Gastric ulcer (21 cases): 

Acute " 15 

Subacute "[ ^ 

Chronic / 
Gastric cancer (2 cases): 

Acute o 

Subacute 1 

I 2 

Chronic / 

Appendicitis (12 cases): 

Acute 12 

Subacute ) 

Chronic / ' 
Hydatid of liver (8 cases) : 

Acute 2 

Subacute "(^ ^ 

Chronic / 
Hepatic abscesses (7 cases): 

Acute I 

Subacute | ^ 

Chronic / 
Duodenal ulcer (5 cases) 

Anterior ( = Acute) 3 

Posterior ( = Subacute) 2 

Splenic abscess (3 cases) : 

Subacute 3 



The Sig.mificance of Rigors in Subphrenic Abscesses 

Cases. 

Number recorded • 10 

Died 6 

Pyaemias (2 chronic ones lived) 5 

Communicated with .stomach 2 

Suppurative cholangitis i 

Acute periostitis i 



SUBPHRENIC ABSCESS. I49 

The Use of the Aspirating Needle in Eighteen Cases of Subphrenic 
Abscesses. Some Several Times. 

Cases 

Failed to diagnose 11 

Pus 7 

Foul pus 2 

Anchovy pus i 

Pus and serum i 

Clear serum 4 

Blood-stained serum 2 

Gas 2 

Mortality of 76 Cases of Subphrenic x\bscess. 

Deaths. Per Cent. 

76 cases 36 = 47.4 

12 cases no operation 12 = 100. o 

64 cases operated on 24 = 37.0 

21 cases operated on by author 4 = 19.0 

Analysis of 36 Deaths. 
(A) Unavoidable. — 12 deaths = 16 per cent, (about). 

Multiple abscesses of liver 5 cases 

Cancers 2 

Hour-glass stomach 2 " 

Lung complications 2 " 

General peritonitis i case 

(B) Avoidable (probably). — 24 deaths. 

Not operated on 12 cases 

Anterior operation; other pouches left 8 

Transpleural operation in dififuse stage 2 

General peritoneum opened by anterior incision i case 

Inefficient needling i " 

The Ideal Mortality of Subphrenic Abscess = about 16 per cent. 



/ 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE SURGICAL TREATMENT OF VISCERAL PROLAPSE. 

The Surgical Treatment of Gastroptosis. 

Gastroptosis is a disease, the frequency and significance 
of which are variously estimated by different writers. Glen- 
ard found a condition of enteroptosis in 400 out of 1300 pa- 
tients, and has given us the most complete description of the 
disease which has been published. 

The circumstances which are present are these: There is 
a weakening of all the natural supports of the viscera; the 
peritoneal ligaments are long, lax, and unequal to their bur- 
den, and the abdominal wall in its lower part is pushed for- 
wards, bulging in characteristic fashion; a passive dilatation 
of any parts, or of all parts, of the alimentary canal may be 
present. 

The patient complains chiefly of a sense of a heavy 
weight, of dragging, and of weariness in the abdomen. There 
is often nausea, and sometimes vomiting; there are fulness, 
flatulence, eructations. The bowels act irregularly, and con- 
stipation is always a prominent feature. The patient is 
almost always a neurasthenic of a most pronounced type. 

An examination will disclose the circumstances men- 
tioned above — a laxity of the supports and consequently an 
undue mobility of all the organs in the abdomen. 

In the great majority of cases relief is aft'orded by the wear- 
ing of an abdominal belt. In some cases, however, the wearing 
of a belt has proved ineffective and resort has been had to sur- 
gery. The operation practised is known as " gastropexy. " 

Buret's Operation. —It is to Duret, of Lille (" Revue de Chir., " 
1896, p. 430J, that we owe the first suggestion for the performance 

350 



SURGICAL TREATMENT OF VISCERAL PROLAPSE. 



LSI 



of the operation of "gastropexy. " His patient was a married 
woman who had suffered very severely for three years from gas- 
troptosis. The method adopted for the purpose of fixing the 
stomach up to the abdominal w^all in approximately its proper po- 
sition was as follows : A long incision was made in the abdominal 
wall from the xiphoid cartilage to the umbilicus dow^n to the 
peritoneum. The peritoneum in the upper part of the wound 
was not incised, but was bared on its anterior surface bv 




Fig. ^T,. — Gastropexy; Buret's operation. 

stripping away the recti from it. The abdomen was opened 
through the lower part of the peritoneum. The stomach was 
then sought. Through the stomach and the undivided peri- 
toneum in the upper half of the wound a suture was passed. 
The suture was of silk and was continuous; it was passed at 
first through the left edge of the parietal incision, through 
fasci, rectus muscle, and peritoneum, and then horizontally 
through the serous and muscular coats of the stomach, close 
to the lesser curvature. The needle was now passed from 



I.S2 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



within outwards through the uncut peritoneum, and then 
back into the abdomen, again to pick up the stomach as 
before. A series of loops of this suture were then taken. As 
soon as the stitch was tightened the stomach was slung 
upwards and there fixed. The patient did well, was relieved of 




Fig. 34. — Gastropex}^; Rovsing's operation. The area between the stitches is 
scarified with the intention of promoting firmer adhesions. 



her \-ery distressing s^^mptoms, and in two years had gained 
25 pounds in weight. 

A similar operation to this was performed by Davis, but 
in place of the stomach the lesser omentum above the stom- 
ach was picked up by the stitch. 

Rovsing's Operation. — Rovsing, of Copenhagen, has per- 




Fig- 35- — Gastropexy; Coffey's operation. The suture of the omentum to the 
anterior abdominal wall. 




Fig. 36. — Gastropexy; Coffey's operation. The suture of the omentum to the 
anterior abdominal wall. 

153 



154 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

formed a large number of operations by a method of his own. 
The method consists in passing three stout sutures of silk trans- 
versely through the stomach, picking up only the outer coats. 
At each end the silk is tied over a glass rod, after being taken 
through all the layers of the abdominal wall. The stitches are 
removed at the end of four weeks, when the stomach is "solidly 
fixed" to the anterior abdominal wall. 

Rovsing describes two forms of gastroptosis : (i) That 
which he describes as "virginal," which is the rarer but which 
is the more important, since the very great majority of the 
cases needing operation belong to this class. The abdominal 
wall is firm and strong. (2) That which occurs in multiparous 
women ; it is often accompanied by considerable prolapse of other 
viscera, causes little pain, and is often relieved by well-fitting 
bandages. 

Bandages are of no value in the "virginal" form because the 
abdominal wall, being sound, does not allow adequate, properly 
directed pressure to be exerted by any external appliance. 

Rovsing has operated upon 49 cases; 44 belonged to the 
"virginal" class, 5 to the "multiparous." In only 6 of the 
cases was there gastric stasis. All the patients recovered from 
the operation and all were relieved, with the exception of one 
case where there was also a narrowing (unnoticed at the time) 
of the duodenum due to old adhesions. In one case, gastropexy 
was combined with hepatopexy; in another, removal of the 
extremity of an enlarged left lobe of the liver was also performed. 

Clarence Webster, in cases associated with divagation of 
the recti, remedied this condition by resection of the fascia 
and approximation of the muscles. 

Depage in 1893 advocated a shortening and tightening of the 
abdominal wall in all its diameters by an extensive plastic opera- 
tion. The operation, however, is a formidable one. Further 
objections are that the ligaments are not shortened and a second 
stretching of the abdominal wall may ensue. 

Coffey's Operation. — -Coffey supports the stomach by suturing 



SURGICAL TREATMENT OF VISCERAL PROLAPSE. 1 55 



v^- 



/ 









^ 



Fig. 37. — Beyea's operation for gastroptosis — the first layer of sutures. 




Fig. 3S. — Beyea's operation for gastroptosis — the first layer of sutures com- 
pleted; the second and third being introduced. 



156 ABDOMINAL OPERATIOXS. 

the omentum along the greater curvature to the abdominal wall, 
above the umbilicus. 

Beyea's Operation. — The most satisfactory method is probably 
that suggested by Beyea ("Philadelphia Med. Jour..'" Februan^, 
r 903 , p. 257). The operation is described in the following manner : 

"An incision, about three inches in length, was made through 
the linea alba, midway between the xiphoid cartilage and um- 
bilicus. The tissues were separated in the usual manner and 
the peritoneal cavity opened, exposing a small portion of the 
lesser curvature and cardiac end of the stomach, the gastro- 
hepatic ligament or omentum, gastrophrenic ligament, and the 
lower portion of the left lobe of the liver. The table was then 
elevated to the Trendelenburg position, and the stomach displaced 
still further downwards and out of the wound by means of 
gauze sponges. This procedure caused the gastrohepatic and gas- 
trophrenic ligaments to be slightly stretched and separated from 
the underlying structures, which permitted an accurate deter- 
mination of the length of these ligaments and very much facil- 
itated operative manipulations. The gastrophrenic ligament 
was seen well developed, and evidently formed a strong support 
to the cardiac end of the stomach. The joining portion of the 
gastrohepatic ligament was composed of thin, delicate perito- 
neum, increasing in thickness and strength towards the right 
or pyloric end of the stomach. Retractors were introduced and 
the liA'er held aside by placing a gauze sponge beneath a retrac- 
tor. Three rows of interrupted silk sutures were then intro- 
duced so as to plicate and thus shorten the gastrohepatic and 
gastrophrenic ligaments in the following manner : The first row, 
beginning in the gastrophrenic ligament and extending across 
the gastrohepatic ligament to almost opposite the pyloric ori- 
fice and hepaticoduodenal ligament, was introduced so as to form 
a plication in the centre of these ligaments, and included from 
above downward or vertically about 4 cm. of tissue (row No. i). 
They were practically mattress sutures, including sufficient of 
the delicate tissue (i cm.) to ensure against their tearing out. 
Five sutures, about one inch apart, were introduced from right 
to left, and caught in haemostatic forceps. The next row (row 
No. 2) of sutures was introduced in the same manner, but 
2.^ cm. above and below the first two. Then a third row 



SURGICAL TREATMENT OF VISCERAL PROLAPSE. 1 57 

(row No. 3) was introduced just above the gastric vessels and 
a short distance below the diaphragm and liver. The sutur- 
ing was strictly confined to the normal ligamentary supports, 
and the distance between the rows from left to right was in- 
creased with the length of the ligaments, being greater towards 
the right. The gauze sponges were then removed, and the first, 
the second, and finally the third row of sutures were secured, 
the stomach, particularly the pyloric end, being elevated to a 
little above the normal position." 

The sutures were of silk. Four successful cases are re- 
corded. A similar operation has been performed by Bier. In a 
recent letter Dr. Beyea kindly informs me that he has oper- 
ated in eight cases, with marked benefit in all. The first case 
remains well after about eight years. I have only once per- 
formed the operation, and the result has been very good. 

The advantage of the operation just described is that it 
does not solder the stomach to the anterior abdominal wall, 
and, therefore, does not interfere with the proper mobility of 
the organ. 

There are, doubtless, cases in which an operation of this 
kind is necessary. Such cases, however, are few. The treat- 
ment by external mechanical supports should always be given 
a long trial before surgical measures are advocated, and con- 
sideration must always be given to the fact that the patients 
are often of a profound neurotic type. 



Hepatoptosis. 

By hepatoptosis is understood that condition of prolapse 
or dropping of the liver due to the inadequacy of the suspen- 
sory^ apparatus. A mere depression of the liver by fluid ac- 
cumulations above it, or by lateral deviations of the spine, 
is, therefore, not included in the definition. 

The condition was first accurately described by Cantani 
in 1866. Two forms are generally recognised: 



158 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

(a) Partial hepatoptosis, in which there is a down- 

ward prolongation of a portion of the liver. 
This results in the condition known as " Riedel's 
lobe," "floating lobe," or "linguiform lobe." 

(b) Complete hepatoptosis, in which there is a down- 

fall of the whole organ. 

The suspensory apparatus of the liver seems at first sight 
singularly unfitted for the burden that is laid upon it. The 
following are the chief means by which the gland is held in 
position : 

1. The vena cava. It has been shewn by Faure that the 
most substantial support to the liver is afforded by the vena 
caA^a. He likens the relation of the vena cava and the liver 
to that which obtains in the case of the heart and the great 
vessels. 

2. The ligaments proper to the liver. 

3. The intra-abdominal pressure — due, in part, to the ten- 
sion of the anterior abdominal wall, and, in part, to the pres- 
ence beneath the liver of the mass of the stomach and intes- 
tines. The influence of this factor, which is considered of 
the first importance by Sappey, Landau, and others, is, by 
Faure, not altogether denied, but asserted to be quite insig- 
nificant. 

The dropping of the liver is not a perfectly simple vertical 
movement. The posterior surface of the liver, owing to the 
strong attachment of the vena cava, moves the least; the an- 
terior border moves the most. There is a sort of nodding 
movement, or a movement of rotation around a transverse 
axis through the posterior part of the organ. In addition it 
must be noted that the right, larger, lobe moves further 
downwards than the left lobe. The anterior sharp edge of 
the liver becomes, therefore, lower and lower, and the upper 
convex surface becomes, at the same time, more and more 
inclined to look forwards. 

Associated in manv cases with this downfall of the liver 



SURGICAL TREATMENT OF VICERAL PROLAPSE. 1 59 

is a marked deformity, which consists most often in a flatten- 
ing of the gland, especially of the right lobe. The anterior 
and inferior surfaces are increased at the expense, respec- 
tively, of the superior and the posterior surfaces. In not a 
few cases a deep transverse furrow is seen to lie along the an- 
terior surface of the right lobe; the peritoneum which lines 
this groove is thick and milky in its opacity. This shape of 
the liver is most often found in association with a Riedel's 
lobe. 

"Riedel's lobe" is a downward projection from the right 
lobe of the liver, immediately to the right of the gall-bladder. 
In very rare instances the elongation may proceed from the 
quadrate lobe, immediately to the left of the gall-bladder. 
This linguiform process is associated almost always with gall- 
stones, and is caused, so it is said by Riedel, by the gradual 
distension of the gall-bladder dragging downwards that por- 
tion of the liver in its immediate vicinity. Both Riedel and 
Terrier have shewn — and the observation has been abun- 
dantly confirmed — that when the gall-bladder, so affected, 
is drained of its contents by the performance of cholecyst- 
otomy, the projection is gradually withdrawn, and the con- 
formation of the liver returns slowly to the normal. 

The symptoms which are caused by this downward slipping 
of the liver need not be detailed here. Suffice it to say that 
the patients who suft'er therefrom are, in 90 per cent, of the 
cases, women, in whom a prolapse of other organs — the kid- 
ney, the stomach and intestines, and the uterus — can also be 
recognised. Hepatoptosis is only a part of a general visceral 
prolapse, a condition known as enteroptosis, or Glenard's dis- 
ease. It is well known that the sufferers are, for the most 
part, neurotic in type. 

TREATMENT. 

As a rule, the most successful treatment consists in the 
application of a well-fitting belt. The type of inflatable rub- 



l60 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS 

ber pad recommended by Byron Robinson is probably the 
most satisfactory of all. In the more obstinate cases sur- 
gical aid will be called in for the purpose of dealing with a 
painful "floating" lobe or of fixing a wandering liver which 
cannot adequate^ be kept in position by any mechanical sup- 
port. 

Riedel's lobe has been treated b}^ excision, b}^ fixation to 
the abdominal wall, and by cholecystotomy. 

Removal has been performed by Langenbuch, Bastian- 
elli, and Lock^'ood; it can be needed only when the lobe is 
the seat of a pain that cannot otherwise be relieved. Suture 
of the lobe to the parietes was first performed by Billroth in 
1884; later, by Tscheming and Langenbuch. The perform- 
ance of cholecystotomy for this condition is, of course, within 
the experience of many surgeons. 

Total Hepatopexy. — The first operation for the purpose 
of fixing the whole liver was performed b}^ Gerard-]\Iarchant 
in 1 89 1, though it had been suggested by Kisbert in 1884. He 
sutured the thin anterior edge of the liver to the costal mar- 
gin by silk sutures. This method has been followed in the 
majority of subsequent operations. A portion of the liver 
substance has been picked up by a series of sutures of stout 
silk, and each suture fixed to the anterior abdominal wall or 
to the costal margin. For the purpose of carrying the suture 
through the liver the needle suggested by Kousnetzoff should 
be employed. In addition to the sutures so passed, undoubted 
help would be gained by the denudation, by vigorous gauze 
friction, of all parts of the liver, so that the formation of 
adhesions might be more certainly accomplished. 

Legueu suspends the liver by a stout double thread which 
passes completely through it from side to side. 

Pean, by a procedure which he called " cloisonnement peri- 
toneal horizontal," was able securely to fix a mobile liver. 
He made a transverse incision through the anterior abdominal 
wall, replaced the prolapsed liver, and then erected a barrier 



SURGICAL TREATMENT OF VISCERAL PROLAPSE. l6l 

below it by suturing the peritoneum of the anterior abdom- 
inal wall to that of the posterolateral wall. 

Francke adopted the following plan: A series of sutures 
were passed along all the anterior margin of the liver except 
the part near to the gall-bladder, uniting this edge to the cos- 
tal margin. Between the upper surface of the liver and the 
diaphragm gauze was packed in and left for eight days. On 
its removal firm adhesions formed between the two apposed 
and granulating surfaces. 

The best plan to follow would seem to me to be this: To 
make an incision obliquely, about one inch below the mar- 
gin of the costal cartilages; to replace the liver; to fix the 
anterior edge securely with several sutures to the costal mar- 
gin; to pack in between the liver and the diaphragm and pos- 
sibly also beneath the right lobe of the liver many strips of 
gauze, which should be left in place a week; to keep the 
patient absolutely at rest in bed (with the foot of the bed 
elevated a few inches) for at least one month. 

It must be borne in mind that surgery is called for only 
in the most extreme cases, and regard must always be had 
to the fact that a neurotic element is a marked feature in all 
these patients. 

J. G. Clark ("Surg., Gyn. and Obst., " 1908, p. 339), in a paper 
on the surgical phases of enteroptosis, groups the cases as follows: 

1. Cases of congenital habitus. 

2. Cases of acquired enteroptosis. 

3. Cases of enteroptosis following post-operative ad- 

hesions, hernia, or the removal of large tumours. 

The first type of case is usually not improved by operation. 
Cases of the second type include women who have borne children 
in rapid succession, the habitually constipated, and the too 
tightly laced. 

Clark mentions 35 cases with a percentage of about half 
this number of symptomatic cures. The types of operation per- 
formed were Webster's plastic operation on the abdominal wall, 

VOL I. II 



1 62 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

suspension of the sigmoid, suspension of the transverse colon by 
omentoventral suture, and Beyer's operation. Amongst Clark's 
conclusions are: 

1 . No case should be operated upon until medical and mechan- 
ical measures have been exhausted. 

2. Cases due to congenital habitus are unrelieved by surgery. 

3. In order for an accurate estimation of the degree of ptosis 
:x:-ray should be employed. 

4. Ptosis following childbirth is improved b}^ resection of the 
relaxed ventral tissue after the method of Webster. 

5. In marked cases of ptosis of the transverse colon with 
stasis and symptoms of partial obstruction, partial colec- 
tomy is necessary. 

6. Redundant sigmoid may necessitate either suspension or 
sigmoidectomy. 

7. In all cases an abdominal support should be worn. 



SECTION II. 
OPERATIONS UPON THE STOMACH. 



CHAPTER X. 



OPERATIONS FOR PERFORATING GASTRIC OR DUODENAL 

ULCERS. 

The perforation of a gastric or duodenal ulcer is one of the 
most serious and most overwhelming catastrophes that can 
befall a human being. The onset of the symptoms is sud- 
den, the course rapid, and unless surgical measures are 
adopted early, the disease hastens to a fatal ending in almost 
every instance. 

Perforation of the stomach is usually described as being 
of two varieties — acute and chronic; but there is, as I first 
pointed out, an intermediate class of cases, not embraced by 
either of these terms, which is best described as subacute. 

In acute perforation the ulcer gives way suddenly and com- 
pletely. A larger or smaller hole results, and through this 
the stomach-contents are free to escape at once into the gen- 
eral cavity of the peritoneum. 

In subacute perforation the ulcer probably gives way al- 
most as quickly as in the acute form, but, owing to the small 
size of the ulcer, or to the emptiness of the stomach, or to the 
instant plugging of the opening by an omental flap or tag, 
or to the speedy formation of lymph which makes, as it were, 
a cork or lid for the ulcer, the escape of fluid from the stomach 
is small in quantity and the damage inflicted thereby is less 
considerable. The symptoms at their onset may be as grave 
as those in acute perforation, but on opening the abdomen 

16.:; 



i64 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



the ulcer may be found to be sealed over, and no further 
escape of fluid is occurring. 

In the subacute form of perforation I have found that 
there is always a complaint of greater discomfort for several 
days preceding the rupture. Vague general or localised pains 
have been felt in the abdomen, or a sharp spasm or "stitch" 
when the patient turned quickly or attempted to laugh. One 

girl, a housemaid, felt the 
pain down her left side, es- 
pecially when reaching up to 
her work; another said it 
hurt her to bend, as her side 
felt stiff. These premonitory 
s^^mptoms are important, and 
if recognised, the}" should 
enable us to take measures 
to prevent the occurrence of 
perforation. They doubtless 
have their origin in a local- 
ised peritonitis, and the stiff- 
ness is due to the unconscious 
protection of an inflamed area 
by a muscular splint. 

In chronic perforation the 
ulcer has slowh' eaten its 
way through the stomach- 
coats, and a protective peri- 
tonitis has had time to de- 
velop at the base. The escape of stomach-contents is. there- 
fore, merely local; barriers of lympli confine the fluid to a 
restricted area, and a perigastric abscess forms. A chronic per- 
foration occurs more frequently on the posterior surface of 
the stomach, and the perigastric abscess occasioned thereby is 
recognised as "subphrenic." The acute and subacute forms 
of perforating ulcer are more common on the anterior surface. 




Fig. 39. — A perforating round ulcer 
causing death in a lady of twenty-two. 
This is the common condition. There 
is a chronic ulcer with an acute perfora- 
tion (Museum, of Royal College of Sur- 
geons of England, No. 2396). 



OPERATIONS FOR PERFORATING GASTRIC ULCERS. 165 

There can be no doubt that recovery by medical treat- 
ment alone is possible both in the acute and in the subacute 
forms of perforation. I have had two cases under my care 
in which a diagnosis of perforation had been made by com- 
petent medical men. In both, an operation was impossible, 
as no skilled help was available until the urgency of the symp- 
toms seemed to have passed off. When I operated, many 
months later, the evidence of peritonitis completely sur- 
rounding the stomach was undeniable. Though patients may 
recover, their recovery cannot be urged as a reason for the 
delay or withholding of surgical help in all cases, for the pos- 
sibility of spontaneous recovery, though not denied, is yet 
so remote as to make it imperative to adopt operative treat- 
ment at the earliest possible moment. The risk of opera- 
tion is definite; the hazard of delay is immeasurable. 

It is by degrees becoming more generally recognised that 
chronic ulcers of the stomach and of the duodenum are conditions 
that can be diagnosed with an approximation to accuracy which, 
though it leaves much to be desired in the case of the former, is 
almost exact in the case of the latter. And increasing confidence 
is being displayed in the view, which some amongst us have long 
expounded, that chronic ulcers are in all cases in need of surgical 
treatment. We may accordingly have reasonable expectations 
that with earlier and more confident diagnosis and with a speedier 
resort to operative measures, the final and often long-deferred 
catastrophe of perforation in a chronic ulcer may be wholly 
avoided. Whenever a patient who has complained at intervals 
of indigestion begins to suffer in the present attack more acutely 
than in an earlier one, the signal of impending perforation is being 
raised and the clear warning should by no means go unheeded. 

At the moment when perforation occurs there is the most 
agonising and unendurable pain. Patients will afterwards say 
that there is no pain so horrible in its torture as this. The least 
movement seems to add something to its severity, so that a pa- 
tient will perhaps remain for hours almost without stirring. A 



1 66 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

medical man upon whom I operated told me that the perforation 
had occurred while he was crouched on his hands and knees in 
bed in a position which seemed to relieve his pain. When the 
rupture of the ulcer took place he could not move to reach the 
bell, and had to wait motionless until help came to him in the 
earlv morning. The tense rigidity of the whole body is in strik- 
ing contrast to the ceaseless unrest of a patient who is suffering 
the agony of hepatic colic. In him a constant change of posi- 
tion and of pressure seems in some measure to cause abatement 
of the pain, or, at least, to be imposed upon the patient in the 
search for relief that never comes. The abdominal muscles are 
found to be in a condition of inflexible rigidity, but even here some 
difference in the various parts of the abdomen can be felt. Over 
the ulcer the stiffness is of the most obdurate character; one 
might almost think that a disc of metal replaced the supple muscle. 
This local increase of a general resistance is most definite and dis- 
tinct, as a rule, and it affords a decided help not only in the diag- 
nosis of the lesion but in its location. The patient's expression 
is of one who is terror-struck. The approach of a hand to the 
abdomen for the purposes of examination is quickly resented, and 
the most piteous appeal for gentleness is made. The breathing 
is short, jerky, and shallow, and the patient may indeed cry out 
that he "cannot breathe." This is due in part no doubt to a 
spasm of the diaphragm, and in part also, I believe, to that great 
over-distension of the stomach which is so commonly seen when 
the abdomen is opened. Though the patient looks generally ill 
— with pallid face, staring eyes, and sweating brow — the pulse 
will be found at the first to be hardly altered in frequency or in 
volume. This is one of the surprises which must not fail to be 
recognised and remembered. I have often been told by medical 
men that at the first view of a case they could hardly bring them- 
selves to believe in the occurrence of a perforation, since the pulse 
was so tranquil and full ; and in a case I saw some years ago with 
Dr. Carlton Oldfield, we deliberately postponed for a few hours 
any question of operative treatment because the pulse, in rate and 



OPERATIONS FOR PERFORATING GASTRIC ULCERS. 1 67 

volume, was normal. Unhappily, this fact of the unaltered pulse- 
rate is even now not generally recognised; accordingly delay, 
which is always serious, may occur. The pulse increases in fre- 
quency and depreciates in value very soon, but this is due not to 
the perforation but to the peritoneal contamination which is the 
inevitable sequel. No one has any difficulty in recognising the 
presence of peritonitis, but our aim must always be to discover 
at the moment of its occurrence the lesion to which the peri- 
toneal infection is secondary. The symptoms and the signs of 
the perforation of a hollow viscus are not those of the peritonitis, 
which make haste to develop. 

I have seen a difficulty in diagnosis arise, and I know of 
three cases in which negative exploration has been per- 
formed, when the patient was a woman at the commencement 
of a menstrual period. From some unexplained and indeter- 
minate cause a sharp attack of abdominal pain, followed by 
vomiting, distension, prostration, and collapse had occurred 
in all and had caused a confusion in the diagnosis. In the 
case under my own observation, a history of previous similar, 
though less severe, attacks at the menstrual epoch, and the 
absence of any marked abdominal stiffness or tenderness, 
though the belly was obviously distended, enabled me to 
negative the question of perforating ulcer of the stomach. 

The Operation. — The operation should be conducted as 
speedily as possible, and all measures adopted to save the pa- 
tient from shock. The patient should be operated upon in the 
recumbent position so that fluid drains away from the diaphragm 
which absorbs very rapidly, to the pelvis from which absorption 
is very slow. 

The abdomen is opened in the middle line, above the um- 
bilicus, by an incision of ample size. The work which it is 
necessary to do cannot be efficiently done through a small 
opening — the surgeon must not be cramped. It is quicker 
to stitch up a large wound than to operate through an un- 



l68 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

duly small one. The wound is made to left or right, in accord- 
ance with the discovery of that area of greater local rigidity to 
which reference has already been made. It is almost always pos- 
sible to make the incision in the close neighbourhood of the ulcer. 
In some doubtful cases a small suprapubic incision may first be 
made; the character of the exudate will then declare the nature 
of the perforation, whether of the stomach, duodenum, gall- 
bladder, intestine or appendix. The little incision is used subse- 
quently for drainage. As soon as the abdomen is opened, gas or 
a little thin, clear or turbid fluid will escape. Both gas and 
fluid are inodourous, and when the fluid is examined, it is 
found in many cases to be sterile. The amount of gas and of 
fluid will depend upon the length of time that has elapsed 
since the perforation: if less than six hours have passed, there 
will be little or no gas, and the fluid will be clear or almost 
so. This fluid is poured out by the peritoneum as a protec- 
tive measure, and is not only sterile, but is actively antibac- 
terial. As more and more of the stomach-contents escape, 
the fluid becomes more turbid. Portions of semidigested 
food may be found in the peritoneum, and I once saw an 
orange-pip there. 

The ulcer is rapidly sought, and, as a rule, is found at once. 
It is recognised by the escape of fluid from it, by a thick de- 
posit of lymph around it, or by the constant welling-up of 
fluid from a particular part of the stomach. As soon as the 
ulcer is localised, the stomach at that part is drawn well up 
into the wound, and a few swabs are packed around to pre- 
vent any further soiling of the peritoneum. The gap in the 
ulcer is at once closed by a single stitch which passes through 
all the coats of the stomach on each side of the perforation. 
This closes the opening and prevents any further escape of 
stomach-contents. If the stomach is full, — and it very often 
is, — it is a good thing at this stage to pass a stomach-tube and 
empty all the contents away. The stomach may also be 
gently washed out. 



OPERATIONS FOR PERFORATING GASTRIC ULCERS. 1 69 

The perforation will often be found surrounded by an 
area of very dense induration, in which a suture can find little 
securit}^ of hold. This induration is almost entirely due to 
oedema of the stomach-wall around the ulcer; it is not, as one 
might suppose from the feel of it, due to any cicatricial in- 
duration and contraction in the ulcer itself. CEdema alone 
causes it, for on postmortem examination of such cases the 
induration is always found to have vanished. There is no 
need to excise the ulcer, and this procedure is, in so far, harm- 
ful that it wastes a few seconds and causes sometimes not a 
little bleeding. Excision of the ulcer is, however, performed 
as a routine measure by some surgeons. The perforation, 
having been closed by a single stitch, is now effectually 
sealed by infolding the stomach-wall by a double layer of 
suture. I always use thin Pagenstecher thread and the 
curved intestinal needle for this purpose. The first suture 
begins about one inch away from the ulcer, and continues 
beyond the ulcer about one inch. The second stitch is 
applied beyond the first, which it infolds. 

In some instances the closure of the gap may be difficult. 
The opening may be almost inaccessible, being on the lesser 
curvature, close to the cardiac orifice. In these circumstances 
the application of sutures in the ideal method just described 
may be physically impossible. The only plan, then, to 
adopt is to take one or more interrupted sutures through or 
outside the ulcer and make a closure of the perforation that 
will, at the least, be temporarily efficient. To make the sealing- 
off complete, an omental graft or flap is then applied over the 
stitches. The left end of the omentum is sought and turned 
upwards over the stomach, where it can be fixed by one 
or more stitches. In one case I have adopted this plan with 
perfect success when satisfactory closure by suture alone was 
impossible. 

The perforation being closed, attention must be paid to 
the toilet of the peritoneum. The shorter the time that has 



170 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

elapsed since the giving-wa}^ of the ulcer, the less will there 
need to be done. If the patient is operated upon within the 
first four or six hours, very little cleansing will be necessary. 
A few sterile swabs passed to the back of the abdomen, above 
the lesser curA^ature, above the liver, and into each renal 
pouch, will ensure that all is made clean. The abdomen can 
then be closed without drainage. 

If, however, more than twelve hours have elapsed since 
the perforation, and if gross particles of food are free in the peri- 
toneum greater care and longer time must be spent on ensuring 
that all is clean. Hot moist swabs are passed into all the nooks 
and crevices of the abdomen. Especial care must be taken to 
see that the parts immediately beneath the diaphragm are thor- 
oughly cleansed — for the risk of subphrenic abscess or of a spread- 
ing of a septic inflammation through the diaphragm, giving rise 
to pleurisy or empyema, is by no means inconsiderable. It is 
absolutely necessary that these upper parts of the abdomen 
should be left as clean as it is possible to make them. If careful, 
methodical, painstaking sponging will not suffice, flushing with 
hot sterile salt solution may be adopted in the worst cases. The 
kidney pouches, and in most cases the pelvis, need also to be 
cleansed. If the perforation has occurred more than twenty- 
four hours before the operation, a very thorough cleansing will 
be necessary, and in such cases a second incision above the pubes 
must be made for drainage. Finney suggests the making of 
multiple incisions for piu-poses of flushing and drainage, and in ad- 
vanced cases of peritonitis nothing else is so effective. The ques- 
tion of drainage can be decided only by the surgeon himself in 
each case. If possible, drainage should be avoided, but in cases 
of over twelve hours' duration it is probably necessary in at 
least one-half of them. Drainage, when used, should be free, 
and, as a rule, I prefer the split rubber tube drain to any 
other. When the ulcer has been sutured, a careful search must 
be made for other ulcers which may have perforated. In two 
cases of my own two ulcers had simultaneously, or almost 



OPERATIONS FOR PERFOR.\TING GASTRIC ULCERS. I7I 

simultaneously, perforated. In the first, the two ulcers were 
exactly opposite each other — one on the anterior, one on the 
posterior, surface. In the second, the two ulcers were both 
on the anterior surface, about i^ inches apart. It has been 
computed, from a large number of statistics, that two ulcers, 
or more than two, perforate in 20 per cent, of the whole num- 
ber of cases. I have already referred to the necessity, in 
many cases, of emptying the stomach, and perhaps of 
gentle lavage also. This point is one which I have not seen 
mentioned in the writings of any surgeon, but it is, I am con- 
vinced, an important one. 

In all cases of duodenal perforation and in some of gastric per- 
foration the question must arise as to the need for gastro-enter- 
ostomy. When an ulcer has perforated, the closure of the 
resulting aperture is accomplished by folding in the wall of the 
intestine. In a tube of the calibre of the duodenum, or of the 
juxtapyloric portion of the stomach this results in narrowing. 
Even when the suture is made with the finest accuracy, and the 
stitches inserted along a vertical line, some amount of stenosis 
is almost sure to follow at once; and in the subsequent contrac- 
tion of healing this will very probably become more marked. In 
the first case of perforated duodenal ulcer upon which I operated 
so great a constriction of the duodenum was produced by the 
suture that I found it necessary to perform gastro-enterostomy 
at once. I have since then had to carry out a similar procedure 
in other cases. It was this experience which first led me to ad- 
vocate the performance of gastro-enterostomy in all cases where 
a narrowing of the bowel had been at once produced by the ap- 
plication of the sutures, or where it was likely to be caused in the 
subsequent contraction which would occur in the process of heal- 
ing. I was, I believe, the first surgeon to advocate the perform- 
ance of gastro-enterostomy in suitable cases of perforating ulcer 
("Lancet," 1901, ii, 1656-1663). 

Other writers have since advocated the routine performance 
of gastro-enterostomy in all cases of perforation of the stomach, 



172 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

but m\' experience has shown that this is quite unnecessary. 
Gastro-enterostomy is only to be done in those cases where an 
obstruction is present or is likely to develop from the closure of 
the ulcer, or where a second ulcer is seen. The advantages of 
gastro-enterostomy are; that it permits a more assured closing 
of the ulcer, for the surgeon's mind is not filled with misgivings 
as to whether his suture may be too widely taken ; that it allows 
of the early unrestricted administration of food; that it avoids 
the recurrence of the ulcer, or the development of a second ulcer, 
either of which may perforate. 

A. B. Alitchell ("Trans. Ulster Med. Soc, " 1908, i, 68) reports 
a case in which perforation occurred on July 21, 1907; the ulcer 
was closed by sutiu-e and the pelvis drained ; a second perforation 
occurred on March 5, 1908, and a second operation — closure of 
the ulcer and gastro-enterostomy — was performed with success. 1 
believe it to be the best practice, therefore, to close the ulcer so 
efficiently as to cut off the pyloric outlet from the stomach, and 
to perform posterior gastro-enterostomy (or anterior, if thought 
better) at once. 

As soon as the operation is completed, the patient is given 
an enema consisting of 10 ounces of saline solution with one 
ounce of brandy. This is repeated every three or four hours, 
or a continuous saline injection may be given per rectum (Mur- 
phy's method). No fluid is given by the mouth for at least 
twelve hours, and, if possible, not for twenty-four hours, unless 
gastro-enterostomy has been performed. In that case any quan- 
tity of fluid may be given from the first. The mouth is fre- 
quently rinsed, and the teeth are brushed. This will keep the 
mouth moist, and will lessen the sense of thirst. If needed, 
subcutaneous or intravenous injections of saline solution may be 
given. 

When the patient has come round from the anaesthetic, 
she is propped up in bed with about five pillows or with 
the bed-rest. This semi-sitting posture is necessary as af- 
fording drainage of fluids away from the diaphragm, and as 



OPERATIONS FOR PERFORATING GASTRIC ULCERS. 1 73 

being decidedly more comfortable for the patient. For the 
first few days a careful note must be taken of the pulse-rate 
and of the rate of the respirations. The most dreaded com- 
plication in cases of this kind is the occurrence of some sep- 
tic inflammation beneath the diaphragm (subphrenic abscess) 
or in the chest (pleurisy or empyema). After twenty-four 
hours the patient may be given sips of water, milk and water, 
a little wine and water, or tea. It must be remembered that 
there is need for careful dieting perhaps for some weeks after 
the operation. 

PERFORATING DUODENAL ULCER. 

In certain particulars the symptoms and the treatment 
of perforating duodenal ulcer differ from those of perforating 
gastric ulcer. 

A duodenal ulcer may perforate at once and acutely into 
the peritoneal cavity, or may slowly destroy all the coats of 
the bowel and lead to the formation of a localised encysted 
abscess. If the former, the fluid escaping from the viscus 
is free to run at large in the peritoneal cavity. In many of 
the cases, as is seen from a study of the records, a well-de- 
fined path is taken. The fluid (generally mucus, more or less 
tinged with bile) escapes on to the upper surface of the trans- 
verse mesocolon to the right of the hillock which is formed 
by the fitting in of the transverse colon to the greater curva- 
ture of the stomach. It, therefore, tends to run to the right 
to the hepatic flexure, and then to descend along the outer 
side of the ascending colon to the iliac fossa. There collect- 
ing, it may cause symptoms strongly suggestive of appendi- 
citis. From the iliac fossa the fluid drains to the pelvis, and, 
filling that, overflows into the left iliac fossa. If an abscess 
forms, it may be bounded by lymph, by the liver, or by in- 
testines. Meunier describes a local abscess in his case as be- 
ing bounded by the quadrate lobe of the liver, the gall-bladder, 
and the transverse mesocolon. Lennander relates a case where 



174 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

an abscess was hemmed in on all sides by intestine. The per- 
foration of such an abscess ma}^ lead to acute septic general- 
ised peritonitis, as recorded by Planchard. Perforation of 
the upper portion of the duodenum may lead to subphrenic 
abscess. Seven cases of this kind are related in JMa^^dl's mon- 
ograph. An ulcer may destro}^ all the coats of the bowel, 
and its base be formed by the liver (Ke^d, Herzfelder, Collin) 
or by the gall-bladder (Krauss, Mo3^nihan). An ulcer may 
destro}'' all the coats of the bowel and perforate a hollow 
viscus, forming an "internal duodenal fistula." Rokitansky 
describes a case .of gastroduodenal fistula; Hoffman and 
Gross, cases of cholecystoduodenal fistulae; and Duden- 
sing a case where the ulcer had perforated the pancreatic duct. 
An. ulcer may destroy all the coats and lead to the formation 
of an abscess, which bursts upon the surface of the body, form- 
ing an "external duodenal fistula," as recorded by Lumeau 
and Bucquoy. The duodenal wall may be ulcerated through 
by an abscess arising from without, as in the case of lumbar 
abscess bursting into the duodenum close to the biliary 
papilla under the care of DaA'ies-CoUe}^. 

At the first the symptoms of a perforated duodenal ulcer 
are precisely similar to those seen in cases of perforated gas- 
tric ulcer, but after the first hour has passed the symptoms and 
signs of gastric and duodenal perforation begin to differ in their 
development. When the ulcer is in the stomach, the signs 
are those of general peritoneal involvement ; when the ulcer is 
duodenal, the course taken by extravasated fluids leads to a 
more acute and an earlier involvement of the peritoneum on 
the right side, and in the right iliac fossa. The clinical picture 
of appendicitis is copied with such accuracy that in 49 recorded 
cases tabulated by me in the "Lancet," of December, 1901, in 18 
the first incision was made over the appendix after a diag- 
nosis of acute appendicitis had been made. In the final stage, 
the peritoneal infection is universal. 

When the abdomen is examined even within the first one 



OPERATIONS FOR PERFORATING GASTRIC ULCERS. 1 75 

or two hours, a greater resistance and a more marked tender- 
ness may be found upon the right side, and the tenderness 
over McBurney's point may be exquisite. 

The diagnosis rarely presents any difficulty. The symptoms 
are those of an abdominal catastrophe, occurring in one who 
has, as a general rule, though not invariably (for an acute 
ulcer may rupture), exhibited those symptoms of duodenal ulcer 
which I have shewn to be so characteristic. The pain and ten- 
derness are almost always greater on the right side where also 
there is a more obstinate rigidity (see my book "Duodenal 
Ulcer," second edition, 1913, p. 215). 

When operation is performed, there may be great difficulty 
in exposing the ulcer. If the ulcer be in the first portion of the 
duodenum, it is generally easily discovered and easily sutured; 
if the ulcer is "tucked back," it may be impossible to suture it. 
Whenever practicable, the perforation should be closed com- 
pletely in the manner already described. By so doing, the lumen 
of the duodenum may be greatly narrowed, so that an alternative 
route from the stomach must be given by the performance of 
gastro-enterostomy. This was performed in several of my cases. 

When the ulcer is so deep that it cannot be sutured, or when 
sutures however carefully introduced cut out at once, the diffi- 
culties of the surgeon are considerable. In such cases the ulcer 
may be closed by folding the two omenta over it. The gastro- 
hepatic omentum is drawn over the anterior surface of the duo- 
denum and fixed at its lower border by a few stitches or by liga- 
tures to the gastro-colic omentum, at its attachment to the 
great curvature of the stomach. The extreme right portion of the 
great omentum is then turned upwards over the duodenum to 
form a second protective layer over the gastro-hepatic omentum. 
This is the method I adopt, in one form or another, in all cases of 
chronic duodenal ulcer. It is known that even after gastro- 
enterostomy has been done, a chronic duodenal ulcer may per- 
forate. In all cases therefore at the time the short circuiting 
operation is performed I join the two omenta together over the 
duodenum to make a secure covering for it. When an acute per- 



176 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



foration has occurred and the gap cannot be closed in the ordinary 
manner, this method of occlusion by borrowing the omentum 
may prove perfectly satisfactory. To make quite secure, how- 
ever, it would probably be better in all such difficult cases to close 
the pylorus also, and to make an alternative route from the 
stomach by means of gastro-enterostomy. Lennander, Mayo 
Robson, and others advised that in such cases a tube surrounded 
by gauze should be carried down to the ulcer, so that a channel 
might form from the perforation to the abdominal wall. In 




Fig. 40. — Mode of closure of duodenal ulcer, whether perforating or not. 
The ulcer is enfolded and the gastro-hepatic and gastro-colic omenta are sutured 
or ligatured together over the intestine. 

the case of the stomach this would mean that a gastric fistula 
would result, which would admit of closure after the lapse of a 
little time. In the case of a duodenal ulcer such a procedure 
would almost certainly result in the death of a patient from 
starvation in a very few days. It is remarkable with what rapid- 
ity a patient succumbs who has an external duodenal fistula. 
It is therefore absolutely imperative in all cases to close the ulcer 
by suture, by grafting, or plugging with, the omenta, or to close 
the pylorus and to perform gastro-enterostomy. 



CHAPTER XII. 

OPERATIONS FOR CHRONIC GASTRIC ULCER, PYLORIC 
STENOSIS, ETC.— GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 

Posterior Gastro-enterostomy. 

The operation of posterior gastro-enterostomy is performed 
in the followinsf manner: 




Fig. 41. — The "abdominal incision in gastro-enterostomy; the anterior sheath 
of the rectus is stripped up to the middle line. 



An incision about four inches in length is made about one 
inch to the right of the middle line above the umbilicus. The 
anterior sheath of the rectus is opened, and the fibres of the 
muscle are split, or, as is far better, the anterior sheath is dis- 



VOL. I 12 



177 



1/8 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



sected up from the front of the muscle as far as the middle line ; 
the whole bod}^ of the rectus is then drawn to the outer side, 
and the posterior layer of the sheath is incised along a line 
exactly behind the incision in the anterior layer. The skin is 
covered by "tetra cloths" attached b^^ the special forceps to the 
wound edges and ends. The abdomen is then opened. 

An inspection of the whole of the stomach is necessary. 
It may be that an obvious thickening or puckering of an ulcer 




Fig. 42. — Incision of the posterior sheath after outward traction of the rectus. 

at the pylorus is visible at once, but the surgeon must not rest 
content with this. A further search must be made on both 
the anterior and the posterior surface for other points of thick- 
ening. Not until the whole stomach has been felt and seen 
should any operation be performed upon it. ]\Iany mistakes 
have been made from lack of this precaution. 



POSTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY, 



179 



The stomach, transverse colon, and omentum are withdrawn 
from the abdomen and turned upwards to expose the under 
surface of the transverse mesocolon. The origin of the jejunum 
is then sought. Occasionally the first few inches of the jejunum 
are attached to the under surface of the mesocolon by adhesions 
possibly physiological, possibly pathological. The meso-colic 
band, a short ligament springing from the under surface of the 




Fig. 43. — The posterior surface of the stomach made to project through the 
incision in the transverse mesocolon. 



mesocolon and attached below to the jejunum, may extend on to 
the gut for 3 or 4 inches. If it does it should be divided until the 
jejunum is free up to its origin. 

The posterior surface of the stomach is exposed by making 
an opening through the transverse mesocolon into the lesser sac. 
It is sometimes not quite easy to divide the transverse meso- 
colon clearly, and in order to do so I have found the following 
method of great advantage : 



i8o 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



The transverse colon and the stomach are held in the sur- 
geon's left hand, and the mesocolon is made taut. At a blood- 
less spot in the arch of the middle colic artery a clip is 
applied to the under surface of the mesocolon, and, having 

secured a firm hold, it is pulled 
away from the posterior surface 
of the stomach. A snip of the 
scissors by the side of the clip 
opens the lesser sac at once. The 
opening is enlarged by gentle 
stretching and tearing until three 
■fingers can readily be passed 
through it. Through this open- 
ing the whole of the posterior sur- 
face of the stomach is explored. 
Adhesions may be found between 
the stomach and the mesocolon 
or between the stomach and the 
pancreas, and it may be that these 
are so dense as to preclude the 
possibility of the performance of 
the posterior operation. 

The inspection and investiga- 
tion of the stomach being com- 
plete, the anastomosis may be 
made. It is essential to see that 
the part needed for the anasto- 
mosis is brought through the open- 
ing in the transverse mesocolon. 
This part consists of a vertical 
fold in line with the vertical por- 
tion of the lesser curvature and also with the right margin of 
the oesophagus, and it ends below at the lowest point of the 
greater curvature. A fold of the posterior surface along this 
line is then seized by the surgeon and drawn well out of the ab- 




Fig. 44. — Moynihan's clamp 
for gastric and intestinal opera- 
tions (made by Down Brothers, 
London) . 



POSTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



I8l 



domen. As the fold is held in the fingers of the left hand, it is 
embraced by a clamp held in the right and applied vertically, 
the tip of the blades pointing to the chin, the handle pointing to 
the pubes. The amount of stomach held in the clamp should 

be 3 or 4 inches in length. The 
(ffffS'-ftK clamp is then turned transversely, 

the handle pointing to the left side 
of the abdomen, where it is held by 
[ i ^i- .'31 i t-J. the assistant. 





Fig. 45. — Gastro- enteros- 
tomy. The strip of gauze be- 
tween the clamps. 



Fig. 46. — The clamps completely sur- 
rounded by mackintoshes; all the viscera 
within the abdomen. 



The uppermost portion of the jejunum, which has been held 
up to this point by the assistant, is now drawn well out of the ab- 
domen and clamped. The clamp is applied by the assistant, 
while the length of gut is held by the surgeon. When the clamp 
is in position, and before it is locked, the jejunum at the proximal 
end is pulled forwards so as to make it as taut as possible, while 
the clamp held by the assistant is depressed. This secures that 
the clamp is applied as close to the flexure as possible. 



1 82 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



The two clamps are now holding the portions of stomach and 
intestine to be anastomosed. The upper clamp holds a fold of the 
stomach 3I to 4 inches in length ; the lower, a portion of jejunum of 
the same length. The portions of stomach, omentum, and trans- 




Fig- 47- — G-astro-enterostomy. The clamps in position; the viscera re- 
turned within the abdomen; the swabs placed in position. The suture is now 
commenced. 



verse colon outside the abdomen are now returned, so that no 
viscera remain exposed except those to be engaged in the 
anastomosis. 

The two clamps are now held apart ; a roll of moist hot gauze 



POSTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY, 



183 



is placed between them; over this they are placed as closely 
together as possible, and around them two mackintosh cloths 
are placed, so that nothing is now visible but the two clamps 
embracing the viscera about to be united. It is an important 
feature of this operation that there is no undue handling or 
exposure of any part of the abdominal contents. 





Fig. 48. — The first layer of serous 
suture. 



Fig. 49. — Reinoval of the eUipse of 
mucous membrane. 



The sutures are now introduced; they are all continuous, 
and there is no interruption by knotting at any part of their 
course; a needle of my own pattern (made by Down Brothers, 
London), rather more than half a circle in length and with 
a rounded body and a slot eye for easy threading, is used, and 
thin Pagenstecher (celluloid) thread is employed throughout. 
The first stitch picks up the serous and muscular coats only. 



1 84 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



It is commenced at the left end of the portions of stomach 
and jejunum enclosed in the clamp, and is continued until 
the greater curvature of the stomach, at the right end of the 
clamp, is reached. The length of the sutured line should be 
at least two inches ; its average length is between two and 
three inches. The individual stitches are placed about one- 




Fig. 50. — The beginning of the suture, which embraces all the coats; Allis's 

forceps in position. 



eighth of an inch apart, and the thread is drawn upon suf- 
ficiently to ensure an easy approximation of the serous sur- 
faces. As each passage of the needle through jejunum and 
stomach is completed, the suture is pulled upon gently, so that, 
at the same time, the thread just introduced is tightened and 
a little ridge or fold of each viscus is raised up, making clear 
the exact position for the passage of the needle next time. 
When the first row of the stitch is complete, the needle is 



POSTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



185 



laid aside, to be used against a later stage of the operation. On 
either side of this row at a distance of yi inch an incision is now- 
made into the stomach and jejunum, the serous and muscular 
layers of each being carefully divided until the mucous membrane 
is reached. Before the opening is made a few pieces of moist 
gauze are packed round the clamps to catch any discharge or 
blood which may escape. As the cut is made the serous coat 




Fig. 51. — The inner suture, continued. 

retracts and the mucous layer pouts into the incision. An ellipse 
of the mucous membrane is now excised from both stomach and 
jejunum, the portion removed being about 134' to 2^2 inches 
in length, and rather more than half an inch in breadth at 
the centre. The gastric mucosa shews a marked tendency 
to retract; it is, therefore, seized, together with the serosa, in a 
pair of miniature (French) vulsella on each side. No vessels are 
ligated, as a rule. The cut surface of the bowel and stomach may 



i86 



ABDO:\IIXAL OPER.\TIOXS. 



occasionally ooze slightly ; this can be checked at once by tight- 
ening the clamps one notch. An Allis's forceps is placed on the 
posterior cut edges of the incision, picking up the mucous and 
serous coats of the stomach and the serous and mucous coats of 
the jejimum. It is placed at or near the end of the incision, near 
the operator, and is allowed to hang down. Its weight is suffi- 
cient to keep the cut edges now to be sutured in apposition and to 
make them fairlv taut. The inner suture is now introduced. It 




Fig. ^2. — The inner suture nearly completed. The mucosa being turned 
outwards, not inwards. 



embraces all the coats of the stomach and jejunum around 
the whole circumference of the opening. The needle is first 
passed through the wall of the jejunum from the mucous to 
the serous surface at the left end of the incision, and then from 
the serous to the mucous surface of the stomach at a cor- 
responding point; the knot, when tied, is on the mucous sur- 
face. The needle is now passed, time after time, from the 
mucosa of the jejunum to the mucosa of the stomach, pick- 
ing up both serous coats in its passage. The stitch is drawn 



POSTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



187 



tight enough to constrict any vessels in the cut edges, and as 
it is so drawn the point for the next introduction of the needle 
is made clear. When the stitch has been completed along 
the hinder margin of the incision, it is returned along the an- 
terior margin, without interruption until the original end of 
the stitch, left long, is reached, when a triple knot is tied and 
the ends of the suture are cut short. 






Fig. 53. — The inner suture com- 
pleted ; the clamps removed to shew 
if there are any bleeding points. 



Fig. 54. — The serous suture 
resumed. 



The clamps are now loosened but are left in position in order 
to prevent the viscera from slipping back into the abdomen. 
If any bleeding vessel is seen, it is clipped and ligatured. The 
parts are wiped over with hot moist swabs, and all instruments 
used up to this point are discarded. This is done on the assump- 
tion that the mucous membranes of the two viscera may contain 
micro-organisms. As a matter of fact, organisms are almost in- 
variably absent if the plan of preparation of the patient, else- 
where described, is followed. 



1 88 ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 

The original serous suture is now continued. The needle 
which was laid aside is used again. The only difficult part 
of the stitch is now encountered, for there are many vessels 
along the greater curvature of the stomach and near it which 
have to be avoided, and unless the utmost exactness is ob- 
served, a vessel may easily be wounded. If it should be. a 
deeper and wider stitch must be passed, and tied with suf- 
ficient firmness to check the bleeding. The suture is drawn 




Fig- 55- — Termination of the serous suture; the final stitch overlapping the 

first one. 



upon with moderate firmness, with the result that the place 
for the next introduction of the needle is made plain. When 
the stitch has been carried around to the point from which 
it originally started, the end of the thread left long is taken 
in the fingers; with it the stomach and jejunum are dragged 
gently upwards, and beyond it the needle is passed once be- 
fore being tied. This is well shewn in the figure (Fig. 55). 
This affords an extra security at a point which might other- 



POSTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



189 



wise be weak. The ends of the stitch are knotted and cut 
short. Before inserting the last two or three stitches, it is well to 
remove the clamps in order to relieve the slight tension of the 
jejunum especially; a greater security is, in this way, given to the 
apposition at the termination. 

The suture lines are now complete. The inner one embraces 
all the coats and is haemostatic; the outer one includes the 
serous and muscular coats, and affords a wide approximation 
of surfaces. 

The stomach and jejunum are now wiped over gently with 





Fig. 56. — The roll of gauze behind the anastomosis when pulled from side to 
side displays all parts of the suture line. 

hot moist swabs, and the mackintosh removed. A strip of 
gauze, it will be remembered, was placed in between the two 
viscera before the clamps were brought together. The end of 
this near the surgeon is now raised up and turned towards the 
left side of the patient. The result of this is that the under, or 
opposite, side of the anastomosis is disclosed, and it can then 
be seen if the suture line is satisfactory. This part also is 
gently swabbed. If any part of the suture line seems weak, a 
separate stitch may be introduced — this, however, is practically^ 
never necessary. The gauze strip is now removed, and the 



190 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



transverse colon and the stomach, which were replaced in the 
abdomen before the stitching was commenced, are now with- 
drawn. In the surgeon's left hand the middle of the transverse 
colon and the lower part of the stomach are grasped, and are 
drawn gentl}" away from the posterior wall of the abdomen, 
while, with the right hand, the portions of viscera at the anas- 
tomosis are adjusted in the opening made in the transA^erse meso- 




Fig- 5 7- — The suture line complete. When the stomach and jejunum are 
held up the latter is seen to descend directly from the flexure on to the stomach, 
F, in the duodenojejunal flexure. (After W. J. Mayo.) 



colon. A clip is now placed upon the edges of this opening on the 
left side, and a suture is passed between this point and the jeju- 
num just outside the line of stitches at the anastomosis. The 
same is done on the right side, and also at the lowest point (that 
nearest the transverse colon) of the opening. These three stitches 
hold the transverse mesocolon in contact with the jejunum all 
around the line of the sutures. In this manner additional security, 
if such were necessary, would be given to the suture line; and, 



POSTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



191 



further, a hernial protrusion of the small intestine into the 
lesser sac of the peritoneum is prevented. I prefer to stitch 
the mesocolon to the jejunum rather than to the stomach, as is 
generally done. The stomach, colon, and omentum are now 
replaced and the abdominal wound is closed. 




E-plEL r^ Vv'RlOrl-r. 



Fig. 58. — The s.uture of the edges of the opening in the mesocolon to the Hne 

of anastomosis. 



I have used the above method in approximately 350 cases 
of gastro-enterostomy in simple and malignant disease. In 
only one case have the mechanics of the operation been at 
fault, and that was in an early case, when no sutures were 



192 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



passed through the transverse mesocolon. The patient died 
of a hernia of all his small intestine into the lesser sac. The 
possibilit}^ of this is now prevented b}^ the sutures between 
the jejunum and mesocolon which I have described. 







Fig. 59. — The final stitches in gastro-enterostomy, uniting the margins of the 
opening in the transverse mesocolon to the line of anastomosis. 



In all cases of duodenal or pyloric ulcer (especially the former) 
infolding of the ulcer, as is done in cases of perforation, is de- 
sirable. If the ulcer in the duodenum be too large to be infolded 
the gut should be closed by infolding sutures upon the proxi- 
mal side of it. After these sutures are tied, the gastro-hepatic 



POSTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



193 



and gastro-colic omenta above and below the duodenum are drawn 
together by Hgature in such a manner as to form an additional 
protection to the infolded ulcer. It is important to remember 
that in cases of duodenal ulcer both perforation and haemorrhage 
have proved fatal after gastro-enterostomy has been performed. 
It will be seen, from the above description, that the method 
of suture is precisely the same as that which is adopted in most 




Fig. 60. — Gastro-enterostomy. Shewing the position of the anastomosis 
on the posterior wall of the stomach. Note the large size of the opening, and 
the absence of a jejunal loop. 

cases of intestinal anastomosis. The fact that the method 
is one which is widely applicable is, in my judgment, a very 
strong point in its favour. 

The average time for the performance of the entire opera- 
tion is between twenty-five and thirty minutes. I have on 
three occasions performed it in less than twenty minutes when 
the circumstances were desperate. There is no method of 
gastro-enterostomy which is equally rapid and equally safe. 



194 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



In not one case haxe I seen any fault in the suture line when 
the abdomen has had to be reopened months or years after- 
wards for other operations, such as the removal of the appendix 
or for the performance of ovariotomy or hysterectom}^ 
The following are the chief points to be emphasised: 




Fig. 6i. — Posterior gastro-enterostomy with a loop; entero-anastomosis is also 

performed. 



AVhen the operation is completed and the parts are be- 
ing replaced, it will be seen that there is no loop in the 
jejunum on the proximal side of the anastomosis. 
The gut descends in a straight line from the flexure 
to the posterior surface of the stomach. Regurgitant 
vomiting is therefore unknown. 

The opening in the stomach is vertical. 

The opening reaches to the very lowest part of the 



POSTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 1 95 

Stomach, on the greater curvature. The formation 
of a pool of stagnant fluid below the level of the anas- 
tomosis is therefore impossible. 

The removal of the mucosa of the stomach and jejunum, 
which results in an opening, not a slit, being made be- 
tween the two viscera. For thought of this point I 
am indebted to the Murphy button, which "stamps 
out," as it were, a portion of the wall of both stomach 
and jejunum. 

The large size of the opening; the smaller opening made 
is almost twice the size of that made by the Murphy 
button or by a bobbin. The size of the opening, more- 
over, can be justly proportioned to the size of the 
stomach. A large stomach necessitates a large anas- 
tomosis. With all mechanical aids this cannot be done. 

Absence of undue contraction in the opening results 
from the close approximation of the cut edges of the 
mucous membrane of the two viscera. There is, in- 
evitably, in cases of dilated stomach, some subsequent 
reduction in the size of the anastomosis ; this is in 
direct proportion to the reduction which occurs in the 
size of the stomach itself. After a gastro-enterostomy 
opening has been working for six months in a case of 
greatly dilated stomach, it will always be found that 
some reduction in size of the stomach has occurred. 
The stomach, in my experience, rarely returns to the 
normal, but a considerable lessening in size is often 
appreciable. At equal rate does the opening become 
reduced. 

It is a common fault in the performance of gastro- 
enterostomy that the opening is made too small — 
often far too small. The minimum length of the open- 
ing should be 2 inches; and in those cases when the 
stomach is greatly dilated, it may well be made twice 
this length. 



196 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

7. Suture of the transverse mesocolon to the suture line, 
both stomach and jejunum being embraced by the 
stitch which picks up the mesocolon a little distance 
from the cut edge. The result when the suture is drawn 
tight is that this cut rough edge is rolled inwards 
towards the lesser sac. 






Fig. 62. — Posterior gastro-enterostomy. (Mayo's method.) 



8. The inner suture, embracing, as it does, all the coats, 

will, if properly applied, prevent any haemorrhage into 

the stomach. The suture must be firmly drawn by 

the surgeon himself: this important matter must not 

be, as it sometimes is, left to an assistant. 

There have been differences of opinion as to the exact line 

along which the attachment of the jejunum to the stomach should 

be made. Surgeons, also, wear their rue with a difference. 



ANTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. I97 

There does not in practice seem to be much to choose between 
the results of one method and of the other: the one essential 
is that the operation should be practised only in those cases 
where there is a clear indication of its necessity. Hochenegg 
advised that in applying the jejunum to the posterior wall of the 
inverted stomach the bowel should be placed in such a direction 
that the line of the ascending portion of the duodenum was con- 
tinued without any break; in this way a no-loop antiperistaltic 
anastomosis is made. The antiperistaltic method has also been 
advocated by W. J. Mayo ; it has accordingly met with wide adop- 
tion, and has been followed by equally satisfactory results. 



Anterior Gastro-enterostomy. 

The foregoing description applies only to the posterior 
operation. 

If, for any reason, the anterior operation should have to 
be performed,- — for example, on account of adhesions between 
the posterior surface of the stomach and the pancreas, or of 
the invasion of the posterior wall by growth, or because the 
mesocolon is too short, — the same method can be adopted. 
The only difference is that a point in the jejunum some 15 
or 18 inches from the flexure will be chosen for the point of 
anastomosis, so as to avoid any chance of compressing the 
transverse colon by an unduly tight proximal loop of jejunum. 
The method of suture is precisely the same as in the posterior 
method, but the stomach clamp is applied obliquely in such a 
direction that the anastomotic opening runs from above down- 
wards and to the left ; the degree of obliquity, however, should 
not be too great. When the jejunum is fixed to the stomach it is 
desirable to make its attachment extend well above the opening, 
so that there is no likelihood of kinking of the gut at the upper end. 
This may be done by making the outer row of sutures extend over 
a length of 3 inches, while the opening, 2 inches in length, is kept 
to the lower end. The figure will explain this point. 



198 



ABDOMINAL OPER-\TIONS. 



In the anterior operation an entero-anastomosis is perhaps 
an advantage. An entero-anastomosis may also be performed 
after the posterior operation if a loop be left. 

In those cases of non-malignant disease in which, for mechan- 
ical reasons, the posterior operation would be excessively difficult 
or impracticable I should myself prefer to perform the anterior op- 
eration by Roux's method. In Roux's operation the jejunum is 
divided completely across about 6 to 9 inches from the flexure ; the 




Fig. 63. — Anterior gastro-enterostomy; shewing the outer suture embracing 
a much longer portion of the stomach and intestine than the inner. The greater 
curvature is at the left of the picture at the tip of the clamp. 



distal cut end is implanted into the stomach, and an end-to- 
side anastomosis performed, and the proximal end is implanted 
into the side of the distal, about 3 inches from its point of union 
with the stomach. The anastomosis is made between the 
posterior surface of the stomach and the jejunum, but can 
be made equally well with the anterior surface. I have often 
performed Roux's anterior operation, — the gastro-enterostomy 
in Y, as it is called, — and the results have been most satisfac- 
tory. Indeed, the method is in many respects an ideal one,— 



ANTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



199 



it reproduces more nearly the normal conditions, for the bile 
and pancreatic juice after this operation are introduced into 
the bowel about 3 inches from the new opening into the stom- 
ach, exactly as in the normal duodenum. Roux's operation is 




Fig. 64. — Anterior gastro-enterostomy; the operation completed. The 
extension of the outer suture well beyond the upper limit of the opening is seen. 
The jejunum is represented as transparent so as to shew the position of the 
opening. 



said to prevent the possibility of regurgitant vomiting, though 
I know of one case where the vomiting of bile since the opera- 
tion has been a constant feature. The disadvantage of the 
operation is that it requires longer time for its performance, 



200 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



and that in practice the results are not a shade better than, 
if, indeed, they are as good as, those which follow the ordinary 
posterior operation. 

ROUX'S OPERATION. 

The stomach-wall is clamped obliquely so that the tip of the 
clamp holds the lowest point on the greater curvature, whilst 




Fig. 65. — Rotix's operation. The jejunal loop to be divided is controlled by a 
clamp which remains on until both anastomoses are complete. 

in the base of the clamp is a portion of the stomach close to the 
lesser curvature and near the cardia. A long loop of jejunum is 
then picked up, and its base is secured by a clamp. At least 8 or 
9 inches should be the length of the loop whose base the clamp 



ANTERIOR GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 20I 

holds. The loop embraced by the clamp is now divided about 
2 inches from the upper clamped end, the cut being extended into 
the mesentery. The upper cut end of the jejunum is now united 
to the side of the lower part, just above the place where it is 
clamped; the union is effected in the ordinary manner by suture. 
The distal cut end is then united to the stomach as it is held by 
the other clamp. The anastomoses are both completed before 
either clamp is removed. There is consequently no soiling of the 
operation field by gastric or intestinal discharges or by blood. 

The operation takes approximately forty-five minutes — 
that is, at least fifteen minutes longer than the usual operation. 
I perform a modified Roux' operation in some cases where an an- 
terior gastro-enterostomy is necessary. The method is as fol- 
lows: A loop of jejunum some i8 inches long is taken, and 8 or 
9 inches gripped in the rubber guarded clamp. The jejunum is 
then divided just beyond the rubber clamp, the distal portion 
being held by a Parker Kerr clamp. The portion held in this 
clamp is now closed by a continuous Pagenstecher suture, the 
stitch being taken at right angles to the blade of the clamp, first 
on one side, then on the other. On reaching the tip of the clamp 
the suture is held at either end by the surgeon, while the assistant 
in a single movement opens the clamp and withdraws it, the sur- 
geon meanwhile drawing the sutures tight. This manipulation 
closes the gut, rolling its edges inwards; the stitch now returns 
to its starting-point, where it is tied and cut. After the closure 
of the distal end of the jejunum in this fashion, an anterior ver- 
tical gastro-enterostomy is performed, and lastly the proximal 
cut end of the jejunum, which has up to this point been held in 
the rubber guarded clamp, is united by an end-to-side anasto- 
mosis with the distal end about 4 or 5 inches below the gastric 
anastomosis. 

It is curious to read in many accounts of the great difficulties 
encountered in the performance of the operation of gastro- 
enterostomy and of the infinite number of modifications of 
one sort or another that have been suggested. In this opera- 



202 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



tion, as in all others, the key-note of success is simplicity. The 
great variety of suggestions as to "new methods," many of 
them uncouth, shews beyond doubt that the principles un- 
derlying the operation have not been adequately appreciated. 
If the posterior operation be performed in the manner de- 
scribed above, the results, both immediate and remote, will, 
I venture to sa}^ be satisfactory. There will be no need of 




Fig. 66. — Rotix's operation complete. 

anxiety as to regurgitant vomiting, nor will there be need or 
possibility of entero-anastomosis, closures of proximal loops, 
division of the pylorus, and so forth. 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER THE OPERATION. 

A number of complications occurring after the operation 
have been recorded. Among these may be mentioned: 

1. Haemorrhage. 

2. Regurgitant vomiting. 

3. Internal hernia. 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



203 



4. Separation of united viscera. 

5. Formation of adhesions at or near the point of anastomosis. 

6. Peptic ulcer, 

7. Chest compHcations. 

8. Diarrhoea. 

I. Haemorrhage. — There have been recorded at least three 
deaths from haemorrhage within a few hours of the completion 
of the operation of gastro-enterostomy, and in all the blood has 
been shewn to come from the incision in the stomach. 




— ai-. 



Fig. 67. — Position of a patient in bed immediately after the performance of 
gastro-enterostomy. As soon as the patient comes round from the anaesthetic 
he is propped up in this way. 



The bleeding may be due to improper suturing. Unless 
ligatures are applied to all the bleeding points in the cut edges 
of the stomach, the suture must be applied in such a manner 
as to secure efficient control of the vessels. In two of the fatal 
cases interrupted sutures were used; this is bad practice. A 
continuous suture is far more certain to close the cut ends of 
the vessel; between two interrupted sutures a vessel may bleed 
unchecked. The best suture is, therefore, a continuous suture 
which embraces all the coats. 



204 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

After the inner suture is completed and the clamps are re- 
moved, a few moments should be allowed to elapse during which 
the stomach and intestine are lightly wiped over with a swab 
wrung out of hot sterile salt solution. This pause in the opera- 
tion will give time and opporttmity to any vessel inadequately 
controlled to bleed. If a bleeding point is seen, a separate 
stitch, taking all the coats of both viscera, is passed and is firmly 
tied. 

If the inner suture is applied as I have described, it will be 
found that the mucosa on the side towards the operator is not 
turned in towards the lumen, but is turned outwards; it there- 
fore remains visible after removal of the clamps, and a bleeding 
point in it is instantly seen. If the mucosa is turned inwards 
on this side (the side where the vessels chiefly lie), bleeding may 
go on unperceived into the stomach. The prevention of haemor- 
rhage is, therefore, attained by — ■ 

(a) The use of a continuous suture. 

(b) The embracing of all coats of the suture. 

(c) The drawing of the suture firmly and evenly. 

(d) Inspection of the mucosa after removal of the 

clamps. 

A discussion was recently held, inaugurated by Sinclair White. 
as to the cause of haemorrhage after gastro-enterostomy. Sin- 
clair "White himself was inclined to hold the clamps used in the 
operation as a responsible factor, believing that after their re- 
moval bleeding might occur from points Avhich had been missed 
by the suture taken through all the coats. The use of clamps was, 
therefore, deprecated. I cannot agree with this opinion. The 
clamps are so useful during the operation, keeping the parts in 
position, preventing the escape of contents, and so forth, that 
I should be very loth to abandon them. If they are used, it is, 
of course, ver}'- necessary to apply the inner suture with great care, 
placing each turn of the thread close to those already inserted, 
and drawing it sufficiently tight to ensure control of any bleeding 
point. I have personally never had trouble from haemorrhage 
with the method I have described. R. C. Coffey relates a very 
interesting case in which death occurred from a wound in the 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



205 



stomach inflicted by the clamps. The pressure of the clamps 
need never be so strong as to inflict injury on the mucosa. 

Herczel and a few other writers have recorded cases of death 
due to haemorrhage from the ulcer for which gastro-enterostomy 
had been performed. Unless the origin of the bleeding is de- 
monstrably in the ulcer I should feel disposed to think it more 
likely that the hsemorrhage had occurred from the incision to 




Fig. 68. — Post-mortem specimen of stomach mucous membrane in which 
is shewn a stoma forty-eight hours after a gastro-enterostomy; also a sHt in the 
mucous membrane produced by clamps. Crossing the slit is a vessel which was 
devitalised by the clamp and which gave way thirty hours after the operation , 
producing a fatal hasmorrhage. [Coffey.] 



the stomach wall. It is necessary in all operations so to handle 
the stomach as to do as little hurt to it as possible. If bleed- 
ing does occur from the ulcer it is probably due to rough 
handling. 

2. Regurgitant Vomiting. — Many theories have been put 
forward to explain the occurrence of regurgitant vomiting after 
gastro-enterostomy. The formation of a "spur" at the point 
of anastomosis has undoubtedly some influence, and has been 
demonstrated by Chlumskij in certain cases operated upon by 
Mikulicz. It was formerly thought that the sole cause was the 



206 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

presence, in the stomach, of bile and pancreatic juice. Riegel, 
Malbranc, and Weil related cases where a reflux of bile into 
the stomach resulted in grave symptoms. Billroth remarked 
upon the serious import of bile regurgitation after gastro-enter- 
ostomy. Claude Bernard and others, founding their opinion 
upon laboratory experiments, considered that bile inhibited 
gastric digestion. Dastre, in dogs with gastric fistulas, intro- 
duced bile at all stages of digestion, and concluded that the 
alkalinising effect of the bile was swiftly negatived by a copious 
outflow of gastric juice. No ill effects were noticed either on 
the digestive powers or on the general health. Oddi, experi- 
menting upon dogs, obliterated the common bile-duct and united 
the gall-bladder to the stomach. All the bile consequently 
flowed at once into the stomach, with the result that the 
animals gained in weight and suffered not at all. Max Wick- 
hoff, Angelberger, and Terrier have performed cholecysto- 
gastrostomy for obstruction in the common bile-duct, and 
Perrin ("These de Lyon," 1901) has suggested the routine 
performance of cholecystogastrostomy in occlusions, presum- 
ably complete and irremediable, of the common duct. These 
records all shew that the mere presence of aseptic bile alone 
is insufficient to induce vomiting. Chlumskij has suggested 
that the regurgitant vomiting is due to the presence of pancre- 
atic juice in the stomach. To settle this point, Steudel under- 
took a series of experiments upon dogs. He divided the in- 
testine completely across at the duodenojejunal flexure, closed 
the duodenal end, and implanted the jejunal into the anterior 
wall of the stomach. The dogs lived and thrived for a time, 
but died from perforation of the duodenal loop by fragments 
of bone, which had been eaten and had passed from the stomach 
through the pylorus. 

In the "British Medical Journal " of May, 1901 , I recorded the 
case of a boy, aged six, upon whom I performed gastro-enter- 
ostomy for complete rupture of the gut at the duodenojejunal 
flexure. The torn end of the duodenum was sutured, and, after 
resection of a few damaged inches, the jejunum was joined to 
the stomach. As a result, the whole of the bile and the pan- 
creatic juice passed into the stomach. The boy made a perfect 
recovery, and remained in splendid health until the one hundred 
and fourth day after the operation. He then became suddenly 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 207 

collapsed and died in a few hours, death being due to the per- 
foration of the bowel by the Murphy button that had been used 
for the anastomosis. This case proves beyond dispute the in- 
effectiveness of bile and pancreatic juice as sole agents in pro- 
ducing regurgitant vomiting. 

There are four varieties of misdirected current after gastro- 
enterostomy : 

1. Regurgitation of duodenal contents through the pylorus. 

2. Escape of fluids from the stomach into the afferent loop. 

3. Escape of fluids from the afferent loop into the stomach. 

4. Regurgitation of the contents of the efferent loop into 

the stomach. 

Any one of these establishes the circulus vitiosus. Of these 
four, the .third, the escape of duodenal contents from the aft'erent 
loop into the stomach, is generally considered the most frequent 
and the most grave. 

Chlumskij ("Beit. z. klin. Chir.," Bd. xx), in discussing the 
causes of regurgitant vomiting, suggests the following : 

1. Formation of a spur. This is certainly the most fre- 

quent. When the anastomosis is effected, the two 
limbs of the loop hang downwards, and a sharp kink, 
with spur-formation, results at the point of junction. 

2. The jejunal displacement may cause a kink at the duo- 

denojejunal junction, and thereby produce an acute 
obstruction of the duodenum. 

3. The mucous membrane of the stomach may form large 

pouting valves which obstruct the afferent opening. 

4. Closure of the anastomotic opening, if the mucomucous 

stitch is improperly applied. 

5. Compression of the efferent branch of the loop by the 

colon (Doyen). 

6. Steudel related a case, operated upon by Czernv, in 

which the opening in the transverse mesocolon had 
narrowed and constricted the efferent loop. 

7. In the original operation of Wolfler the antiperistaltic 

implantation of the jejunum favoured regurgitation. 
Of the frequency of regurgitant vomiting, the following fig- 
ures give some indication: In 65 cases operated upon by Czemy, 
I only presented grave symptoms of regurgitation. Kn entero- 
anastomosis was performed, and recovery speedily followed. 



208 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

In 74 cases operated upon by Mikulicz, 7 died of regurgitant 
vomiting. In 7 cases an entero-anastomosis was performed, 
and of these, 3 died. In 215 cases of posterior gastro-enteros- 
tomy from the Heidelberg clinic, reported later than those of 
Steudel by Petersen, there was not a single case of reflux vomit- 
ing. In 21 cases of anterior gastro-enterostomy an entero- 
anastomosis was necessary in 3. 

A very large number of modifications of the operation of 
gastro-enterostomy have been suggested, with the hope of pre- 
venting reflux. In Wdlfler's original operation, performed Sep- 
tember 28, 1881, the jejunum was united to the stomach with 
ts proximal end nearest to the pylorus. Von Hacker, in 1885, 
suggested that the jejunal anastomosis should be made, not 
on the anterior, but on the posterior, surface of the stomach, 
which could be reached by tearing through the transverse meso- 
colon. The point on the jejunum to be utilised for the anas- 
tomosis was placed by von Hacker 20 to 25 centimetres from 
the duodenojejunal flexure ; by Kappeler, 40 to 60 centimetres ; 
by Chlumskij, 50 centimetres; by Kader, 60 to 80 centimetres. 
Petersen emphasised the importance of the anastomosis being 
as near to the flexure as possible. In 1883 Courvoisier per- 
formed a " gastro-enterostomie retrocolique posterieure trans- 
mesocolique," an operation attended by no satisfactor}^ re- 
sults, but memorable as containing the germ of the idea which von 
Hacker utiHsed in his method. In 1892 Jaboulay suggested, 
and in 1894 performed, the operation of gastroduodenostomy ; 
Kiimmell, in 1895, independently suggested the same procedure. 
Mikulicz and Villard strongly commend the method. Kiim- 
mell divided the duodenum completely, closed the proximal 
end, and implanted the distal into the stomach. Jaboula}?- united 
the anterior wall of the duodenum to the anterior wall of the 
stomach, folding the duodenum .forwards over a hinge formed 
by the pylorus. Villard described his method under the title 
" gastro-duodenostomie sous-pylori que." Instead of folding the 
duodenum over on to the stomach, he anastomosed the adja- 
cent surfaces of the stomach and duodenum. Brenner introduced 
a retrocolic, anterior gastro-enterostomy. A loop of the je- 
junum was passed through a rent in the transverse mesocolon, 
and then pulled forwards through the omentum just below the 
greater curvature of the stomach, and united to the anterior wall. 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 209 

In 1887 Rockwitz drew attention to the fact that in the 
operation of Wolfier the current in the stomach was opposite 
in direction to that in the duodenum. To ensure an isoperi- 
stalsis he suggested that the proximal end of the loop should 
be fixed towards the cardiac end and the distal towards the py- 
loric end of the stomach. In 1898 Roux, of Lausanne, per- 
formed his method of " gastro-enterostomy in Y," adapting to 
this operation a method that had been practised in 1892 by 
Maydl for jejunostomy. Roux divided the jejunum completely 
across, implanted the distal end into the stomach and the prox- 
imal into the side of the distal. 

' The operation of entero-anastomosis was first suggested in 
1890 by Lauenstein, who advised that the afferent loop should 
be united to a neighbouring coil of intestine. In 1892 Braun 
and Jaboulay performed entero-anastomosis between the afferent 
and efferent loops. Doyen performs a gastro-enterostomy in 
Y which is similar to that adopted by Roux, but is anterior in- 
stead of posterior, and the approximations are made side to side 
and not end to side. His method is considered by Liicke to 
be the best of any method yet suggested. It is practically a 
gastro-enterostomy, an entero-enterostomy, and a resection 
of the afferent loop combined. 

Several methods of narrowing the afferent loop with the hope 
of preventing its filling with stomach-contents have been sug- 
gested. Wolfier surrounds it with a circular stitch; Chaput 
packs round it with iodoform gauze ; and von Hacker makes 
a series of longitudinal pleats in it. Tavel has shewn that in 
his patient after a few weeks no trace of a fold could be dis- 
covered. 

Several methods of preventing misdirection of the stomach 
have been carried out ; the methods are usually described as 
"gastro-enterostomy by invagination." Faure invaginates a 
cone of the stomach into the distal segment of the anastomosed 
loop. Sonnenburg sutures the edges of the stomach incision, 
leaves the threads long, passes them into the jejunum at the 
opening for the anastomosis, and out by a second opening 
a couple of inches distal to this. By drawing now upon 
the sutures the stomach is pulled well into the jejunum. Rut- 
kowsky, Witzel, and Kader have combined the operations of 
gastro-enterostomy and jejunostomy, passing the tube into the 

VOL. I — 14 



2IO ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

Stomach and through the gastro-enterostomy opening into the 
distal segment of the duodenum. 

The attempted formation of a vah^e at the new opening, 
suggested by Wolfier in 1883, has been carried out most effec- 
tively by Kocher, who makes a semilunar incision in both stomach 
and intestine, the convexity being upwards. 

Hadra, in 1891, was the first to suggest that the loop of the 
bowel united to the stomach should be attached to it both above 
and below the opening, so that it should be suspended from the 
stomach by a wide attachment. In this manner the forma- 
tion of a spur would be effectually prevented. Lauenstein, 
n 1896, suggested the suspension of the gut onty on its proxi- 
mal side. 

The whole question as to regurgitant vomiting has, how- 
ever, receded into the background in my experience. I never 
see it in any case of mine now, nor have I seen it in the last few 
hundred cases. I believe regurgitant vomiting to be due usually 
to a mechanical defect in the operation, a defect which consists 
mainly, if not solely, in the leaving of a loop of jejunum between 
the flexure and the anastomosis. This loop becomes "water- 
logged": the bile and pancreatic juice distend it, being unable 
to escape from it easily into the distal limb. Regurgitation 
through the pylorus then occurs ; or the weight of the heavy 
loop causes a kink at the anastomosis which closes the entrance 
to the distal limb. In some cases post-operative adhesions distal 
to the opening may be the cause of that obstruction which is in- 
variably present in cases of "regurgitation." 

Bartlett ("Interstate Medical Journal," April, 1907) records 
a case of posterior gastro-enterostomy of the "no-loop" variety, 
but with an oblique iso-peristaltic anastomosis which was fol- 
lowed by gastric shrinkage. Five days after the operation the 
patient commenced to vomit, this continuing until he retained 
absolutely nothing. At the end of two weeks a secondary opera- 
tion was performed. Bartlett writes: 

"The stomach which had been greatly dilated, was now 
shrunken, and retracted so high up under the ribs, that the 
greater curvature was higher than the point at which the duo- 
denum passed through the mesentery, hence, the one-inch loop 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 211 

of jejunum which had pointed downwards at the completion of 
the first operation now pointed upwards, the bowel being sharply 
kinked at the suture line." 

The afferent bowel was empty, but the duodenum was dis- 
tended. Bartlett attributes the condition to "too perfect gas- 
tric drainage." 

Treatment. — The treatment of regurgitant vomiting in the 
serious cases must be by operation ; an entero-anastomosis must 
be performed. In the slighter cases relief is often afforded in a 
remarkable manner by lavage of the stomach every twenty- 
four hours for a few days. 

3. Internal Hernia. — Several cases of internal hernia fol- 
lowing gastro-enterostomy are recorded; some of these have 
proved fatal, some have been remedied by subsequent opera- 
tion. 

One of my own cases proved fatal. The following are the 
notes : 

The patient, a male aged twenty-eight, was seen on October 
30, 1902. For fourteen months he had suffered from indigestion. 
At the onset he had an acute attack of indigestion lasting five 
days; occasional vomiting then, but no blood. He fainted 
several times, and had tarry motions. During the last three 
months he had become progressively worse, and lost over a 
stone in weight ; had constant pain after food and occasional 
vomiting. He could take only fluids, and was "wearing down" 
fast. The stomach was moderately dilated. Free HCl present. 
Old blood was noticed in the stools in infirmary almost daily. 
At the operation duodenal and gastric ulcers were found; duo- 
denal ulcer in first portion about the size of a threepenny-piece, 
very hard, and slightly adherent. A scar was found on the 
posterior surface of the stomach near the pylorus. The pa- 
tient died on the tenth day of acute intestinal obstruction. 
At the postmortem examination it was found that there had 
been a hernia of almost the whole of the small intestine through 
the rent made in the transverse colon, and that the herniated 
bowel was tightly strangled at the opening. 

Dr. W. J. Mayo has recorded ("Annals of Surgery," i\ugust, 
1902) a case; the following is an extract from his description: 



212 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

"Abdomen re-opened. Gastrojejunal orifice nearly oblit- 
erated and stretched to an inch in length. Jejunum twisted 
at the site of anastomosis one-half turn from the left to the right. 
Somewhat more than one-half of the small intestine had passed 
through the loop of jejunum, between the origin of the jejtinum 
and the attachment to the stomach. The point of entrance 
was on the right side, beneath the transverse colon. The trac- 
tion weight of the intestines upon the mesenter}' at the inferior 
margin of the loop had caused the volvulus. The mesentery 
at this point was much thickened; the intestines were replaced, 
the gastrojejunal fistula divided, and the opening into the 
stomach closed. The opening into the jejunum was enclosed 
by a purse-string suture, and the half of a ]\Iurphy button was 
introduced and a posterior gastrojejtinostomy made. The 
pyloric stricture was nearly complete, the ulcer evident^ cica- 
trised. It is probable that the part of jejimum immediately below 
the anastomosis passed through the loop first, producing the 
twist which was so prominent a feature on opening the abdomen. 
As to when this happened, it is hard to tell — probably not for 
some months after the operation. When the process once be- 
gan, it might be expected to continue until such an amoimt 
of intestine travelled over the loop as to pull the mesenter>^ 
taut, the symptoms increasing as the condition gradually de- 
veloped. It is possible that at the time the juncture was 
effected a sHght twist might have occurred. 

A similar case is recorded by Dr. Gray, of Aberdeen (" Lancet , ' ' 
vol. ii, 1904, p. 526): 

The patient, an immarried woman, aged thirtA'-one years, was 
seen by me in consultation on the evening of ]\Ia3^ 15, 1904. For 
some months she had suffered from severe "indigestion," in- 
tense epigastric pain, radiating to the back, occurring almost 
immediately after taking food. She had not vomited during 
this period, but had noticed that the stools were xery dark on 
several occasions. On ]\Iay 14 she became suddenty collapsed 
and vomited a large quantity of blood. In spite of medical 
treatment the haematemesis was repeated several times, although 
not to such a large extent. The bowels were opened and the 
stool contained a large quantity of blood. On the evening of 
the fifteenth she became again so collapsed that death was 
thought to be imminent. She had recovered somewhat before 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY, 21 T, 

I saw her. Her pulse was very feeble and irregular. It was 
occasionally as low as 120, but was usually considerably quicker. 
It was estimated that she had vomited between two and three 
pints of blood. By percussion of the shifting dulness, limited 
to the gastric area, it was found that the stomach contained at 
least a pint of blood. Nothing had been given by the mouth 
since the onset of the attack. These facts, considered along 
with the presence of the large quantity of blood in the stool, 
made the total blood lost amount to probably between four and 
five pints. It seemed that the bleeding had stopped and it was 
thought advisable to wait until the morning, as transference to 
hospital would have had a severe effect on the patient in her 
perilous condition. Morphine was given hypodermically and 
a careful watch was set. She passed a fairly good night, but 
early the next morning she again vomited blood and was re- 
moved to hospital. On arrival there she vomited a small quan- 
tity of fresh blood, so an operation was carried out at once. 

Chloroform was administered, and three pints of saline solu-, 
tion were slowly infused into a vein at the elbow. The stomach 
was exposed by a free incision. Blood was seen to be present in 
large amount in the stomach and in the whole length of the 
intestines. Nothing else abnormal about the stomach was de- 
tected by inspection or palpation. The blood was squeezed 
through the pylorus, the stomach was opened posteriorly, and 
its interior was inspected. No ulcer was seen. A posterior 
retrocolic gastro-enterostomy was performed. Sutures alone 
were used. 

The patient vomited early on the second day after operation. 
The vomit contained a small amount of "coffee-ground" ma- 
terial and was foul smelling. Five minims of liquid extract of 
cascara sagrada were given every hour, but after three doses 
she became sick, so it was intermitted for twelve hours and then 
begun again. An enema was given on the evening of the day 
of operation to clear the rectum; a tarry motion resulted. 
Every second day thereafter an enema was administered. On 
the fourth day the stool was free from blood. 

About noon on the sixth day she complained of intermittent 
griping pain in the abdomen. This continued until the evening, 
when it abated somewhat. It was thought probably to be due to 
flatus, although previously to this a turpentine enema brought 



214 • ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

away neither flatus nor feces. A small dose of morphine was 
given. She was quite comfortable until 3 o'clock on the morning 
of the seventh day, when the pains began again and increased 
in severity as the effect of the morphine passed off. Vomiting 
occurred on two occasions. At 9 a. m. another turpentine 
enema was given, but with no result. The facial expression was 
now somewhat drawn and anxious. Vomiting continued at 
intervals, but the pains subsided considerably after the enema. 
The temperature and the pulse were unaffected. The latter had 
become reduced in frequency from 144 on the day of operation 
to 100 to no. 

Intestinal obstruction was diagnosed, and immediate opera- 
tion was advised. This was declined. I prescribed two drachms 
of magnesium sulphate by the mouth and eight minims of liquor 
strychninee hypodermically. The immediate effect of this was 
to produce severe colicky pain and acquiescence in operation, 
which was carried out at 4 p. m. It was then found that prac- 
tically the whole of the small intestine had insinuated itself from 
left to right through the ring formed at the first operation by the 
peritoneum of the under layer of the mesocolon, that lining the 
posterior abdominal wall and forming the upper layer of the 
mesentery, and completed anteriorly by the gastrojejunal junc- 
tion. It was easily pulled back and the ring closed by suturing 
the under layer of the mesentery to prevent recurrence of the 
hernia. Strangely enough, there was enormous distension of 
the colon with gas. It was found to be quite patent down to the 
rectum. It was accordingly punctured by a trocar and canula 
and the gas let out. A silk suture was inserted to close the open- 
ng made by the trocar, and a piece of omentum was stitched 
over that. The gastrojejunal junction was found to be per- 
fect. The patient vomited once during the evening after opera- 
tion, but thereafter recovery was uninterrupted, and she left 
the hospital on June 1 3 . She was seen on July 5 , when she looked 
extraordinarily well. She had suffered no pain, no indigestion, 
and no vomiting since her dismissal. The stools had been 
normal. vShe now made no restrictions in her diet. 

A case is also recorded by Mr. Barker: 

Under chloroform an incision was made in the middle line 
below the umbilicus. Slipping the finger in under the scar. 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



21. 



not a trace of adhesion to it could be found. The wound was 
then enlarged upwards through the old scar, which was per- 
fectly firm. Some free ascitic fluid now ran out, and dark, dis- 
tended coils of small intestine presented on both sides. The 
transverse colon was sought for and drawn out and was found 




Fig. 69. — A, Afferent jejunum coming out from under the plica duodeno- 
jejunalis (b) ; c, termination of the afferent duodenum dragged back to the 
hidden anastomosis, from which (d) the efferent jejunum is passing in its turn 
over the afferent portion (a to c) ; g, last part of the ileum twisted round the 
efferent jejunum and terminating in (i) the end of the ileum at the ileocsecal 
valve; h, distended coils of the jejunum in the general cavity of the abdomen; 
K, coils of the ileum in the general cavity of the abdomen. It is seen from this 
diagram that the whole of the small intestine with the exception of the first and 
last seven or eight inches passed behind the gastro-enterostomy junction and 
was strangulated over the afferent portion, where it formed a large volvulus 
(Barker) . 



to be pale and much contracted. Search was then made for 
the gastro-enterostomy junction, but it could not be clearly 
made out. With the finger I could feel the plica duodenoje- 
junalis at the root of the left side of the mesocolon, but the di- 
rection of the first part of the jejunum was not clear. On the 



2l6 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

right side of the middle of the mesocolon small intestine was 
felt passing under some tightly constricting mass, and on draw- 
ing the coils aside the last seven or eight inches of the ileum, 
tense and contracted to the size of the little finger, were seen 
ending in the normal csecum and twisted on its own axis. Fol- 
lowing this back it was seen to pass behind the gastro-enterostomy 
junction and to be twisted on itself at the point of constric- 
tion. It was now plain to all present that the whole of the small 
intestine with the exception of the last seven inches or so had 
passed between the junction of the stomach and jejunum and 
the root of the mesocolon made two years ago, and over the first 
part of the jejunum (a) (afferent), and then down into the gen- 
eral cavity of the peritoneum. But not only this, the whole 
small intestine having thus passed, formed a huge volvulus, 
turning on its mesentery in a direction contrary to the move- 
ments of a clock. When this was recognised, the coils as a whole 
were lifted up and untwisted one complete turn in the direc- 
tion of the movements of the hands of a clock. Only then could 
the last part of the ileum (i) be withdrawn from under the con- 
striction, all previous efforts in this direction having failed. But 
when the volvulus was untwisted, it, and all the rest of the small 
intestine above it, could be easity and rapidly drawn out. The 
junction with the stomach could now be plainly seen, and both 
the afferent and efferent loops ; the coils were washed with 
normal saline solution (warm) and the abdomen was closed. 
The operation lasted sixty-five minutes and was well borne. 
Convalescence was uninterrupted and primary union was found 
when the stitches were removed on the eighth day. 

A case of internal strangulation following gastro-enteros- 
tomy was related before the Royal Academy of ^Medicine in 
Ireland by Mr. Gordon ("Lancet," 1905, a'oI. ii, p. 1477). A 
loop of the bowel had passed from right to left above the 
proximal loop of the jejunum, there becoming strangulated. 
A second operation was necessary to relieve the obstruction, 
and was successful. 

In addition, a case of my own has been operated upon a 
second time, and a hernia through the opening in the trans- 
verse mesocolon discovered. 

All the forms of hernia can be prevented by attention to two 
points: 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 21 7 

(a) The suture of the edges of the opening in the meso- 
colon to the stomach, or, preferably, to the jejunum. 

(b) The avoidance of a loop of jejunum between the duo- 

denojejunal flexure and the anastomosis. 

4. Separation of the united viscera has occurred only after 
the use of mechanical appliances, and as these are no longer 
necessary, this complication is negligible. With the suture it 
does not occur. 

5. The formation of adhesions around and about the anas- 
tomosis is very rarely seen. As a result of them, a constric- 
tion of the jejunum may result, and vomiting, due to high 
intestinal obstruction, will occur. I once operated upon a 
patient, upon whom gastro-enterostomy had been performed 
by another surgeon, on account of persistent vomiting. The 
distal loop of the jejunum was buried in dense adhesions, which 
reduced the calibre of the bowel to approximately a quarter 
of its former size. The proximal loop was greatly distended. 
A somewhat similar case is recorded by F. B. Lund ("Boston Med. 
and Surg. Journal," May 11, 1905, p. 549). 

It is not improbable that the tendency to the formation of 
adhesions is due to infection at the time of operation. 

6. Jejunal and Gastro jejunal ulcer. — Now that we have ar- 
rived at a stage in the development of the surgery of the simple 
diseases of the stomach and duodenum in which we are entitled 
to say that many of the technical difficulties have disappeared, and 
that almost all our anxiety as to the immediate result of an opera- 
tion has long been allayed, we are chiefly concerned to discover the 
remote destiny of our patients. Enquiry assures us that when 
gastro-enterostomy is now performed in suitable cases, the im- 
mediate mortality is very low, certainly less than 2 per cent., and 
the ultimate condition of the very great majority of the patients 
most satisfactory. In connexion with the operation there remains 
only one serious complication to be faced, that is, the development 
of a new ulcer in or near the site of the anastomosis made between 
the stomach and the jejunum. Of the history of this condition of 
jejunal or gastrojejunal ulcer, since its first recognition by Braun 
in 1899, it is not necessary to speak here. A very full account is 



2l8 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

given in several recent articles, the most notable of which is by 
Van Roojen ("Arch. f. klin. Chir.," 1910, xci, 380); see also 
Paterson ("Proc. Roy. Soc. Med., " June, 1909, and separate pub- 
lication) , Wilkie ("Ed. Med. Jour., " 1910). Van Roojen gives brief 
details of 89 cases, and to these three recorded by Wilkie, two cases 
upon which I have operated, and cases privately related to me 
by Rutherford Morison, Norman Porritt, and Basil Hall, and 
others, with the three cases related below, bring the total up to 
over 100. It is remarkable that so few cases are recorded in 
American literature, seeing that the development of the surgery 
of the stomach has been so active in that country. It is almost 
certain that if they had occurred they would have been re- 
ported. 

Ulceration at the line of suture, or in the jejunum very close 
thereto, occiirs almost exclusively after operation for simple dis- 
ease. In only one case in the literature was the gastro-enteros- 
tomy performed for carcinoma ; this is recorded by Axel Key out 
of the practice of Lennander ("Nordisk. Med. Arkiv, " 1907, 
xl, 97). The patient was a woman, aged twenty-five, who had a 
tumour of the pylorus for which resection followed by anterior 
retrocolic gastro-enterostomy was performed. The patient died 
on the tenth day from peritonitis. An examination of the speci- 
men proved the growth to be carcinomatous. In the distal limb 
of the jejunum were found two small round "perforating" ulcers, 
20 mm. and 37 mm. from the anastomosis. In every other case 
recorded the disease was non-malignant. The ulcer may be 
single, or there may be two, three or four ulcers. As a rule, the 
ulcer lies close to, and is exactly on the line of, the anastomosis, 
but sometimes it may be an inch or two away in the bowel, at 
either side of the anastomosis. In 58 cases Van Roojen found the 
position to be — 

In the closest proximity to, or exactly upon the suture line in . . 46 

In the proximal limb of the jejunum in 6 

In the distal limb of the jejunum in 8 

In or near the point of an entero-anastomosis 2 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 219 

The ulceration occurs after every form of gastro-enterostomy. 
The following list is given by Van Roojen : 

Anterior gastro-enterostomy 29 

Anterior gastro-enterostomy with entero-anastomosis 12 

Anterior gastro-enterostomy in " Y " 10 

Anterior gastro-enterostomy retrocolic i 

52 

Posterior gastro-enterostomy 20 

Posterior gastro-enterostomy with entero-anastomosis i 

Posterior gastro-enterostomy in "\^ " 3 

Posterior gastro-enterostomy antecolic in " Y^ " i 

25 

It would appear from this that twice as many cases of jejunal 
ulcer have occurred after the anterior as have been known after 
the posterior operation ; but we have no knowledge of the relative 
frequency of the adoption of these two methods. Van Roojen, 
in order to investigate this question with a nearer approach to 
accuracy, collected the details of 613 cases of gastro-enterostomy 
in which 10 cases of jejunal ulcer had occurred. There were 189 
cases of anterior gastro-enterostomy with 6 cases of jejunal ulcer, 
and 444 examples of the posterior operation with 4 cases of ulcer. 

The time at which the ulcers appeared is given in the following 
table from Van Roojen: 

Within ten days in 3 cases 

Ten days to three months 5 

Three months to six months 9 

Six months to twelve months 10 

One year to one and one-half years 9 

One and one-half years to two years 6 

Two years to three years 5 

Three years to four years 8 

Four years to five years 4 

Five years to ten years 6 

Ten years and later '. , i case 

66 cases 

Dr. Norman Porritt has kindly furnished me with the notes 
of a case in which two perforations occurred, one in a jejunal ulcer, 
and one in an acute ulcer on the lesser curvature of the stomach, 
six days after the operation of gastro-enterostomy. 



220 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

J. S., tailor, twenty-nine, suffering from pyloric stenosis. 
Posterior gastro-enterostomy performed 4.30 P. M. on May 7, 
1906. Did well until 6 A. m. May 13th, when he had a slight 
abdominal pain, followed by very severe attacks of pain at 2 p. m. 
and 6 P. M., followed by abdominal distension and rigidity. 
Operation May 14th, 5.30 P. M. The abdomen was re-opened 
through the original incision. Dark, bilious looking fluid found 
free in abdomen. The anastomosis lay far to the left of the mid- 
dle line sound and perfect. The jejunum was freed from the 
mesocolon, and in pulling it up gas bubbled from the lesser sac 
and there was seen a round, punched-out hole in the jejunum 
from which bilious liquid exuded. The hole was of the diameter 
of a small lead-pencil. The perforation was closed with a double 
row of Lembert's stitching, but on account of the bad condition 
of the patient nothing more was done than a hasty mopping out 
of the lesser peritoneal sac and the insertion of a broad glass 
tube by a stab incision above the pubes and a gauze drain down 
to the perforated ulcer. As soon as the glass tube reached the 
pelvis thick yellow liquid like semi-digested food welled from it. 
On May 15, iqo6, at 3 A. M., the patient died. 

Post-mortem Examination. — There was no evidence of old 
ulceration in stomach or jejunum, but the pylorus w^as narrowed 
to a tunnel which would barely admit a lead-pencil. It was thick- 
ened all round and the lump left at the operation was now very 
plainly recognised. The anastomosis between the stomach and 
the jejunum was sound and good, but on the lesser curvature near 
the pylorus was a round, punched-out perforated ulcer. The 
ulcer found and stitched at the last operation was examined. It 
involved the w^all of the bowel farthest from, but opposite to, 
the anastomosis, and was a simple, punched-out, circular, clean- 
cut hole. 

The cause of the development of a jejunal or a gastrojejunal 
ulcer has not yet been made clear. It is probably not the same 
in all cases. It may be the smallness of the opening; a bruising 
of the edges of the anastomosis, or the development of a haema- 
toma in the wall of either viscus as the result of the wounding of a 
vessel by a needle ; the persistent presence of excessive quantities 
of free HCl; or the tearing and unceasing irritation of an unab- 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 221 

sorbable inner thread which has only partly been released from 
the suture line. Van Roojen found that in only three cases in 
which an ulcer was found at the line of the anastomosis was any 
trace of thread or silk to be discovered. In a case of Battle's 
("Lancet," 1906, pp. 274, 1246) an inner suture inserted thirteen 
months before was removed from the anastomotic line, but the 
jejunal ulcer was an inch away. Wilkie ("Edin. Med. Jour.," 
19 10, ii), in an excellent account of some experimental work con- 
ducted to elucidate this question, shews that the union of the 
mucosa at the line of anastomosis occurs by granulation in about 
seven days, and he concludes, on evidence that is perhaps a little 
slender, that "the presence of an unabsorbable suture in the 
granulation area tends to delay repair." Accordingly, he con- 
siders it advisable to employ some absorbable material for the 
inner stitch. The inner stitch is probably soon discharged : it is 
the outer stitch which in all probability perforates here and there 
through the mucosa which is found hanging at the suture line 
months after the operation. 

It seems not unlikely that the occurrence of a jejunal ulcer 
may be due to a persistence of those causes which first set at work 
the changes leading to the development of the chronic ulcer for 
which the gastro-enterostomy was performed. Gastric and duo- 
denal ulcers are probably always secondary, and so far as my own 
clinical observation goes, they would appear to be secondary 
to an infection elsewhere, generally within the abdomen, but pos- 
sibly apart from it, in the mouth, on the skin, or elsewhere. Of 
all the evident primary causes, those within the alimentary canal 
are the commonest ; of these a diseased condition of the appendix 
is by far the most frequent. The appendix should, therefore, 
always be removed when the operation of gastro-enterostomy 
is being done, and any other infective causes sought, and, if 
found, dealt with radically if possible. 

A search through the recorded examples of this condition 
shews that four clinical types of ulcer can be recognised : 

I. The ulcer develops rapidly and perforates shortly after 



222 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

the operation. There are only four cases which can be included 
in this group. The circumstances in all are similar: Gastro- 
enterostomy was performed for an ulcer at or beyond the pylorus, 
associated with hyperacidity, which in two cases was intense; 
the progress for the first few days was satisfactory, then suddenly 
•there was an acute onset of pain, followed by peritonitis and 
death. In all cases an ulcer just beyond the anastomosis was 
found, and perforation has occurred into the general cavity. 

II. The ulcer develops within a few weeks or months of the 
operation and the symptoms suggest a recurrence of the ulcer 
for which the operation was performed, or a stenosis of the new 
opening. The cases in this group are many. The symptoms are 
very similar to those which were caused by the original ulcer in 
the stomach or in the duodenum, for which the gastro-enteros- 
tomy was performed; or they can be referred to a mechanical 
difficulty in the emptying of the stomach. These complaints 
are attributed to a supposed "recurrence" of the ulcer. Sec- 
ondary operations were performed for disabling symptoms, for 
haemorrhage, or for perforation and peritonitis. In these last 
instances acute perforation had occurred in a chronic ulcer. 

III. The ulcer develops slowly, and insidiously undergoes a 
"subacute" perforation, with the result that a tumour forms in, 
or abutting upon, the epigastrium. About two-fifths of all the 
recorded examples fall in this category. There are not usually 
any symptoms of which the patient takes serious notice. As a 
rule, only some trivial discomfort after meals or "indigestion" 
is noticed; on examination of the patient a distinct tumour is 
felt. When the abdomen is opened, the jejunum at or near the 
anastomosis is found adherent, usually to the parietes. On sepa- 
rating the viscera a perforation into the intestine at the site of an 
ulcer a little below the anastomosis is discovered. The con- 
dition, it will be seen, is precisely analogous to that of "subacute 
perforation" in the stomach (see "Annals of Surger>^ " 1907, 
vol. xlv, p. 223). 

IV. The ulcer perforates into a hollow viscus. The ulcer is 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 223 

of the chronic type, and perforation occurs after adhesion to a 
hollow viscus — either the stomach or the colon. 

Treatment. — The treatment of a peptic jejunal ulcer may 
be beset with almost insuperable difficulties. Much will, of 
course, depend upon the conditions found at the time of the op- 
eration. If an acute perforating ulcer be found, it will probably 
be enough in many cases to close the ulcer by sutures and by 
subsequent careful dieting and rest to avoid the recurrence of 
trouble. In the cases where the ulcer is of the chronic type, and 
especially in those wherein a subacute perforation has occurred, 
a resection of the jejunal length engaged in the anastomosis and 
of the adjacent part of the stomach, followed by the making of a 
new junction between the stomach and the jejunum at a slightly 
lower level, will be needed. If the original anastomosis has been 
of the posterior no-loop variety, then the performance of a re- 
section of the anastomosis is exceedingly difficult, as I have good 
reason to know. In such a case it is better to cut the jejunum 
across immediately above its attachment to the stomach, and 
after resection of the anastomosis to make the new junction after 
the "Y" method of Roux. If the ulcer should be at or near the 
anastomosis, and a resection of the kind just mentioned be im- 
possible, then I would suggest the free opening of the stomach 
by an incision along the anterior surface, in order that access 
may be gained to the ulcer from the gastric side. Probably then 
the anastomosis could be pushed from behind through the wound 
in the anterior wall of the stomach and a resection of the ulcer 
performed. This method I have several times adopted for the 
suture or excision of ulcers, apparently otherwise inaccessible, 
on the posterior wall of the stomach adherent to the pancreas, 
following Pilcher and Mayo. The operation may be called 
" transgastric resection or suture of an ulcer." 

The following three cases of jejunal ulcer treated by operation 
have been under my care. The original gastro-enterostomy in 
Cases I and 3 was performed by other surgeons; in Case 2, by 
myself. In none of the cases was any trace of the original inner 



224 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



suture discovered. Case i is remarkable for the fact that two 
operations for the excision of jejunal ulcers were conducted within 
a period of seven months. 




a --^ 
o > 




i^ 




-•mtkJS^ 



Case i. — Old perforated duodenal ulcer. Posterior gastro- 
enterostomy. Recurrence of duodenal ulcer. Jejunal ulcer. 
Excision of anastomosis. Modified Roux's operation. 

M., Major R. A. M. C, aged forty-two. In 1892 whilst 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



225 



abroad had an illness, associated with acute pain over gall-bladder 
region, pyrexia and nocturnal delirium, which was diagnosed as 
enteric fever; he was invalided to Malta, where he contracted 
Malta fever. After return home attacks of acute pain in gall- 
bladder region kept recurring and were accompanied by vomit- 
ing. During the war in South Africa was well, but on way home 
he woke suddenly one night with a very sudden and acute attack 
of pain, which did not completely cease for three weeks. During 
none of these attacks did he have jaundice, hasmatemesis, or 




Fig. 71. — Case i. 
The parts removed at the second operation. An ulcer which was on the verge 

of perforation is seen. 

melaena. During the next two years the attacks of pain kept re- 
curring; pain nearly always occurred two or three hours after 
food. A diagnosis of gall-stones was made, and operation ar- 
ranged for in April, 1902. Five days before date fixed for opera- 
tion a sudden attack of most excruciating pain in the upper ab- 
domen, which persisted until the operation was performed. The 
condition then found was a perforated duodenal ulcer evidently 
on the upper and posterior wall, with considerable localised peri- 
tonitis. The perforation was closed and the gall-bladder 

VOL. I — 15 



226 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

drained, although so far as can be learned no gall-stones were 
found. 

During the six months following operation he had no trouble, 
but then he began to have a return of the pain, although it was 
not quite so definite in its onset after food as before his first 
operation. There was no A^omiting. 

In Ma}^, 1903, posterior gastro-enterostomy was performed 
by the same surgeon in London. For six to eight months he 
was subject to attacks of biliary vomiting; these then ceased, 
but pain began to recur and lasted for three to four weeks ; usu- 
ally it was reheved by a milk diet. 

In 1904 pain was ven,^ severe, and a diagnosis of jejunal 
ulcer was made; he was put on fluid diet for months, with re- 
lief. During 1906 and 1907 was much better and had only one 
or two attacks, which occurred after playing golf. 

In July, 1908, passed a very tarry motion but had no pain. 
In September a much worse attack, with acute pain situated 
midwaA^ between umbilicus and left costal margin. He was 
in a nursing home under treatment with antilytic serum, which 
appeared to relieve the pain temporarily. On December 8th he 
woke at 4 A. ]M. with a feeling of oppression in stomach, followed 
by vomiting of between three and four pints of blood; melsena 
for several days after. Since that time has had saurin treatment, 
etc., but the pain has kept recurring, most frequently at 2 A. m. 

When seen by me in March, 1909, I made the following diag- 
nosis: Duodenal ulcer, possibly jejunal ulcer. Patent pylorus, 
partial closure of anastomotic opening. 

Operation was performed on March 24, 1909. Incision just 
to right of middle line, close to old incision. The gall-bladder 
margin of liver and stomach were found to be involved in a mass 
of tough adhesions which were separated with much difficulty; 
the omentum and transverse colon were turned up over the an- 
terior aspect of the stomach and were adherent to the anterior 
abdominal wall. 

The parts were defined, and it was found that a large indu- 
rated scar was present in the anterior wall of the first part of the 
duodenum. 

The gastro-enterostomy was next examined, and it was found 
that the opening was patent, but the two limbs of the jejunum 
were almost parallel up to the anastomosis; a considerable 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 227 

"loop" was present. After the firm surrounding adhesions had 
been separated, the anastomosis was carefully palpated, an in- 
durated "knot" was felt on the mesenteric aspect of the gut just 
opposite the gastro-enterostomy opening. This was thought 
to indicate a jejunal ulcer, so it was decided to excise the anas- 
tomosis. The two limbs were clamped and divided, and the 
stomach incised with scissors just around the anastomotic open- 
ing. 

The end of the efferent limb was next closed by suture, and 
a lateral anastomosis performed between it and the opening 
already existing in the stomach. The proximal limb was next 
implanted into the distal by an end- to-side anastomosis. The 
raw surface left by the ligation of the mesentery was covered in 
as completely as possible. Duodenal ulcer and pylorus infolded 
by several sutures. Abdomen closed. The operation was ex- 
tremely difficult throughout and took two and one-half hours. 

October, 1909. Since operation he has not been any better 
but his pain has been constant both night and day, though vary- 
ing much in intensity. For example, he had always more when 
he took any exercise. His pain was localised to a small area, 
just to the left of the umbilicus, and here he thought he could 
feel a lump, but no one else has made this out. He finds food 
of any sort sets the pain going in a few minutes. The pain is a 
constant hot sensation which never actually leaves him, and 
which is particularly bad at night. He has been having small 
doses of morphine at nights since the last operation in June. 
He has tried olive oil treatment without benefit ; the only things 
that relieve him are strong alkalis and morphine. He has lost 
a considerable amount of weight of late. 

Further operation, October 7, 1909. Incision through right 
rectus in one of the old scars ; a very firm mass of adhesions was 
met with and much time spent in separating them; at length 
the site of the last operation was exposed, the "Y"-shaped junc- 
tion of jejunum being found in good order. The transverse 
colon was now turned up and the posterior gastro-enterostomy 
exposed, the lesser sac having been opened and numerous ad- 
hesions having been separated. On palpation a hard mass could 
be felt in the posterior part of the line of suture, with a crater in 
its centre, and the whole mass being the size of a shilling. It was 
decided to detach this gastro-enterostomy and remove the loop 



228 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS, 

of small intestine down to the "Y "-shaped junction, and to do a 
new anterior gastro-enterostomy. The stomach was closed by 
two rows of interrupted Pagenstecher stitches. 

The "Y "-shaped junction was detached and the lower seg- 
ment closed so as to reproduce the normal line of bowel. The 
stomach and transverse colon were turned up and the jejunum 
followed up to its union with the stomach, and with some diffi- 
culty the line of union was defined. In separating the numerous 
adhesions the jejunal ulcer which had been felt on the posterior 
surface of the anastomosis ruptured at the bottom of its crater, 
where it was extreme^ thin. The anastomosis was detached 
with a collar of stomach wall, and several blackened Pagenstecher 
sutures of the last operation were found, mostly in the lumen of 
the bowel, attached by one end to the wall. The hole in the 
lesser sac was closed by the portion of mesentery belonging to that 
portion of jejunum leading from the old gastro-enterostomy to 
the "Y "-shaped junction; this portion of the gut was now re- 
moved. A new anterior gastro-enterostomy was now performed 
in the usual wa}^ with as short a loop as possible. 

Case 2. — Duodenal ulcer. Ulcer sutured. Posterior gas- 
tro-enterostom}^ Appendicectomy. Jejunal ulcer. Excision. 
Mrs. S. Sent by Dr. Edgecombe, Harrogate. Admitted to 
Nursing Home November 28, 1910. All her life she has had 
"indigestion, " worse of late years. She says it is an aching pain 
coming on, as a rule, two hours after food; it comes on in attacks 
lasting some days or weeks; after a few days in each attack the 
pain comes irrespective of the taking of food, but then food re- 
lieves it. She practically never vomits. The attacks have be- 
come worse of late, but she had an attack in November, 1909, 
and not another until a few weeks ago, though in between there 
is some trouble of a much slighter type. The pain is always 
worse in winter, and is situated invariably above and to the left 
of the umbilicus, the area here being very tender. She has not 
had hasmatemesis or melaena or jaundice, and had not lost weight 
except in the attacks, gaining it at once in the quiescent intervals. 

November 30, 1910. Incision through right rectus. Very 
well-marked duodenal ulcer one-half inch beyond pylorus at 
upper margin, causing marked thickening and puckering of 
duodenum. Stomach slightly dilated. Posterior gastro-en- 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 229 

terostomy performed and ulcer infolded. Appendix was much 
adherent, extremely small, and fibrous; it was removed. 

Re-admission May 13, 1911. Was operated upon for duo- 
denal ulcer and chronic appendicitis November 30, 19 10. For 
a time she had relief, but soon her symptoms began again "as 
bad as ever" and of the same type, but the pain was felt lower 
down in the abdomen, and referred to the umbilicus. Pain 
one or two hours after food and relieved by food; occasionally 
pain to the right of the middle line. 

Operation May 15, 191 1. Incision through old scar. At 
the lowest part of the anastomosis was a hard white indurated 




Fig. 72. — Case 3. 

The parts removed. The gastro-enterostomy opening looks downward and to 

the right. The ulcer is just seen within the upper opening. 

mass involving the transverse colon, with a crater on it, felt 
through anterior wall of stomach, about one inch long and one- 
half inch to three-quarters of an inch broad, the whole being 
plastered down by adhesions. After separation, the crater's 
base was seen to be formed by transverse colon and transverse 
mesocolon; the edges were in the line of the lowest point of 
the anastomosis between the stomach and the jejunum and 
involving both organs. The whole ulcerated area was cut away. 
The gap in the anastomosis line was stitched up by a row of 
interrupted catgut stitches and one continuous outer suture 



230 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



of Pagenstecher thread. A wide opening free from induration 
was left and admitted tw^o fingers easily. In September, 19 ii, 
the patient wrote to say that she was free from pain, but acting 
under m}" instructions was living on a spare dietar}', consisting 
chiefl}' of liquids. 



Ulcer 



Lower limb of 
jejunum 




Stomach covered 
by transverse 
mesocolon 



Duodenojejuna 
flexure 



Pjq y,. — Operation for Excision of the Parts ix a Case of Jejunal Ulcer. 
Step I. (Drawn by Mr. L. R. Braithwaite.) 




Fig. 74. — Operation for Excision of the Parts in a Case of Jejunal 

Ulcer. Step 2. 
The transverse mesocolon is detached from the stomach, so as to allow 
the stomach to be drawn well through the opening. A clamp is then applied 
in the same position which it occupied at the original operation. Clamps 
are applied to the jejunum on each side of the anastomosis. (Drawn by Mr. 
L. R. Braithwaite.) 



Case 3. — Jejunal ulcer following gastro-enterostomy. Ex- 
cision. Roux's operation. Appendicectom}'. Mrs. S. Sent 
by Dr. Bingham, Lancaster. Three years ago she had gastro- 
enterostomy done by a London surgeon for duodenal ulcer. For 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 



J3I 



some months she was better, then began to have pains in the 
body soon after food — almost immediately after swallowing it. 
She began to diet herself at once, and has done so ever since. 
Nineteen months ago she had a very severe hsematemesis and 
nearly died, and twice since has had severe hasmatemesis. The 
pain, whenever she fails to take great care in her diet, comes on 
at a spot about one inch above the umbilicus, and may be very 
severe. She says it is like the pain she had before the operation. 
She has not lost weight, but has carefully dieted herself the whole 




Fig. 75. — Operation for Excision of the Parts in a Case of Jejunal 

Ulcer. Step 3. 
The parts engaged in the anastomosis with the ulcer are removed. The 
distal end of the jejunum is closed. The proximal end is open and is ready 
for union with the jejunum lower down in an end-to-side anastomosis. (Drawn 
by Mr. L. R. Braithwaite.) 



time. X-ray examination shewed all food going through anas- 
tomosis. 

September 11, 191 1. Old scar excised in right rectus. Gas- 
tro-enterostomy explored: it was posterior and nearly vertical. 
In the jejunum, one-half inch below the beginning of the anas- 
tomosis and near the mesenteric edge of it, was a small indurated 
stellate scar, which was about the size of a three-penny piece, 
and by its contraction caused marked narrowing of the jejunum. 
This was clearly the scar of a jejunal ulcer. Owing to the fact 
that a local incision would endanger the vascularity of the jejunum 
at this part, full excision was performed. The lesser sac was 



232 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



opened around the anastomosis so that a part of the stomach 
was drawn through and a clamp put on above the anastomosis. 



\\\ft)'f Pifr////U/i'(^ 




Fig. 76. — Operation' for Excision of the Parts in a Case of Jejunal Ulcer. 

Step 4. 
The jejunal end-to-side anastomosis completed. The upper closed jejunal 
end is now brought upward for a side-to-side union with the stomach. (Drawn 
bv Air. L. R. Braithwaite.) 




Fig. 77. — Operation for Excision of the Parts in a Case of Jejunal 

Ulcer. Step 5. 
The operation completed. (Drawn by Mr. L. R. Braithwaite.) 



The jejunum distal to the anastomosis was clamped and divided 
and the distal end closed by suture. The jejunum proximal to 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 233 

the anastomosis and to the ulcer was divided, and, owing to there 
being a longish loop, this was easier than usual, though even 
now there was difficulty. The proximal cut end was anasto- 
mosed at right angles to the distal jejunum, about six inches 
below its cut-and-closed end. The part of the jejunum left at- 
tached to the stomach (including the ulcer), together with the 
portion of the stomach projecting beyond the clamp, including 
therefore the gastro-enterostomy opening, was excised. 

The length of jejunum formerly distal to the anastomosis, 
whose cut end had already been closed, was now clamped, and 
a side-to-side union effected between it and the opening in the 
stomach embraced by the clamp. The appendix was adherent 
and was removed. The original duodenal ulcer was well marked 
and was infolded and covered in by omentum. 

Case 4. — Transgastric excision of a gastrojejunal ulcer. The 
patient, a male, aged forty- seven, had a history of abdominal 
trouble extending over seven years. At the commencement his 
only symptom was epigastric pain on kneeling, on leaning for- 
wards, in fact, after any movement which caused contraction 
of his recti abdominis. Gradually this pain became more se- 
vere, occurring at almost regular intervals, and accompanied 
by flatulence and hyperacidity. The pain was a typical hunger 
pain, commencing from two to three hours after meals, and was 
relieved by lying down or by taking food. There was never any 
vomiting. The epigastric pain was situated above and to the 
right of the umbilicus, and occurred only at intervals. Gradu- 
ally, however, the intervals became shorter and the periods of 
pain longer. 

After three and a half years of this he had a sudden attack 
of severe abdominal pain in the right hypochondrium, which 
was diagnosed as a subacute perforation; from this he recovered. 

In January, 191 2, a posterior gastro-enterostomy was per- 
formed by another surgeon. The patient recovered from this 
operation, and his symptoms subsided only to return about eight 
months later. The pain after this was lower in the abdomen and 
more to the left than previously — this pain was really the only 
symptom, but it was severe in character and for the last few weeks 
before I saw the patient almost constant in duration. 

The :K-ray report was as follows: "The bismuth food passes 



234 



ABDOMIXAL OPERATIONS. 



freely through the oesophagus. The stomach is not dilated. 
The outline is regular except for an indentation about, the middle 
of the greater curvature. Peristalsis is seen, but it is not excessive. 
The gastro-enterostomy opening is patent, and as far as I can 
judge about two-thirds of the food passes through it and about 
one-third through the pAdorus. The stomach is empt}' two 




Fig. 78. — Transgastric excision of jejunal ulcer. 



hours after the meal. No food lodges in the duodenum, nor is 
there any duodenal kinking. The small intestine is empt}' in 
twelve hours. No stasis. No ileal kink. 

"In twenty-four hours almost all the bismuth food has been 
passed per rectum. I have seen no abnormality in the large 
intestine. 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 235 

"There is no x-Tay evidence of calculus in either kidney, in 
the ureters, or in the bladder." 

On January 7, 1914, I reopened the abdomen, excising the 
scar of the previous operation, and adopting for the deeper 
portions of the incision Crile's aneesthesia. On opening the ab- 
domen the transverse colon presented: it was markedly hyper- 
trophied and distended. It was kinked in a very curious fashion, 
its middle portion being adherent to the under surface of the left 
lobe of the liver and to the diaphragm. Before the stomach 
could be examined, it was necessary to separate the adhesions, 
fixing the colon in this unusual position. This separation was 
exceedingly difficult. The stomach itself was normal in outline, 
and there was a scar of an old ulcer on the first stage of the duo- 
denum. The anastomosis which had been performed was a 
posterior vertical no-loop gastro-enterostomy. The stoma was 
of adequate size and in the correct position. On feeling the stoma 
with the finger a hard nodule, the size of a shilling, with a dimple 
in its centre, could be detected. This nodule, which was thought 
to be a gastrojejunal ulcer, could be clearly palpated through 
the anterior wall of the stomach. In view of the technical per- 
fectness of the original operation, it was decided that a trans- 
gastric excision of the ulcer would be a safer operation than an 
excision of the entire anastomosis. Accordingly, while my as- 
sistant passed two fingers, one on either side of the jejunal loop 
so as to grip the ulcer, I made a longitudinal incision through the 
anterior wall of the stomach, parallel to the curvatures and mid- 
way between them. On opening the stomach my assistant 
everted the posterior wall through the opening, thus bringing the 
gastrojejunal ulcer into view. The ulcer was almost entirely 
gastric, being just on the edge of the stoma. On opening the 
stomach a piece of silk (or linen thread) was found hanging loose 
from the region of the ulcer. 

Excision was performed with scissors, and the opening made 
in the posterior wall of the stomach closed with through-and- 
through sutures passed from the mucosa. 

The anterior incision was then closed, leaving only room for 
a No. 14 rubber catheter, which was passed into the stomach and 
along the afferent jejunal loop. 

After the closure of the anterior incision a few interrupted 
Lembert sutures were passed posteriorly in the region of the orig- 



236 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

inal anastomosis. The abdomen was then closed, leaving the 
catheter in situ. The patient was given 4 ounces of peptonised 
milk through the gastrostomy tube on leaving the table. 

The following case, in which there were two separate per- 
forations of peptic ulcers in the jejunum, is recorded by Battle 
("Lancet," vol. i, 1905, p. 1246): — - 

The patient, a woman, aged 30, w^as admitted to St. Thomas's 
Hospital in March, 1903. The ulcer was situated in the anterior 
aspect of the stomach near the pylorus and was surrounded by 
a good deal of thickening. It was sutured, the peritoneum 
was cleansed, and a drainage tube was left in the lower wound. 
Anterior gastro-enterostomy was performed on April 9, 1904, 
for pyloric stenosis. On May 6, 1905, she underwent operation 
for perforation of a simple ulcer of the jejunum which had burst 
into the general peritoneal cavity. It was a circular clean-cut 
ulcer, situated about one and a half inches from the line of junc- 
tion of the bowel with the stomach. The ulcer was sutured, 
the peritoneum was cleansed, and the two wounds through which 
this was done were closed without drainage. Finally, the pa- 
tient was again admitted to the hospital on ]\Iarch 14, 1906, for 
symptoms of perforation. At the operation a perforated ulcer 
was found at the line of junction of the stomach and small 
intestine. The tissues around it were indurated. She left the 
hospital on April 12th, having made a very satisfactory recovery. 
It was of interest to note that there were no adhesions found at 
this operation ; also that there was now no hernial protrusion of 
any of the scars. 

7. The question of chest complications, parotitis, etc., is 
discussed elsewhere. 

8. Diarrhoea. — -An occasional sequel to the operation of 
gastro-enterostomy is the occurrence of diarrhoea. The attack 
may be slight, or may be so serious, so constant, uncontrollable 
and exhausting as to be the immediate cause of death. 

It has been in my own experience extremely infrequent, and 
when noticed has been temporary and never alarming or serious. 
In only one case have special measures, dieting and the admin- 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 237 

istration of opium, been necessary; the patient, a man of forty- 
six, was operated upon for duodenal ulceration, with recent ex- 
cessive haemorrhages. The diarrhoea lasted for five days, but, 
although troublesome, was never so unremitting as to give 
me any real anxiety as to the patient's ultimate recovery. 

Much more serious experiences are recorded by others. 
Kelling ("Archiv f. Klin. Chir.," Bd. 62, 1900) and Anschlitz 
("Mitth. a. d. Grenzgebiet, " Bd. 15, 1905, p. 305) have dealt 
with the subject in detail. 

Kelling remarks that in the cases which prove fatal no obvious 
explanation of the diarrhoea, is discoverable. He suggests that 
there are two forms : First, that in which the diarrhoea is due to 
the escape into the intestine of acid contents not neutralised 
by the bile and the pancreatic juice. Second, that in which it 
is due to "fermentation." The latter is not serious, and is 
seen only or chiefly in patients suffering from carcinoma, or 
in those cases where there is an absence of free HCl. 

The explanation of the first form lacks adequate confirmation. 
In spite of the fact that both bile and pancreatic juice may al- 
most constantly be found in the stomach after gastro-enteros- 
tomy, acid contents may still escape into the intestine, and may 
indeed cause peptic ulcer. But it has not been suggested, or 
recognised, that diarrhoea occurs especially in those suffering 
from hyperchlorhydria, as one would expect if this hypothesis 
were accurate. 

With regard to the explanation of the second form, this 
may be true in certain cases. Fermentation may go on to such 
a degree in the stomach that no amount of careful lavage will 
ensure the cleanliness of the mucosa. This may be proved by 
examining a pyloric growth after pylorectomy has been performed ; 
the recesses of the irregular mass are sometimes extremely foul. 
The delivery of putrid, fermenting food into the jejunum would, 
of course, instantly set up diarrhoea. It is always remarked 
that the stools in such a case are "very oft'ensive. " But in not 
a few cases the diarrhoea does not appear at once, but only 



238 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

after several da^'s, Avhen the patient has perhaps been doing Avell. 
It should also be remarked that cases have occurred after partial 
gastrectomy, when the infective area has been removed. 

Anschiitz believes the chief cause to be the excessive weakness 
of the patient, and remarks that the same type of diarrhoea 
is seen in those who suffer from advanced carcinoma elsewhere, 
or from extensive tuberculous disease apart from intestinal 
lesions. Carle and Fantino remark that the food runs through 
the intestine like water through a rubber tube, which is pOAver- 
less to hasten or impede its progress. 

It is apparent that no adequate explanation of this com- 
plication can be given ; but it is probable that a strict attention 
to the diet, the administration of only sterile foods for some time 
after the operation, the giving of opium early, and the exhibition 
of drugs such as isoform, ;3-naphthol, salol, etc., whose purpose 
is to act as disinfectants, will comprise the most effective means 
at our disposal for preventing and for checking the onset of this 
symptom. 

A. F. Hertz ("Annals of Surgery," October, 1913) mentions 
additional unfavourable complications after gastro-enterostomy, 
namely, too rapid drainage of the stomach, and, in cases of dila- 
tation, situation of the stoma above the upper level of the gas- 
tric contents. 

Where there is too rapid drainage of the stomach, the patient 
complains of a sensation of fulness, localised rather lower than 
the position where the pain of the original ulcer was felt ; there is 
usually diarrhoea also, the bowels in some cases being opened after 
each meal. Hertz writes: 

"In all patients suffering from this group of symptoms I 
have found with the x-rays that the stomach was small and hy- 
pertonic, and that the passage of food out of it was extremely 
rapid, so that a meal consisting of half a pint of porridge and 
milk, mixed with two ounces of bismuth oxy chloride or barium 
sulphate, left the stomach in less than an hour, and in one case in 
less than ten minutes after being taken, instead of requiring the 



COMPLICATIONS AFTER GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY. 239 

normal three or four hours. If the patient is watched while he is 
taking the meal, the outflow from the stoma may indeed appear 
to be almost as rapid as the inflow from the oesophagus." 

He adds that these appearances were seen both in cases where 
the pylorus was closed and where it was patent; indeed, in one 
case pyloroplasty had been performed. The feeling of distension 
is doubtless due to the rapid passage of the gastric contents 
through the stoma, leading to abnormal distension of the proximal 
portion of the jejunum. The diarrhoea is due to the irritation of 
the bowels by the food which escapes from the stomach too rap- 
idly for efficient gastric digestion. 

Treatment in cases such as this must be either palliative — ■ 
i.e., rest for an hour after food to delay the emptying of the 
stomach, combined with pancreatic extract to compensate for 
the deficiency of the normal secretion, and possibly small doses 
of belladonna to relieve the jejunal spasm set up by distension, 
or operative, i.e., narrowing of the stoma. Another possible 
cause of trouble is situation of the stoma above the level of the 
gastric contents. In cases of gastric dilatation it often takes con- 
siderable time to ascertain which portion of the stomach will lie 
lowest when the upright posture is assumed. These cases usu- 
ally improve with rest in bed, which allows the stomach to re- 
gain its tone, and also aids the emptying in cases where the 
stoma is not sufficiently low. 

My own experience shews that the unsatisfactory results 
which follow upon gastro-enterostomy are due (apart from tech- 
nical errors) almost exclusively to the performance of the operation 
in improper cases. If the operation is restricted to those cases in 
which definite organic disease is discovered in the stomach, distal 
to the suggested anastomosis, or in the duodenum, the results are 
uniformly satisfactory. Bad results are due to the adoption of 
the operation in cases where no lesion is present to justify it. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

OPERATIONS FOR CHRONIC GASTRIC ULCER. 
GASTRODUODENOSTOMY. 

The operation of gastroduodenostomy was first suggested 
by Jaboulay in 1892, and performed by him in 1894. In 1895 
Kiimmell independently suggested the same principle, the union 
of the duodenum to the stomach, but carried the principle out 




Fig. 79. — Gastroduodenostom}- lines of incision (J aboulay's method). 

by dividing the duodenum completely across, closing the proxi- 
mal end, and transplanting the distal end into the anterior wall 
of the stomach near the greater curvature. 

Jaboulay united the anterior wall of the duodenum to the 
anterior wall of the stomach, folding the duodenum forward 
over a hinge, as it were, formed by the pylorus. Yillard de- 

240 



GASTRODUODENOSTOMY. 



241 



scribed a modification of the method under the term "subpyloric 
gastroduodenostomy." Instead of folding the duodenum over 
on to the stomach, he anastomosed the contiguous surfaces of 
the stomach and duodenum. 

The operation is most easily performed when there is a largely 
dilated stomach and a mobile duodenum. In one case reported 




Fig. 80. — Gastroduodenostomy (Ktiinmeirs method). 



by Spencer any other gastro-intestinal anastomosis was im- 
possible by reason of extensive adhesions which affected all of 
the pyloric portion of the stomach. When the pyloric region 
is adherent or invaded by growth, the operation is difhcult or 
may be impossible. 

The advantages of this procedure over gastrojejunostomv 
are claimed to be the easier emptying of the stomach at an ori- 



VOL. I — 10 



242 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



fice near the natiiral outlet, and the absence of bile regurgita- 
tion, owing to the fact that the new opening in the intestine is 
placed above the bile papilla. The regurgitation of bile does, 
however, occur if a large opening be made. 

The two methods of performing an anastomosis between 
the stomach and duodenum which enable the operation to be 
most satisfactority completed are those described by Kocher 




Fig. 81. — Gastroduodenostomy (Yillard's method). 



and Finney. Professor Kocher has suggested that the duo- 
denum should be freed by stripping up the peritoneum 
to the right of the vertical (second) portion, so that an anas- 
tomosis between the stomach and the duodenum may be more 
readily performed. The following description is given by Pro- 
fessor Kocher ("Scott. Medical and Surgical Journal," October, 
1903, p. 311): 



GASTRODUODENOSTOMY. 243 

"The most suitable incision is one similar to that which we 
recommend for exposing the gall-bladder, viz., an oblique in- 
cision two finger-breadths below and parallel to the right cos- 
tal margin, beginning at the middle line. After dividing the 
skin and fascia, the rectus muscle is cut through as far as the 
broad abdominal muscles. The posterior layer of the rectal 
sheath, the fascia trans versalis, and the peritoneum are divided. 
In muscular subjects the transversalis muscle is split parallel 
to its fibres, which are then firmly drawn apart. Should any 
adhesions exist between the gall-bladder and the colon, they 
must be divided. The liver is drawn upwards, the stomach to 
the left, and the transverse colon and the descending limb of 
the hepatic flexure downwards. The duodenum is then brought 
into view, and its outer border is clearly defined. A pad of gauze 
is placed against the under surface of the liver, and the latter 
is then drawn well upwards with a suitable retractor. Gauze 
compresses are also employed to push aside the stomach and 
colon. 

"The delicate layer of parietal peritoneum covering the kid- 
ney is divided vertically i^ inches external to the second part 
of the duodenum, and the incision is then continued vertically 
downwards through the upper layer of the transverse meso- 
colon (which is held on the stretch) as far as the larger branches 
of the vessels. The fingers are then introduced behind the left 
edge of the incision through the peritoneum, and the duodenum is 
separated from the vertebral column, the vena cava, and the aorta 
until it can be brought forward and pressed against the pyloric 
portion of the stomach, which, in its turn, is compressed against 
the left edge of the wound in the abdominal wall, so as to shut 
off the general cavity of the stomach and prevent escape of its 
contents. Both stomach and duodenum are now compressed 
above and below between the fingers of an assistant, and the 
lateral anastomosis is effected in the usual manner by two rows 
of sutures. 

"To one who has once convinced himself how easily and 
securely this lateral gastroduodenostomy can be performed — 
provided the duodenum can be rendered sufficiently movable — 
it will be evident how admirably the operation fulfils the indi- 
cations for treatment in stenosis of the pylorus. Unlike the 
other surgeons who have performed gastroduodenostom}^ we 



244 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

do not limit the operation to special cases: on the contrarv% 
we regard it as the normal procedure, and we are of the opinion 
that it will take precedence over all the previous methods of 
gastro-enterostom}^ and pyloroplasty. 

"The method is subject to only one contraindication, viz., 
the presence of such extensive adhesions to the under surface 
of the hver that the duodenum cannot be sufficient^ freed. This 
difficulty of adhesions can, however, often be overcome, as we 
have proved in three of our cases ; but the fact of having to per- 
form the suturing inside the abdomen is apt to interfere with 
the security of the stitching, especially in difficult cases. It 
is on this accoimt that subpyloric gastroduodenostomy did not 
meet with universal acceptance. The subpyloric portion of 
the duodenum cannot be drawn out of the wound on account 
of its connexion with the gastrohepatic omentum and the im- 
portant structures contained within it. This fixation to the 
under surface of the liver may be so firm that onty the lower 
two-thirds, or only the lower part, of the vertical portion of 
the duodenum, together with the inferior flexure, can be brought 
in contact with the stomach. 

"We therefore propose that, instead of Villard's subp3doric 
gastroduodenostomy, the name lateral gastroduodenostomy be 
given to this operation, to distinguish it from our method of 
inserting the divided duodenum into the posterior wall of the 
stomach after resection of the pylorus. The great difference 
between Villard's subpyloric gastroduodenostomy and our pro- 
cedure is that we render the descending portion of the duodenum, 
the inferior flextu-e, and a considerable portion of the third (trans- 
verse) part so movable that the parts to be sutured can readily 
be raised up and surrounded with gauze, so that the sutures can 
be introduced extraperitoneal^ with comfort and security. 

"We intend in future to perform lateral gastroduodenos- 
tomy in all cases of stricture of the p3dorus, and only to have 
recourse to gastrojejunostomy in cases rendered unusually dif- 
ficult by firm adhesions. We have performed the operation 
on five occasions — four times for cicatricial stenosis and once 
for malignant stricture. The results have been convincing. 
Regurgitation of bile either does not occur at all or only at first, 
when a large, gaping opening has been made. It is advisable 
to make the anastomotic opening as high as possible, and not 



GASTRODUODENOSTOMY. 245 

too large. The patient with carcinoma was at once relieved of 
all her discomfort. Onty one patient complained subsequently 
of very severe pain, and he had a simultaneous cholecystotomy 
performed for gall-stones. That a dilated and sacculated 
stomach is not so well emptied as by our inferior gastrojejunos- 
tomy is obvious. If gastroduodenostomy be performed in such 
a case, it is advisable to occasionally wash out the stomach." 

Finney's operation was described by its originator as " a 
new method of p^doroplasty." I am indebted to Dr. Finney 
for the following description of his operation, and for the privi- 
lege of being allowed to witness its performance by him at the 
Johns Hopkins Hospital. 

The operation is as follows: 

" Divide the adhesions binding the pylorus to the neighbour- 
ing structures; also free as thoroughly as possible the pyloric 
end of the stomach and first portion of the duodenum. Upon 
the thoroughness wdth which the pylorus, lower end of the 
stomach, and upper end of the duodenum are free depends, in 
large measure, the success of the operation and the ease and 
rapidity of its performance. I wish to emphasise this as one 
of the most important points in the operation. Frequently, 
at first sight, the pylorus may seem hopelessly bound down, 
when, after a little patient toil and judicious use of the scalpel 
and blunt dissector, it is found that it can be freed with com- 
parative ease. A suture, to be used as a retractor, is taken in 
the upper wall of the pylorus, which is then retracted upwards. 
A second suture is then inserted into the anterior wall of the 
stomach, and a third into the anterior wall of the duodenum, at 
equidistant points — say about 12 cm. — from the suture just de- 
scribed in the pylorus. These second sutures mark the lower ends 
of the gastric and duodenal incisions respectively. They should 
be placed as low as possible in order that the new pylorus may 
be amply large. Traction is then made upwards on the py- 
loric suture, and downwards in the same plane, on the gastric 
and duodenal sutures. This keeps the stomach and duodenal 
walls taut, and allows the placing of the sutures with greater 
facility than if the walls remained lax. The peritoneal surfaces 
of the duodenum and stomach, along its greater curvature, are 



246 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 




Fig. 82. — Finney's operation. The duodenum and stomach are clamped. The 

line of incision is shewn. 




Fig. 83. — Finney's operation. The first line of suture complete, the stomach 
and duodenum opened, and the inner suture commenced. 



GASTRODUODENOSTOMY. 



247 




Fig. 84. — Finney's operation. The inner suture nearly completed. 




Fig. 85. — Finney's operation. The outer suture completed. 



248 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



then sutured together, as far posteriorly as possible. For this 
row I would recommend the use of the continuous suture, as 
it is more easily and quickly applied, and it can be reinforced 
after the stomach and duodenum have been incised. After the 
posterior line of sutures has been placed, an anterior row of mat- 
tress sutures is taken, which are not tied, but left long, in the 




Fig. 86. — Finney's operation. A flap turned upwards to shew the alteration in 
the parts produced by the anastomosis (after Sinclair White). 



manner indicated. These sutures, after they have been placed, 
are retracted vertically in either direction from the middle of 
the portion included in the row of sutures. Then, after all the 
stitches have been placed and retracted, the incision is made 
in the shape of a horseshoe. The sutures should be placed far 
enough apart to give ample room for the incision. The gastric 
arm of the incision is made through the stomach-wall just in- 



GASTRODUODENOSTOMY. 249 

side the lowest point of the Hne of sutures, and is carried up to 
and through the pylorus and around into the duodenum, down 
to the corresponding point on the duodenal side. Haemor- 
rhage is then stopped. It is well to excise as much as possible 
of the scar tissue upon either side of the incision in order to limit, 
as far as possible, the subsequent contraction of the cicatrix. 
This procedure I carried out in two of my cases with great satis- 
faction, and I should strongly recommend it in all cases where 
the walls of the pylorus are much thickened and there is much 
scar tissue present. It is well, too, to trim off with scissors redund- 
ant edges of mucous membrane, in order to prevent the formation 
of a valve-like fold of mucous membrane at the new pylorus. 
A continuous catgut suture is now taken through and through 
all the coats of the intestine on the posterior side of the incision. 
This reinforces the posterior line of sutures, secures better ap- 
proximation of the cut edges of the mucous membrane, and pre- 
vents the reunion of the divided intestinal walls. The anterior 
sutures are then straightened out and tied, and the operation is 
complete, unless one wishes to reinforce the mattress sutures 
with a few Lembert stitches. This procedure, as is readily seen, 
gives the minimum of exposure of infected surface. All the 
stitches are placed and the posterior row tied before the bowel 
is opened, and it remains open just long enough to control the 
haemorrhage. The size of the newly formed pyloric opening 
is limited in this operation only by the mobility of the stomach 
and duodenum and the judgment of the operator. 

' ' In all of my cases the incision has been about 1 2 cm. in length, 
and could have been made longer had I chosen to make it so. 
Unless the stomach is very much dilated or has descended to an 
unusual extent, the lower limit of the new outlet is at or near 
the level of its most dependent portion." 

I have, when performing Finney's operation, modified this 
method of performing it. I have, in fact, applied to the 
operation of gastroduodenostomy the method adopted in the 
operation of gastro-enterostomy ; that is to say, I have applied 
clamps to the stomach and to the duodenum, and from both these 
viscera a large ellipse of the mucous membrane has been ex- 
cised after division of the serous and subserous coats. The 



250 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 




Fig. 8 7 . — -Gastroduodenostomy ; shewing the parts to be embraced by the clamp . 




V 



Fig. 8.S. — Gastroduodenostomy; the parts embraced by the clamps and the 
position of the anastomotic opening. 



GASTRODUODENOSTOMY. 



251 



clamps prevent hcemorrhage and the escape of fluids from the 
stomach and duodenum, and thereby make the operation speedier 
and simpler. 

For this operation I have had made a special form of clamp, 
the blades of which at their origin are sharply bent at a right 
angle. The duodenum, even after be- 
ing "mobilised," cannot always be 
brought easily to the surface ; but with 
this clamp the bowel can be well secured, 
because the blade lies well within the 
abdomen, when the handle lies flat 
upon the surface. 

The operation of pyloroplasty has 
fallen into almost complete disuse. 
Even in the hands of its warmest ad- 
vocates it was an unsatisfactory opera- 
tion, and the number of cases in which 
there was a recurrence of symptoms was 
very large. 

The operation of Finney and the 
operation of Kocher have, however, a 
distinct place in surgery, and it is by 
no means unlikely that in the future 
they will be performed in a certain class 
of cases for which gastro-enterostomy is 
now the chosen method. It has seemed 
to me that in those cases where 
pyloric spasm is a prominent condition, 
where it is caused by ulceration in active 
progress at a point a little distant 
from the pylorus, Finney's operation will be especially of ser- 
vice. In the ordinary case of pyloric stenosis, with dilatation 
and hypertrophy of the stomach, no operation could be more 
satisfactory than posterior gastro-enterostomy; for these cases 
it is hardly possible that it can ever be replaced by an opera- 




Fig. 89. — Moynihan's 
clamp for use in Finnej^'s 
operation and partial gas- 
trectomy. 



252 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

tion which is easier, speedier, or safer. In cases of active ulcera- 
tion and pyloric spasm it is probable that Finney's operation 
will prove to be of great value. 

In certain cases of hour-glass stomach a modification of 
Finney's operation may be used, as suggested by Kammerer. 

GASTRO-ENTEROSTOMY COMBINED WITH JEJUNOSTOMY. 

I have performed jejunostomy after the method of Witzel's 
gastrostomy in combination with the modified Roux operation 
in five instances, for cases of large chronic gastric ulcer surrounded 
b}" inflammatory tissue and adherent to the pancreas. Two of 
these have been reported for me b^' E. T. Tatlow C' Lancet," 
November 23, 1912): 

"Case i. — The patient, a female, aged sixt}^ had an anterior 
gastro-enterostomy in Y performed two years ago. At the oper- 
ation a large circular ulcer was foimd on the posterior surface of 
the stomach near the greater curvature, adherent posteriorly to 
the pancreas. For some three months after operation the pain 
disappeared. The woman was readmitted to hospital in the mid- 
dle of March, 1912, complaining of continuous epigastric pain, 
worse immediate^ after food. She lived on milk and 'slops,' 
vomited frequently, and starved herself for four or five days at a 
time ; she was losing weight rapidly. At the operation in ]March 
the previous anterior anastomosis was found to be patent, whilst 
the ulcer was as large as at the original operation. Jejunostomy 
was performed, the jejunum being opened at a point about two 
inches above the fork of the Y anastomosis, in that portion of the 
bowel coming from the duodenojejunal flexure, the catheter 
being retained in position by the method described below. So far 
the results of this operation have been highly satisfactor\\ For 
six months the woman fed herself through her jejunal tube, she 
enjoyed complete freedom from pain, and has put on weight. 
For the past two months she has been gradually resuming feed- 
ing by the mouth. 

" Case 2. — The patient, a female, aged fifty-eight, had an an- 
terior gastro-enterostomy in Y performed three years ago. At 
the operation a large gastric ulcer was found on the posterior 



GASTRODUODENOSTOMY. 



253 



surface of the stomach, bound firmly down to the liver and pan- 
creas. For twelve months after the operation her digestion im- 
proved, but later her symptoms returned. Twenty weeks be- 
fore her readmission to hospital in Leeds, she was operated upon 
elsewhere for a subacute perforation. She came back to the In- 
firmary on September 16, 1912. Her gastric pain was almost 
constant and very severe in character, and she vomited almost 
daily. In this case also at the secondary (or, rather, the tertiary) 



r 



4y/ 



■\ 



1 


a 




--- 




-4 




Fig. 90. — Gastro-enterostom}^ combined with jejunostomj^ (author's method). 

operation the anastomosis was found to be patent and a jejunos- 
tomy was performed." 

The operation is carried out as follows : 

The stomach is clamped as in the ordinary operation ; a loop 
of 18 inches of jejunum is taken and an anterior vertical anas- 
tomosis performed. The proximal jejunal loop is divided near 
the anastomosis, and implanted into the portion of the jejunum, 



254 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

leaving the anastomosis, the distal cut end near the anastomosis 
being first closed. The loop of jejunum coming from the duo- 
deno-jejunal flexure to form one limb of the Y is now taken, and 
at a point two or three inches above the Y; on the side remote 
from the mesentery a small longitudinal incision is made into the 
lumen of the gut, and a No. 14 rubber catheter is introduced. 
This is fixed in position by a 000,000 catgut suture, taking all the 
coats of the bowel, the catheter having been passed down the 
jejunum 4 or 5 inches beyond the anastomosis. Then a series 
of interrupted Pagenstecher sutures are used, as in Witzel's 
gastrostomy, enclosing the catheter in a trough of jejunum, care 
being taken not to stenose the anastomosis. The line of suture 
is then fixed to the abdominal wall by a single stitch at each end, 
and the wound closed snugly round the catheter. 

THE SURGICAL TREATMENT OF ULCERATION OF THE STOMACH DUE 
TO THE DRINKING OF CAUSTIC FLUIDS. 

x\n examination of the museum specimens and a search into 
the records show that in cases in which an intensely irritating 
fluid has been swallowed, accidentally or with suicidal intent, the 
parts most affected are lips and mouth, the pharynx, and the first 
inch or more of the oesophagus, the lower end of the oesophagus 
immediately above the cardiac orifice, and the pylorus and py- 
loric antrum. The greater part of the oesophagus escapes serious 
damage, though patches of ulceration, or even gangrene, may 
be distributed throughout it. So far as the stomach is concerned, 
the worst injury is inflicted on the pylorus, but in severe cases the 
whole mucous membrane may be affected. 

In several of the recorded cases appearances very closely sim- 
ilar to that which I have described were recognised. The con- 
traction and consolidation of the pyloric portion of the stomach 
have been frequently observed. Mr. Keetley likens the appear- 
ance in one of his cases to "a small sausage" ; of a second he says, 
"the pylorus was thickened and so contracted that it woukl only 
just admit the closed blades of a pair of polypus forceps"; and 



GASTRODUODENOSTOMY. 255 

a third that there was "thickening and a very tight stricture of 
the pylorus. " In my own cases the pyloric antrum has presented 
the appearance of a normal uterus; the walls are thick and un- 
yielding, the cavity small, and the pylorus projects downwards 
into the duodenum like the cerv^ix into the vagina. 

The mucous membrane is at once deeply burned; in the 
stomach it assumes very rapidly a deep purple or almost black 
colour, and ulceration speedily follows. In many of the speci- 
mens when a recent examination is made patches of gangrene 
with adherent food particles may be recognised. In addition to 
the cauterisation due to the irritating fluid a septic element caused 
by the decomposition of adherent food particles is present. 

The symptoms noticed at the first moments are an intense 
burning of the labial and buccal mucous membranes, a scalding 
sensation in the throat, and an intense burning in the epigastriiim. 
In many cases, though not in the one now recorded, vomiting 
occurs. The agony at the first may be almost unendurable, and 
shock is profound. 

In the larger number of cases there is soon a marked diffi- 
culty in swallowing; when a few drops only of fluid are swallowed, 
the pain elicited may be excessive. Thirst is intolerable, the 
soreness of the lips and mouth when the sloughs begin to separate 
is terrible, and a raw bleeding surface may be left. Vomiting is an 
early and a constant symptom ; even when a very- small quantity 
of fluid is taken, it may be ejected at once or in a few minutes. 

The character of the symptoms changes after a time, accord- 
ing as obstruction, due to the cicatricial contraction in heaHng, 
is caused in the oesophagus or in the stomach. When a stricture 
forms in the gullet, it is almost always at the upper end; when in 
the stomach, it is at the pylorus and in the pyloric antnmi. In 
an apparently favourable case the local conditions quickly clear 
up, and fluid food may be taken in fair quantity and retained, but 
after the lapse of three or four weeks or more vomiting, which has 
been absent or in abeyance, returns more seriously than before. 
The stomach dilates, and its muscular walls hypertrophy until 



256 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



the usual clinical picture of pyloric stenosis is produced in its 
most exemplary form. 

In other cases the characteristic signs of obstruction in the 
oesophagus are produced, and in still others there may be obstruc- 
tion both in the oesophagus, at the upper or lower end, and at the 
pylorus. 

Treatment. — In all cases it is of the first importance to see 
that there is complete abstention from food of any kind. By 




I ' 



Fig. 91. — Gastrostom}^ combined with gastro-enterostomy. 

giving food the process of ulceration is quickened, the ulceration 
spreads, gangrene in more or less extensive patches occurs, and 
a virulent septic process is set going. The chief attempt should 
be directed to keeping the scalded surfaces sweet and clean. 
Mouth- washes, sprays, gargles, frequent mopping of the ulcers 
with gauze swabs, all are useful in helping to ensure cleanliness. 
The administration of saline enemata by the rectum will help to 
relieve thirst to some extent. 



GASTRODUODENOSTOMY. 257 

It is probable that in all cases the safest course will be to have 
an early resort to surgery. By means of some operative pro- 
cedure the feeding of the patient can be ensured for such a time 
as will allow healing to take place in the ulcerated patches. 

The two operations — one of which will usually be needed — 
are gastrostomy, when the oesophagus alone is affected, and gas- 
tro-jejunostomy combined with gastrostomy, when the pyloric 
portion of the stomach is most injured. Duodenostomy, as prac- 
tised by Hartmann, or jejunostomy alone, suffices merely to feed 
the patient for a time. They do nothing towards securing him 
against the almost certain troubles which will result from the 
mechanical obstruction at the pylorus due to the healing of the 
deeply ulcerated mucosa. 



■17 



CHAPTER XIV. 

EXCISION OF GASTRIC ULCER. 

In the early days of the surgical treatment of gastric dis- 
orders the surprising results obtained after gastro-enterostomy 
had been performed in cases of pyloric obstruction gave a very 
exalted reputation to this procedure. The drainage of the stom- 
ach, which in such cases was the chief necessity, was believed to be 
the need also in cases of ulcer found in parts of the organ distant 
from its outlet. Because the cases dealt with in the days of pio- 
neer work embraced chiefly those in which a stenosis was present, 
and because a short-circuiting operation endowed the patients sub- 
mitted to it with the most robust health, it was illogically assumed 
that gastro-enterostomy was the operation called for in all cases 
of gastric ulceration. A series of patients at the hands of many 
operators were accordingly treated by the operation of gastro- 
enterostomy when either no ulcer at all was discoverable in the 
stomach (a lesion probably existing elsewhere) or when a very 
little ulcer, seen or felt, lay at some point along the lesser curva- 
ture, perhaps nearer the cardia than the pylorus, or upon the an- 
terior or posterior surface. The immediate results of the treat- 
ment of such chronic ulcers were often satisfactory, but a scrutiny 
of the after-results in my own cases demonstrated that in a large 
proportion the ultimate condition of the patient was far from 
good. I found that I was able to classify each case into three 
groups. In the first, a small group, embracing roughly 30 per 
cent, of the total number, the patients, after a period, generally 
of many months, regained their health and appetite, lost all the 
discomforts of dyspepsia, and with care were able to eat well and 
enjoy life. They were indeed fit to be pronounced "cured," 
though perhaps all did not display that sturdy and even reckless 
confidence in their capacities which the patient who has been re- 

258 



EXCISION OF GASTRIC ULCER. 259 

lieved of an obstructive lesion so constantly possesses. In the 
second group the patients soon began to make complaint of a re- 
turn of their former gastric derangements, and in the end willingly- 
submitted to a second operation, in which an excision of the ulcer 
or a pylorectomy had to be performed. In the third group, after 
a period of variable health, the symptoms returned as severely as 
ever, weight was lost, cachexia developed, and the patients died 
of carcinoma of the stomach. It might be urged of these that a 
mistake in the diagnosis had been made at the time of operation, 
and the possibility of such an error must be conceded: but in 
many, indeed in most, the time which had elapsed from the oper- 
ation to the death of the patient, two and one-half, three, or even 
five years, made it seem more probable that the carcinoma had 
developed upon the base of an old ulcer. A comparison was made 
between the indubitable cases of gastric carcinoma treated by 
gastro-enterostomy and these cases; in the former group it was 
rare for a patient's life to be prolonged by a year and a half or 
more; in the latter life w^as advanced two and one-half years or 
more. Even allowing for the possibility of an occasional mistake, 
there could, we thought, be no doubt that in a large number of 
cases pathological processes, at first simple, had at last become 
malignant. 

The question therefore arose as to whether the operation of 
gastro-jejunostomy should not be abandoned in all cases where 
the ulcer lay at a little distance from the pylorus, and be replaced 
by an excision of the ulcer with restitution of the integrity of the 
stomach where this was possible ; or by the performance of Rod- 
man's operation when the ulcer was contiguous to the pylorus, 
and when there was an inveterate and indurated ulcer likely to 
become malignant. 

This then became our plan of procedure. If an ulcer lay in 
the pyloric region, either in the duodenum (far more frequently) 
or in the stomach (rarely), and was causing stenosis and was 
clearly not malignant, gastro-enterostomy was performed. If a 



260 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

single ulcer la}^ in the body of the stomach and. was not causing 
an hour-glass deformity, it was excised. 

If an ulcer near the pylorus was very thick, much indurated, 
and possibly malignant, or if ulcers were multiple, Rodman's 
operation was considered to be necessary. 

When the excision of the ulcer, say on the lesser curvature, 
two or three inches away from the pylorus, was performed, we 
found, at times, that an unsightly deformity of the stomach re- 
sulted, and in a few cases a second operation became necessary, 
either because the ulcer had recurred, or because the healing of 
the suture line and perhaps also its adhesion to parts adjacent, 
had caused a difficulty in the proper working of the stomach which 
only a short-circuiting operation could relieve. In such cases, 
therefore, we began to combine gastro-enterostomy with excision, 
the new anastomosis being made a little proximal to the new 
suture line. In three cases of my own ulcers on the lesser curva- 
ture, treated by excision, recurred, so far as we could judge, 
exactly in the suture line, and in two, perforation of the ulcers 
necessitated urgent secondary operations. Such recurrences may 
be due to the inadequate removal of the original ulcer. The in- 
duration and thickening around the crater of an ulcer extend 
sometimes very widely, and if the size of the crater is taken as 
the measure for the area to be excised, diseased tissue may be 
left behind. The hard fibrous edge of the wound so made may 
heal unkindly, and a new ulcer develope exactly in the line of 
suture. I have, therefore, made it a rule for the last few years to 
excise an ulcer very widely, cutting all round the crater, in tis- 
sues which are soft and healthy. So free a removal of the parts, 
however, has the disadvantage that a deformity of the stomach is 
far more likely to result when the suturing is completed. Since 
we have combined gastro-enterostomy with excision this has not, 
however, been a serious disadvantage, and it has had the supreme 
merit, so far, of preventing recurrences. 

The experience which I have had with regard to ulcers of the 
body of the stomach, and the inefficacy of gastro-enterostomy in 



EXCISION OF GASTRIC ULCER. 26 1 

curing them, is that which I beheve has been the lot of most 
other surgeons. There are two notable exceptions. Kocher, 
to whose opinion the greatest weight always attaches, is satisfied 
that in his hands gastro-enterostomy will cure a gastric ulcer, 
wherever the ulcer may be. 

H. Paterson (''Surgery of the Stomach," pp. 86-94) ^^so con- 
siders that even if the ulcer lie near the cardia, or at any part of 
the body of the stomach, the anastomosis of the stomach with the 
jejunum will allow or even encourage the ulcer to heal. These 
writers believe in the "physiological effect" of a gastro-enter- 
ostomy as something different from its merely mechanical effect. 
Paterson asserts that the entry of the intestinal contents, bile, 
and pancreatic juice into the stomach, neutralising the acidity of 
the gastric juice, has a very decided effect in allowing an ulcer to 
heal. 

The work of Barclay and others, who have examined the stom- 
ach by means of :r-rays after bismuth meals had been admin- 
istered, may throw some light on the discrepancies which exist 
between the surgeons upon this subject. Barclay has shewn 
("The Stomach and GEsophagus," London, 1913) that in all 
cases of gastric ulcer a spasm of the stomach may appear, at times 
in the body of the organ at the area of ulceration, producing an 
hour-glass shape in the stomach, at times in the pyloric end only, 
but in both cases causing definite obstruction. It may be that 
the cases of gastric ulcer cured by gastro-enterostomy are made 
up largely or solely of those in which an obstructive spasm was 
present; the short-circuiting operation, acting then purely as a 
mechanical relief to the ulcer, by allowing food to escape from 
contact with it more quickly than in ordinary circumstances. 
My own experience, however, is very much opposed to the per- 
formance of gastro-enterostomy alone in any case of ulcer on a 
level with or proximal to the site of the anastomosis. 

In connexion Vv^ith the surgical treatment of ulcers of the stom- 
ach, the following general propositions may be affirmed : 

I. In cases of obstruction at, or near, the pylorus the result 



262 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

of the scar of former ulcers, the operation of gastro-enterostomy 
will afford complete and permanent relief. 

2. Ulcers lying in parts of the stomach other than the pyloric 
antrum are best treated by excision. Gastro-enterostomy 
causes rehef , or cure in some, but in others the result is bad or in- 
different. 

3. An ulcer lying upon the lesser curvature if of small size 
can be excised without the resulting scar causing any deformity 
of the stomach ; if of large size excision should be combined with 
gastro-enterostomy. These cases are sometimes exceedingly 
difficult. 

4. An ulcer lying upon the posterior surface of the stomach 
may be reached through the gastro-hepatic omentum, or through 
the transverse mesocolon, or by incision through the anterior wall 
of the stomach. 

5. Large ulcers occupying a considerable extent of the lesser 
curvature, excavating perhaps the liver or the pancreas cannot 
be treated by excision as this would involve complete gastrec- 
tomy. I have found that gastro-enterostomy combined with 
jejunostomy gives the best results. 

6. In cases of ulcer lying near the pylorus, where induration 
is considerable, the ulcer being of the "callous" variety, or when 
ulcers in the pyloric region are multiple, the excision of the "ulcer- 
bearing" area of the stomach — Rodman's operation — is the 
method of choice. 

TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS. 

I . If an ulcer of small size should be discovered in the body of 
the stomach on the anterior wall, and be free from marked in- 
duration or adhesion to other parts, it may easily be removed. 
Two incisions lying approximately parallel to the curvatures of 
the stomach should be made to surround the ulcer, and should fall 
entirely upon healthy parts ; this is essential. The incision which 
remains after the ulcer is removed is then stitched up so that the 
line of suture runs from one curvature to the other; it lies, that is 



EXCISION OF GASTRIC ULCER. 263 

to say at right angles to the hnes along which the original incisions 
were made. In this way it will be made certain that no narrow- 
ing in the calibre of the stomach occurs when healing is com- 
plete. The sutures are placed in two layers, an inner of catgut 
and an outer of Pagenstecher thread. Generally it is better to 
make the catgut suture of the interrupted form. The outer 
thread is best introduced by Cushing's right-angled method; it 
is therefore continuous. The perfectly smooth appearance of 
the suture line, with no thread shewing, which results when this 
stitch is used is the surest method of preventing adhesion between 
the stomach and the abdominal wall. 

2. If the ulcer should lie along the lesser curvature of the 
stomach, sending a branch down on to the anterior or the 
posterior surface or on to both surfaces of the stomach, resection 
may be difficult owing to the adhesion of the ulcer to the liver 
or the pancreas, or because of the remoteness of the ulcer from 
the abdominal incision. As a rule, however, the involved parts 
of the stomach can be draw^n up into the w^ound without too 
great traction being employed, and without any addition being 
necessary to the original parietal incision. When the stomach 
has been coaxed up into the wound the abdominal cavity is 
securely packed off with hot moist swabs which are placed care- 
fully in all directions. The lesser sac may be guarded by swabs 
introduced either through the gastro-hepatic omentum, or 
through an incision in the transverse mesocolon made after the 
colon has been raised. When all gauze packing is in place 
mackintosh sheets are put over them, and over the abdominal 
wall, so as to keep all parts not immediately engaged in the 
operation free from the risk of infection. 

The purpose of the operation is to remove a wedge from each 
surface of the stomach, the base being at the lesser curvature, and 
the apex pointing towards the greater curvature. The operation 
may be begun by the ligature of the coronary artery at each end . 
of the base of the wedge to be removed ; but I have often found 
it possible to dissect off the artery from the lesser curvature. 



264 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



lifting it away during the time the ulcer is resected, and replacing 
it at the end of the operation. When the vessel is secured in one 
or other of these ways a clamp is introduced between the ulcer 
and the cardia, and another between the pylorus and the ulcer, 
so that the whole territory to be dealt with is embraced by the 
clamps, which render the parts avascular and prevent soiling of 
the field by the escape of gastric contents. The ulcer is then ex- 




Fig. 92. — Excision of an ulcer on or near the lesser curvature of the stomach. 
The clamps are applied to include the ulcer which is excised after separation 
of the gastro-hepatic omentum. In the small figure the first stitch is shewn. 



cised, the incisions being carried well into sound tissues. The 
gaping of the wound is often very wide when this is done. 

The appearance seen in the figure is then presented. There 
is a long wound through all the coats of the stomach beginning 
on the posterior surface, mounting over the lesser curvature and 
ending on the anterior surface. The closure of this wound be- 
gins on the lowest point of the posterior surface and continues 



EXCISION OF GASTRIC ULCER. 



265 



round to the lowest point on the anterior wall. The suture is a 
through-and-through suture of catgut, and it is of the Connell 
type. The needle passes on each side from serous to mucous and 
from mucous to serous surface, then crosses the gap, and passes 
again on the opposite cut margin from serous to mucous surface 
and back from mucous to serous. The diagram shews how this 
stitch is passed. On each side a "loop on the mucosa" is left. 




Fig. 93. — The suture continued — note that the stitch is of the "loop on the 

mucosa" type. 

By the time the lowest part of the anterior surface is reached a 
single Lembert stitch is taken to complete the line. The clamps 
are then removed, and sometimes a bleeding point or two may ap- 
pear and require to be secured. An outer layer of suture is now 
necessary. The difficulty of its introduction may be consider- 
able. The posterior surface of the stomach may be turned up- 
wards through the gap in the lesser omentum, or it may be reached 
through the incision already made in the transverse mesocolon. 



266 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



I have often borrowed a flap from the transverse mesocolon to 
place over the posterior suture line to prevent a new adhesion to 
the pancreas. The anterior line is then reinforced by a suture of 
the right angled Gushing type. 

Instead of the Connell suture, which is of course continuous, 
interrupted through-and-through Lembert sutures or the Hal- 
sted suture may be used. I have tried them all and do not find 
any difference between them. The essential thing is, I believe, 
to prevent the suture line contracting adhesions, either to the pan- 




Fig. 94. — The sutures completed. 



creas behind or to the abdominal wall in front, for the fixity w^hich 
thereby results is I feel sure a powerful factor for harm (see Coffey, 
"Surg., G}^., andObst.," 1910, ii, 545). 

3. If the ulcer involves too large an extent of the surfaces 
of the stomach, as well as of the lesser curvature, or if a large 
ulcer be present on either anterior or posterior surface, then the 
whole segment of the stomach in which the ulcer lies may be ex- 
cised. A cylindrical portion of the organ, that is to say, is re- 
moved together with the ulcer. This operation may be called 



EXCISION OF GASTRIC ULCER. 



267 



annular gastrectomy. The operation is performed in the follow- 
ing manner. The two curvatures of the stomach are freed from 
the omenta as widely as necessary, by ligature of the coronary 
and gastric epiploic vessels above and below. A cylinder of the 
stomach is in this way denuded of its blood-supply. At each end 
of this cylinder two pairs of clamps are placed and between each 



/ V 



€ 



V 
-«i* 



V 'v 




^■■i^rr*^^^!^ -'/'^'.jttLu' '^^^1 


■ 


^ 


I 


.'- r 


^^^B 




kH 




111 




'\ ii^^l 


■ / \ 




'J 1 


* 


\ \l 


\ 
\ 

\ 



Fig. 95. — Excision of an ulcer in the body of the stomach. The omenta 
have been ligatured. The dotted lines shew how section of the stomach is to 
be made. 



pair the stomach is divided. The diseased ring of the stomach is 
then removed. The clamps which close the cut ends of the parts 
of the stomach which remain are brought together for anastomosis 
with one another. The surgeon must have foreseen the need for 
making these divided ends of approximately the same size. This 



268 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



may easily be done by placing the distal clamp a little obliquely, 
so that a longer section of the stomach from curvature to curva- 
ture is made. There is usually no difficulty in bringing the cut 
ends of the stomach into easy apposition, for an ulcer which in- 
volves so large an extent of surface as to call for partial gastrec- 




f ff'-i *4 



Fig. 96. — Excision of an ulcer in the body of the stomach. The outer 
suture completed in its first half; the inner suture being applied. 

tomy has probably caused some obstruction and dilatation and 
a degree of hypertrophy in consequence. 

When the clamps are placed side by side the anastomosis 
is carried out exactly as if gastro-enterostomy, or the ordinary 
gastro-anastomosis were to be made. Two continuous sutures 
are used; an outer serous, and an inner which secures all the 
coats, and so acts as an haemostatic. The anterior half of the 



EXCISION OF GASTRIC ULCER. 



269 



outer suture is best introduced by the right-angled Gushing 
method, for the reason already given, that it leaves a smoother 
surface, one less likely to adhere to the parietal peritoneum. 

4. If the ulcer lies on the posterior surface, perhaps adherent 
to the pancreas, it may be removed by one of three methods: 

(a) By rotation of the stomach to a degree which allows the 
posterior surface together with the ulcer to be pushed forward 




Fig. 97. — Transgastric resection of ulcer in posterior surface, showing line 
of incision surrounding the talcer. 

through an aperture in the gastro-hepatic omentum. A few 
stay-sutures passed into the stomach a little distance away from 
the ulcer will hold the parts well up to the parietal wound while 
excision is being made. This method is advocated by J. E. Sum- 
mers ("Jour. Amer. Med. Assoc," 1911, Ivi, 1699) to whom we 
are indebted for many valuable technical suggestions in abdom- 
inal surgery. 



270 



ABDOMINAL OPEIL\TIONS. 



(b) By approaching the stomach through the transverse 
mesocolon, as in the operation of posterior gastro-enterostomy. 
The hinder surface of the stomach is drawn well upwards and the 
ulcer, if small, is easily excised. A flap of the transverse meso- 
colon is then borrowed for application to the posterior wall of 
the stomach after the suture is completed. 




Fig. 98. — Transgastric resection of ulcer on posterior surface. 



(c) By the transgastric method (see Chaput, "Bull, et Mem. 
Soc. de Chir.," 1894, P- 45^; Brenner, "Wien klin. Woch.," 
1896, p. 117; Pilcher, "Long Island. Med. Jour.," May, 1908, 
p. 187; W. J. Mayo, "Ann. Surgery," 1910, ii, 797, and Coffey, 
"Surg., Gyn. and Obst.," 1910, ii, 545). The ulcer is first freed 
from any adhesion it may have contracted to the pancreas. In 
doing this it is not infrequent to find that the stomach is opened 
at the base of the ulcer. A subacute perforation has occurred 



EXCISION OF GASTRIC ULCER. 



271 



long ago and the pancreas has actually formed a part of the base 
of the thick-walled ulcer. During the stage of separation, and 
afterwards, great care is taken to protect the lesser sac by packing 
gauze swabs through apertures made in the gastro-hepatic omen- 
tum, and in the transverse mesocolon. These gauze swabs gen- 
erally suffice by their pressure to arrest any bleeding that may 
occur from the denuded surface of the pancreas. When the ulcer 




Fig. 99. — Transgastric resection of ulcer on posterior surface. 



is quite freed and the stomach can be brought well up into the 
wound an incision about 3 to 5 inches in length is made through 
the anterior wall of the stomach opposite to the ulcer; the in- 
cision runs parallel to the long axis of the stomach. A few vessels 
may bleed freely; they are seized with small clips, and the 
stomach-contents, if necessary, mopped away. The finger of 
the surgeon or an assistant passed up through the opening in the 



272 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



transverse mesocolon presses forward the posterior wall of the 
stomach and cause it to protrude between the margins of the 
wound in the anterior surface. This movement is enough also 
to prevent any escape of the sparse contents that may be present 
in the stomach. Coffey advises the introduction, around the 
wound, of stay sutures, traction upon which will prevent the es- 
cape of fluids from the stomach. The ulcer is now surrounded by 
an incision, roughly elliptical in form, which cuts well into healthy 
tissue at every part. 




Fig. 100. — Placing traction loops preparatory to opening the stomach for 

exploration (Coffey). 



The wound in the posterior wall which now remains may be 
closed by a single layer of through-and-through sutures intro- 
duced from the mucous surface. It is necessary that the suture 
should be of thread since one has to rely upon a single layer. I 
have generally used an interrupted series of sutures placed closely 
together, but a continuous suture, which I have also used, is per- 
haps equally satisfactor}^ The sutures have to be discharged 
into the stomach and to escape; and it is perhaps easier for a 
short interrupted suture to do this than for a long continuous one. 



EXCISION OF GASTRIC ULCER. 



273 




Fig. 10 1. — ^^The stomach has been incised, exposing the mucous surface. A 
callous ulcer is seen in the background, while the fluid contained in the stomach 
may be seen gravitating to the back. Dotted line indicates extent of incision 
by which this ulcer was removed from the posterior wall and the lesser curva- 
ture (Coffey). 




Fig. 102. — First step in closing an incision in the stomach wall. Beginning 
knot of through-and-through right-angle suture is being tied from the inside 
(Coffey). 



274 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



As a rule, complete confidence may be felt in the security of 
the suture line, but if a further auxiliary stitch is thought neces- 
sar^^ it may be that the hinder wall of the stomach can be brought 
out through the transverse mesocolon, as in von Hacker's opera- 
tion, and an additional stitch or two introduced. If it is thought 
necessary, a small wick of dental rubber may be left in the lesser 
sac to act as a drain. I do not favour this, and have never em- 
ployed any drainage in any of my cases. It is quite enough to 
ensure safety if scrupulous care is taken to avoid soiling of the 





f 




WWk 


^^^^^^-Vft^j^^iN 


ii 




— ^- 


M^ tfc^aii&.:S^^JijMi» 


^ 




l^w^ 


li- 


{ 


\tj 


) 


-** 


K, 


^ 
^ 





Fig. 103. — Continuing through-and-through right -angle suture and tying oppos- 
ing loops over it (Coffey). 



parts by escaping fluids. The use of the mackintosh sheets 
makes this a simple problem. If the suture line is well completed 
drainage is then quite unnecessary" : if the suture line is not com- 
petent to hold, no drainage will save the patient. Indeed the 
use of even a thin soft rubber drain is probabty harmful. I have 
used the transgastric method for the resection of a jejunal ulcer, 
in one case, with great satisfaction. 

After all these forms of excision of gastric ulcer I am rather 
chary about giving food for three or four days. I do not encour- 



EXCISION OF GASTRIC ULCER. 275 

age the patients to drink more than they need to slake their 
thirst. Continuous sahne injections by the rectum will easily 
supply all fluids necessary for the first few days. Drinks are 
given chiefly for the gratification of the patients, 

(d) In one case of large ulcer adherent to the pancreas Lynn 
Thomas pared the margins of the ulcer and dissected the mucous 
membrane up until he was able to bring the edges together over 
the base of the ulcer where they were sutured. The patient, a 
domestic servant in his own employment, remains well after sev- 
eral years. The same procedure has been adopted by Phillips of 
Bradford in two cases with excellent results. 



CHAPTER XIV. 
OPERATIONS FOR HOUR-GLASS STOMACH. 

Ax hour-glass stomach may be congenital or acquired- 
Congenital hour-glass stomach, the existence of which I have 
formerly disputed, is extremely rare. Only one undoubted 
case has been reported. Acquired hour-glass stomach may be 
due to the contraction of a chronic ulcer situated in the body of 
the organ, to cancer, to localised perforation of an ulcer in the 
body of the stomach followed by adhesion and anchoring of the 
stomach to the anterior abdominal wall or to the pancreas, and, 
finally, to perigastric adhesions which compress the stomach 
at or near its centre. In one remarkable case upon which I 
operated two constrictions were present, so that a triloculated 
stomach was formed. 

The stricture which divides the stomach into two portions 
may be placed at any point between the cardiac and pyloric 
orifices. As a rule, it is nearer to the pylorus than to the cardia, 
and as a result of the obstruction which it causes the cardiac 
pouch undergoes a marked dilatation. In the great majority 
of cases the greater curvature is pulled upwards to the lesser, 
but in two cases I have seen the normal outline of the greater 
curA^ature has been unaltered, the lesser curvature being tucked 
down towards it. 

Hour-glass stomach is very much more common than was 
formerly believed. I have operated upon 54 well-marked ex- 
amples. The condition, I believe, is occasionally overlooked, 
owing to an imperfect examination of the stomach. When, as 
not seldom happens, there is an obstruction at the pylorus as 
well as in the body of the stomach, the food, after passing from 
the cardiac into the pyloric pouch, again meets with an obstruc- 
tion, and finds great difficulty in escaping through the narrowed 

276 



OPERATIONS FOR HOUR-GLASS STOMACH. 



277 



pylorus into the duodenum. The pyloric pouch then becomes 
gradually dilated and hypertrophied. It may, indeed, be so 
large that when the abdomen is opened it is mistaken for the 
whole stomach and a gastro-enterostomy is performed between 
it and the jejunum. Such an operation is, of course, doomed 









Fig. 104. — Types of hour-glass stomach: i, Obstruction near cardiac end; 
2, cardiac pouch concealed by adhesions; 3, growth in body of stomach; 4, 
two pouches connected by a narrow tube; 5, cardiac pouch largely dilated; 
6, lesser curvature pulled down towards the greater. 



to complete failure; for the symptoms are mainly due to the 
stenosis between the cardiac and the pyloric pouch, which is 
unrelieved. The most necessary precept to bear in mind in 
operating upon the stomach is that the whole stomach, from 
cardia to pylorus, should be seen and felt before any anastomo- 
sis is made. In at least three recorded cases a lack of ade- 



278 ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS, 

quate and precise knowledge of the condition of the stomach 
has led to futile measures and fatal results. 

In many cases of hour-glass stomach, as I have said, there 
is, in addition to the constriction in the middle of the organ, a 
narrowing due to old ulceration at the pylorus. It is because of 
this dual stenosis that the treatment b}^ operation is often a 
matter of difficulty. In such circumstances no single operation 
will suffice to cure the patient ; for if gastro-enterostomy is per- 
formed between the cardiac complement and the jejunum, food 
will escape through the isthmus into the pyloric pouch, and, there 
stagnating, will undergo decomposition and cause distension, 
flatulence, pain, and the occasional vomiting of putrid fluids. 
If the anastomosis is made between the pyloric pouch and the 
jejunum, the symptoms which the operation was destined to 
relieve will persist. In these cases, therefore, a double opera- 
tion must be performed ; a free passage must be made from the 
cardiac pouch to the pyloric, and thence to the jejunum. The 
following operations may be performed: 

1. Gastro-enterostom}^ single or double. 

2. Gastroplasty. 

3. Gastrogastrostom.}^ or gastro-anastomosis. 

4. Partial gastrectomy^ 

5. Dilatation of the constriction. 

I. Gastro-enterostomy alone is suitable for a certain number 
of cases. When the constriction is within two or three inches 
of the pylorus, the pyloric pouch is small, not dilated, and, from 
the surgical point of view, is negligible. Nothing more is neces- 
sary to effect a cure than a free outlet from the cardiac pouch, 
and this is afforded by a gastro-enterostomy. The cardiac 
pouch is dealt with as though it were the whole stomach. 

If both pouches require to be drained, a double gastro- 
enterostomy may be performed, as suggested by Weir and 
Foote. A long loop of the jejunum close to the flexure is iso- 
lated and is united to the two pouches by two separate 
anastomoses. Each pouch, therefore, drains into this loop. I 



OPERATIONS FOR HOUR-GLASS STOMACH. 



279 











Fig. 105. — The operations for hour-glass stomach: i, Gastrogastrostomy; 
2, double gastro-enterostomy (Weir); 3, gastroplasty (the line of incision); 4, 
gastroplasty (the line of suture) ; 5 and 6, partial gastrectomy; 7, Kammerer's 
operation; 8, gastro-enterostomy. 



280 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

have never given this operation a trial, but it is one which would 
probabh^ prove successful. 

2. Gastroplasty is an operation the role of which is very 
limited. It is applicable onl}^ to those cases in which a narrow 
stricture is present in the absence of induration, active ulcera- 
tion, or external adhesion. In mam" of the recorded cases it 
is noted that there was " recoA'ery without reHef ." It is probable 
that, as with p^doroplast}^ the operation will be abandoned in 
favour of worthier methods. The cases to which it is suited are 
few, and more successful operations can be practised even in 
them. The operation consists in making a long transverse in- 
cision or slightly cur\'ed incision through the stricture, and con- 
tinuing the incision well onwards into the healthy stomach-wall 
of both pouches. The incision should be at least 4 inches in 
length. The transverse incision is now made into a vertical 
one by applying a pair of clips at the middle of the upper and 
lower edges, and drawing them as far apart as possible. The 
wotmd is then sutured. It is the operation of p3doroplasty 
appHed to the body of the stomach. 

Dr. Kammerer, of New York, has adopted a modification of 
gastroplasty that w^ill reHeve the operation of many of its ob- 
jections. His method bears the same relation to gastroplasty 
as Finney's operation does to pyloroplasty. His description 
is as follows: "Beginning at the lowest point of the constric- 
tion, a running suture was applied through the serous and mus- 
cular coats, bringing the vertical edges of both compartments 
of the stomach into close approximation along their posterior 
margins. An inverted V-shaped incision was now made through 
the suture thickness of the stomach- wall, about j inch to either 
side of the Lembert suture. The posterior wound edges were 
now brought together with another running suture from within, 
the same procedure being then applied to the anterior edges 
from without. The final act of the operation consisted in re- 
enforcing the anterior suture with a running Lembert stitch, 
and placing a few extra sutures at the lowest point of the stomach 



OPERATIONS FOR HOUR-GLASS STOMACH. 



281 



through the serous and muscular coats, where tension would 
naturally be greatest." The patient made an excellent recovery. 

3. Gastrogastrostomy or Gastro-anastomosis. — This opera- 
tion was first performed by Wolfler in 1894. He made verti- 
cal incisions 7 cm. in length into the dependent pouches on each 
side of the central constriction, and united these so as to form 
a free passage beneath the isthmus. 

The stomach is clamped on each side of the isthmus, and the 
clamps are surrounded with hot machintoshes. A suture is 




Fig. 106. — Hour-glass stomach. The dotted lines indicate the position of the 
openings in the operation of gastrogastrostomy. 

then passed through the serous and muscular coats of the part 
of the stomach, on each side, below the isthmus, reaching from 
it to the greater curvature. The needle is then temporarily 
laid aside. The incisions are then made in front of the suture 
line, through all the coats to the mucosa, a large ellipse of which 
is excised. A continuous suture, picking up all the coats, is 
then passed along the cut margins posterior and then anterior 
until the opening is completely encircled. The original needle 
which had been laid aside is again picked up, and an anterior 



282 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



line of sutures is completed. The operation, in fact, is precisely 
the same as the operation of gastro-enterostomy, save that the 
stomach is embraced by both clamps instead of by one onty. 
Sedgwick Watson in 1895 successfully performed gastro- 
gastrostomy in a different manner. The incisions in the two 
segments of the stomach were transverse. The pyloric por- 
tion of the viscus was folded over the cardiac, Avith the isthmus 




Fig. 107. — Hour-glass stomach. The application of clamps and the method 
of suture in gastrogastrostomy. The details are the same as in the operation 
of gastro-enterostomy. 



as a hinge, and the two stitched together with an elliptical line 
of sutures before being opened. The anastomosis was then 
made by incising the wall of the compartment which now lay 
anterior, and through the opposite side making an opening into 
the cardiac pouch in the centre of the elliptical area which had 
been surroimded by the suture. This method has never been 
repeated, so far as I know. 



OPER.\TIONS FOR HOUR-GLASS STOMACH. 



28- 



4. Partial gastrectomy will more often be practised in cases 
of cancer than in cases of simple disease. In cancer a wide ex- 
cision is necessary, upon the lines laid down in the chapter deal- 
ing with operations for malignant disease of the stomach. When 
the mass of ulcer or growth has been removed, an end-to-end 
approximation of the stomach can be made, or both cut ends 
may be closed and an anastomosis made between the cardiac 
pouch and the jejunum. 




Eh.v/maH:f- 



Fig. loS. — Partial gastrectomy for hour-glass stomach (Cotfey). 

5. Digital Divulsion or Dilatation. — Operations of all kinds 
upon hour-glass stomachs may be made difficult by the adhesion 
of the ulcer whose contraction is responsible for the deformity. 
Adhesion to the anterior abdominal wall, to the liver, or pos- 
teriorly to the pancreas may be so strong that the operative 
manipulations are greatly embarrassed. A separation of the 
stomach from the anterior abdominal wall is always possible, 
though, as in cases of my own, a portion of the abdominal wall 
has to be removed, or the stomach laid open in so doing. 

When the stomach is adherent posteriorly, or when, owing 



284 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



to the infinite complexity of adhesions, the cardiac pouch cannot 
be reached, the constriction between the two pouches may be 
dilated b}^ the fingers until a free communication exists below 
the cardiac and pyloric segments. In one case I was unable to 
do more than this. The mass in the stomach I took to be, with 
the experience I then possessed, malignant and irremovable. 
The cardiac pouch, owing to adhesions, was beyond the possibility 
of inspection or manipulation, and I was, therefore, compelled 



\- 






f. : 






/ -v 




■^>L 



' -Ui^f 




\«: ^ ■ 



Fig. 109. — Partial gastrectomy for hour-glass stomach (Coffey). 

to be content with a retrograde dilatation of a very narrow con- 
striction. To my surprise the patient made a perfectly un- 
eventful recovery; she rapidly gained over three stones in 
weight, and to this day remains well, all trace of a tumour 
having disappeared. 

A full account of the subject of hour-glass stomach with a 
record of my cases will be found in the "British Medical Journal," 
February 20, 1904, p. 413. I have now operated on 54 cases. 



CHAPTER XV 

THE OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF THE 

STOMACH. 

The surgical treatment of cancer of the stomach still leaves 
much to be desired. The medical treatment is now, as it always 
has been, absolutely hopeless, and still involves a mortality of 
100 per cent. The crying need in cases of carcinoma not only 
of the stomach, but of all other parts of the alimentary canal, 
is for earlier diagnosis, and the chance of earlier surgical treat- 
ment. Amongst the notable achievements of surgery in recent 
years, chiefly as a result of the work in the Mayo Clinic, is the 
proof that in a large proportion of cases the onset of cancer in the 
stomach is not a new and unaccountable thing, but is, on the con- 
trary, a tardy development upon an earlier condition which for 
years has clamoured for recognition. 

I am, of course, well aware that all cases of cancer of the 
stomach, unhappily, do not come to the surgeon. No one but 
the surgeon can do any good to patients so afflicted. Yet there 
is a strange timidity of approach to the surgeon which is unac- 
countable, and far too often the favourable period in the history 
of a case is allowed to slip away before any recognition of the 
real conditions is attempted. It is true, then, and must be ad- 
mitted, that when the surgeon speaks of the work which passes 
under his hand he is not speaking of the whole. Nor is any one 
else. Neither the physician nor the post-mortem investigator 
knows the whole range of cases ; indeed, each sees far less nowa- 
days than the surgeon. The view of the latter, therefore, if not 
all-embracing, is doubtless wider than that of any one else. The 
experience of the surgeon shows — and here geographical considera- 
tions seem to matter little— that roughly two out of three of all 
patients who come for relief from a condition of carcinoma of the 

28s 



286 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

stomach give a histon^ of inveterate and recurring dyspepsia OA^er 
a stretch of many months or years. No one knows so well as 
the surgeon, for he made and repeats daily the discoveries, that 
such a history does not always mean that there is a chronic ulcer 
of the stomach, healing and breaking down afresh, during all that 
time. But though we are grown chary of making a diagnosis 
of "gastric ulcer" with that ease and certitude which formerly 
attached to the physicians of all countries, we can and do make an 
accurate diagnosis in a large proportion of the cases, if only those 
patients are allowed to be suffering from ' ' gastric ulcer ' ' who can 
hardly be supposed to be the victims of any other organic lesion. 
The surgeon who walks by sight and not b}" faith knows that 
a gastric ulcer is a real thing, though so many impostors have 
claimed his attention. In the majority of the cases of gastric car- 
cinoma the history given of earlier attacks makes it almost certain 
that these were due to a veritable ulcer of the stomach. There 
may be, I fully admit, errors in this estimate; but making all the 
allowances that our operative experience warns us to be necessar\^ 
there can be, I think, no doubt at all that a genuine chronic gas- 
tric ulcer has been the cause of that dyspepsia of which recurring 
attacks are noted. In one of these attacks, perhaps after an inter- 
val of months or years of freedom, something different is noticed. 
The attack is heralded in the old way; at first no difference 
between it and the others may be observed. But by degrees it 
is realised that something worse is occurring. The symptoms, 
which in earlier attacks were so easily amenable to careful treat- 
ment, to rest, to sparing diet, and so forth, have now become more 
severe and incoercible. Relief does not come from the measures 
which before have been so instanth' successful. ^Moreover, 
weight is more rapidly lost, anaemia may develope. and anorexia 
is most persistent and distressing. This is the occasion, all other 
and more favourable occasions having lapsed, when instant — 
it can hardly be called precocious — surgical treatment should be 
urged. The patient has now arrived at middle life, or has passed 
it, and the diagnosis of cancer ma}' tentativeh' be made and should 



OPER.\TIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 287 

be acted upon with alacrity. Surgical intervention for purposes 
of inquiry has hardly any mortality nowadays. If a cancer be 
found and a resection of the stomach is undertaken, the mortality 
will vary with the expertness of the hands which practise it. 
But whatever that mortality may be, it cannot attain the death- 
rate of inaction and of "expectant" or medical treatment, which 
is exactly 100 per cent. 

It was urged by Dr. W. L. Rodman many years ago that re- 
section of the pyloric end of the stomach for the ulcers that singly 
or in clusters are found there was the most prudent mode of treat- 
ment. In his clinic at Rochester Dr. W. J. Mayo has for several 
years resected the stomach not only for chronic ulcers in the vi- 
cinity of the pylorus, but also for those tumours which might be 
due to ulcer or might be due to cancer, for declared cancer and 
for those cancers which, though evidently not curable because of 
the enlargement of distal, secondary glands, or other visceral de- 
posits, were yet removable. In his so safe hands resection has 
hardly any greater mortality than gastro-enterostomy. This 
procedure is questionless the ideal one. It has afforded, of course, 
a unique series of specimens for investigation. Drs. Wilson and 
MacCarty conclude from their examination of all the material so 
furnished that in 71 per cent, of these cases of cancer of the stom- 
ach the malignant process is engrafted upon a simple one, that 
cancer is really due to a secondary change which starts in the 
edge of an ulcer of long standing. My own material, far less in 
quantity, bears out their contention. It has been shewn that in 
the base of these ulcers tending to cancer the mucosa has gone, 
leaving only scar tissue; in the overhanging border of the ulcers 
the mucosa is proliferating and some epithelial cells, nipped off 
b}^ scar tissue, are shewing all the stages of aberrant proliferation 
with infiltration of the surrounding tissues and metastases in 
the lymphatic vessels of the stomach wall. The truth of these 
observations is hardly yet admitted by those whose inquiry has 
been based only upon specimens found in the post-mortem room 
or on the shelves of the museums — upon parts, that is, that have 



288 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

been long dead, and subjected, no doubt, to the man}^ changes 
which death and swift decay bring in every cell. There is need 
to develope a science of "histolog}^ of the living" to supplement 
and explain the "pathology of the living. " Upon the post-mor- 
tem table only the final dilapidated ruin of the disease is seen; 
in specimens removed during life the disease in its earlier stages 
can be scrutinised. The material upon which the pathologist 
has formerly worked has not been favourable to the discovery of 
the truth ; the sources of eternal truth were poisoned. 

A review of the cases which have been under my own care 
has convinced me that though the histor}^ especially in so far 
as it tells of former attacks of chronic gastric ulcer, may awaken 
a keen suspicion as to the presence of a carcinoma in the stomach, 
and though all the ancillar^^ evidence to be derived from the 
chemical examination of the stomach contents may go towards 
a confirmation of the diagnosis, there is only one means of making 
an assured diagnosis in an early stage. An inspection of the 
parts, and this alone, and that indeed not always, can give us the 
information upon which a probable diagnosis can be made. It is 
necessary for us to realise that by any other methods than this 
one a positive diagnosis of cancer in the stage when it is capable 
of successful treatment is almost impossible. If the patients 
who are suffering from this most insidious and most terrible dis- 
ease are to have any fuller prospect of relief, or of cure, the use of 
the exploratory operation must be greatly increased. I depre- 
cate more strongly, I believe, than most surgeons the adoption 
of the ' ' explorator}^ incision ' ' ; but every argument and all ex- 
perience shew that in cases of carcinoma of the stomach no other 
method than this offers any slenderest hope for the betterment of 
the present deplorable condition of affairs. But before we are 
entitled to advise any patient to undergo this operation we must 
be confident that there is a well-grounded suspicion that some 
condition not admitting of remedy by any other than surgical 
means will be found. 

Indications for Operation in Chronic Gastric Diseases. — I think 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 289 

that an operation should be advised in the following circum- 
stances : 

(a) In all cases of chronic gastric ulcer. The recent experi- 
ence of surgeons has shewn that a diagnosis of chronic gastric 
ulcer can be made with fair accuracy, and that not only the pres- 
ence but also the position of the ulcer can be sometimes predicted. 
When repeated "attacks" occur it is idle to consider any other 
than operative treatment, for nothing else can give permanent 
relief. If any attack occurs in a patient over forty years of age 
the need for surgical intervention becomes urgent. 

(b) When gastric stasis is present. This is a condition the 
existence of which is easily determined. If there are symptoms 
suggesting structural disease in a stomach incapable of empty- 
ing itself completely in from ten to twelve hours, then the condi- 
tions which exist are mechanical, and can be remedied by none 
other than mechanical means. 

(c) When a tumour is present. The tumour may be simple 
or malignant, but research is better conducted by inspection than 
by any other means at our disposal. 

In these three conditions medical treatment may do something 
to relieve, it can do nothing to cure. There is accordingly no 
reason for delay in advocating operation. If this is done, and 
done early, many cases of carcinoma that now drift quietly into 
the inoperable stage may be saved. 

The position seems now to be this — that there are no signs or 
symptoms clearly indicative of the presence of gastric cancer; 
there is no refinement of clinical inquiry nor any endowment of 
clinical acumen which will enable a confident diagnosis to be 
made in an early stage; inspection of the stomach during an op- 
eration carried out when definite faults in its working are known 
will permit of the early discovery, or of the prevention of a cer- 
tain proportion of the cases of cancer. The surgeon must not 
ask the physician for a sign which will reveal the presence of this 
disease to him, but he can and should require that those condi- 
tions which are only to be remedied by operative measures should 

VOL. I — 19 



290 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

be referred to him not in their advanced or terminal stages, but 
at the earliest moment of their recognition. The success which 
has followed the surgical treatment of gastric disorders justifies 
this simple request. 

THE LYMPHATIC SYSTEM OF THE STOMACH. 

As I have already pointed out, an accurate knowledge of the 
lymphatic system of the stomach, as of other organs, is essential 
if the operative treatment of malignant disease therein occurring 
is to be attended with any degree of success. 

The lymph-vascular and lymph-glandular arrangements in 
and around the stomach have been very carefully studied in re- 
cent years by many observers. Among these Most ("Archiv. 
f. klin. Chir.," 1899, lix, 175), Cuneo ("De I'envahissement 
du Systeme lymphatique dans le Cancer de I'estomac, " Thesis, 
Paris, 1900; and again in "Travaux de Chir. Anat.-Clinique, " 
par H. Hartmann, 1903, page 244), Borrmann (Das Wachstum 
und die Verbreitungswege des Magencarcinoms, " Jena, 1901), 
Lengemann ("Verhandl. d. Deut. Gesellsch. f. Chir.," 1902, 483), 
Polya and v. Navratil ("Deut. Zeit. f. Chir.," 1903, Ixix, 437), 
Jamieson and Dobson ("Lancet," 1907, i, 1061) have done work 
of the highest value. The investigations of Most, Borrmann, and 
Lengemann were inspired by Mikulicz, to whom is due the credit 
of first demonstrating the principles, and indicating the methods 
upon which the rational operative treatment of cancer of the 
stomach must be based. 

The greater part of the work of investigation has been carried 
out upon the bodies of foetuses or infants, and the lymphatic in- 
jections have been made after the method of Gerota. It is stated 
by Polya and von Navratil that the number of the glands 
increases considerably in adult life, either by the division of the 
original glands or by their fresh development from lymph-vessels. 
Though the results obtained by these investigations, especially 
those of Cuneo and Polya and von Navratil, are of the highest 
value, they are not to be accepted without discrimination as in- 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OP^ CANCER OF STOMACH. 29 1 

dicating the lines of surgical procedure. For we have as yet 
little or no knowledge of the changes which the lymphatic system 
undergoes between foetal life or early infancy and the period of 
life at which cancer is found. In this period changes in the num- 
ber of the lymphatic glands undoubtedly occur, and it is possible 
that vessels, which in the foetus run to distant glands, are inter- 
cepted by newly developed glands in the adult. Of the changes 
in the vessels little is known, but there is evidence to shew that 
in the aged they are withered and shrunken or obliterated in some 
degree, so that they are no longer easy channels for the convey- 
ance of cancer cells. It must also be remembered that when 
cancer develops in any part, say in the pylorus, the cancer cells 
are carried in the lymph-stream in the direction which is usually 
followed. This direction is indicated in the specimens in which 
the injection method of Gerota has been performed. But in 
cases of cancer the early involvement of certain lymph- vessels, 
their plugging by cancer cells, or the implication of a single gland, 
may be enough to disturb the normal direction of the lymph cur- 
rent. In such circumstances an erratic course may be pursued 
by the cancer cells carried away from the growth. 

The stomach-wall is freely supplied with vessels, which com- 
mencing blindly beneath the surface epithelium, surround the 
glands, forming periglandular and sub glandular plexuses. From 
the latter, large vessels arise, which, passing through the muscu- 
laris mucosas, enter into the large submucous plexus. From this 
again wide vessels pass outwards to the subserous network, 
which lies immediately beneath the peritoneal covering. In 
these vessels there are innumerable valves which give to the in- 
jected trunks a beaded appearance; in the lymph plexuses within 
the walls of the stomach are no valves. When an injection of 
the submucous or subserous plexuses is made the fluid, though it 
is distributed widely, yet shews a definite inclination to pass in 
certain directions. Certain territories are therefore mapped out 
in the stomach, a little arbitrarily perhaps, but nevertheless with 
useful purpose, to indicate the normal lymphatic watersheds. 



292 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

Cuneo describes three such areas. One hes along a line drawn 
from the apex of the fundus (approximately) to the middle of the 
pylorus in such manner as to separate the upper two-thirds of 
the stomach from the lower third; the lymphatics of this area 
drain upwards to the lesser curvature and the cardia. The part 
of the stomach lying below this line is divided into two at the mid- 
point of the greater curvature, a point which lies vertically below 
the right margin of the oesophagus as it enters the stomach, and 
which indicates the separation between the areas of the stomach 
supplied respectively by the right and left gastro-epiploic arteries. 
The lymph- vessels in this lower part of the stomach drain towards 
the greater curvature, those on the right obliquely towards the 
pylorus, those on the left towards the spleen. 

The vessels all drain into lymphatic glands, which are placed 
in certain groups. A description of these may be given before 
the connexion between the vessels and the glands is described. 

The lymphatic glands connected with the stomach follow 
closely the distribution of the arteries to the stomach. The names 
given to the glands are therefore most conveniently those which 
the arteries bear. It would be unnecessary to refer to this were 
it not that there has been, as there too often is in matters ana- 
tomical, a great confusion of names and a needless multiplication 
of them. The following gland groups will be described: 

I. The Glands Associated with the Coronary Artery. — The 
glands in connexion with the coronary artery are divisible into 
certain groups. 

(a) Lower coronary. 

(b) Upper coronary. 

(c) Paracardial glands. 

(a) Lower Coronary Glands. — These glands lie along the left 
half of the lesser curvature, in association with the descending 
branch of the coronary artery, between the layers of the gastro- 
hepatic omentum. Their position is apt to vary; they are 
usually close to the artery, but may, according to Letulle, be 



PLATE I 




bo 
Q 



.2 ^ 

u "" 

< o 



o o 



Oh 0) 



PLATE II 




The arteries and lymphatics of tlie stomach. Posterior view. 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 293 

embedded in the wall of the stomach, or they may slip down- 
wards on the posterior surface of the organ. They are few in 
number in the foetus, and, as a rule, are found only on the cardiac 
half of the lesser curvature; they are larger and more numerous 
towards the cardia, and extend up to the right paracardial glands. 
They receive their afferent vessels from the whole length of the 
lesser curvature. The vessels from the pylorus run very obliquely 
in the wall of the stomach before reaching the glands, those from 
the middle of the stomach less obliquely, the vessels all radiating, 
fanwise, to the gland group. The number of these glands is very 
variable. Poly a and von Navratil found, as a rule, only two or 
three; Lengemann, in one specimen, discovered 14. Their effer- 
ents discharge into the upper coronary group. 

(b) Upper Coronary Glands. — This group lies along the main 
trunk of the coronary artery as it is embraced by the peritoneal 
fold known as the falx coronaria. They are the most constant 
and the most important glands of this region, and are found on 
all sides of the arterial trunk. Below, the chain is continuous 
with the lower coronary group, and above with the glands around 
the coeliac axis, at the upper border of the pancreas. Their 
afferent lymph- vessels come from the lower coronary group, and 
from the next two groups to be described; in addition they re- 
ceive lymph- vessels, as Polya and von Navratil pointed out, 
direct from the lesser curvature of the stomach. (This observa- 
tion, which is confirmed by Jamieson and Dobson, is one of great 
significance from the surgical point of view.) 

(c) The paracardial glands, with their lymphatics form, as 
Most appropriately says, a "girdle" round the cardia of the stom- 
ach. They are divided by some authors into two or three 
groups, according as they lie behind, to the left or right of the 
cardia. The right paracardial glands are constant; they re- 
ceive, according to Polya and von Navratil, their afferents direct 
from the lesser curvature of the stomach, and from the retro- 
paracardial glands and the left paracardial. Their efferents dis- 
charge into the upper coronary glands. The left paracardial : 



294 ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 

Their efferents discharge into the upper coronary glands. The 
left paracardial glands, according to Cuneo, are often wanting, 
but Polya and von Navratil found them constantly and Jamieson 
and Dobson confirm this. Both these observers found them occa- 
sionalh^in large numbers (six and seven). Their efferents come 
from the fundus, in front and behind, and discharge into the right 
paracardial or upper coronary groups. Behind, a retrocardial 
gland may intercept a few vessels. 

II. The Glands Associated with the Hepatic Artery. — It is 
more especially in connexion with these glands that a needless 
confusion in the nomenclature has crept in. The glands may be 
divided into separate groups : 

f A loiver group lyirig along the right 

I gastro-epiploic artery below the greater 

I curvature of the stomach. 

I An upper group lying near the bifur- 

(a) Glands in con- I cation of the gastroduodenal artery. 

nexion with the right ] (The name "subpyloric" is given to 

gastroduodenal art- | the two divisions by Polya and von Nav- 

ratil, but only to the upper group by 

I Jamieson and Dobson) . 

I A retropyloric group lying by the side 

of the gastroduodenal artery behind the 

[ pylorus. 

ih) Glands in connexion with the trunk of the hepatic artery, 

right supra pancreatic glands. 
ic) An occasional gland lying beside the pyloric artery, the 
p^doric arter}', the suprapyloric gland. 

(a) Glands in Connexion Tx'itli tlie Right Gastro-epiploie Artery. — 
These glands are usually described as lying in two groups, a lower 
and an upper, between which is a distinct interval. 

The lower group, usually two to seven in number, lies along 
the right gastro-epiploic artery, below the greater curvature of 
the stomach, between the la^^ers of the great omentum. The 
glands are not found to the left of the midpoint of the greater 
curvature; they lie usually on the lower side of the artery they 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 295 

accompany, and they are apt to stray downwards in the great 
omentum. Their afferent vessels come from the lower third of 
the stomach along the right half of the greater curvature. Their 
efferents, without exception, discharge into the glands of the 
upper group. 

The upper group, consisting of four, five, or more glands, lies 
beyond the pylorus, in the angle formed by the first and second 
parts of the duodenum, at or near the point of bifurcation of the 
gastroduodenal artery. They receive afferent vessels from the 
pylorus, and from the duodenum and the efferent vessels from the 
lower group. The course taken by their efferent vessels is in 
three directions: 

(a) To the chain along the hepatic artery, the retropyloric 

glands being sometimes interposed. 

(b) Across the pancreas, or through the gland, obliquely to 

the glands around the coeliac axis. 

(c) To glands lying in the root of the mesentery; this is the 

direction taken by the majority of the efferents. 

The retropyloric glands, few in number and inconstant, lie 
behind the pylorus, on the front of the pancreas, by the side of 
the gastroduodenal artery. They receive afferents from the 
group just described, and also direct from the hinder surface of 
the pylorus and duodenum. These glands are described by Most 
and Cuneo and are figured by Cuneo and Lengemann. They 
were not seen by Jamieson and Dobson; but of their occasional 
existence there can be no doubt. It may be that they are only 
aberrant members of the gastro-epiploic glands, or. more prob- 
ably prolapsed members of the group of glands along the hepatic 
artery. 

(6) The -Glands in Connexion with the Main Trunk of the 
Hepatic Artery. Right Suprapancreatic Glands. — These glands 
are few in number and lie beside the trunk of the hepatic artery, 
along the upper border of the pancreas. They receive afferent 
vessels, as Most and Polya and von Navratil have shewn, di- 
rectly from the upper border of the pylorus, a " suprapyloric " 



296 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



gland being occasionally placed in the path of one or more ves- 
sels, and also efferents from the upper gastro-epiploic group. 
(The glands are, therefore, both primary and secondary.) Their 
efferents go to the glands around the coeliac axis. 

(c) Occasionally a gland is placed along the pyloric artery 
to the right of the lesser curvature. It intercepts a vessel from 
the pylorus, and transmits its efferents to the right suprapan- 
creatic group. 

III. The glands along the splenic artery are surgically the 




Fig. no. — The lymphatic areas of the stomach: a, The area from which 
the lymphatic vessels drain into the coronary glands; h, the area from which 
the vessels drain into the glands along the greater curvature; c, the "isolated" 
area. 



least important of all, for they drain only the "isolated" area 
of the stomach. One or two small glands lie in the hilum of the 
spleen and in the gastrosplenic omentum. They draw their affer- 
ents from the left half of the greater curvature and from the 
fundus; their efferents go to the next group. 

The main group lies along the trunk of the splenic artery, at 
the upper border of the pancreas ; they are the left suprapancre- 
atic glands. They draw afferents from the glands in the hilum 
of the spleen, and also vessels directly from the fundus of the 



OPEIL\TIVE TREATxMENT OF CANXER OF STOMACH. 297 

stomach. Their efferents discharge into the glands at the coeHac 
axis. 

IV. The glands in connexion with the coeliac axis are 

the recipients of afferent vessels from all the gland groups pre- 
viously described. They are few in number, large in size, lie in 
the fork formed by the coronary artery and the splenic artery as 
the}^ arise from the coeliac axis. Some of their efferents discharge 
directly into the receptaculum chyli, and others pass behind the 
pancreas to the glands lying in the root of the mesentery. 




Fig. III. — Diagram to shew the mode of spreading of a pjdoric cancer, the 
lymphatic invasion, and the line of division of the stomach in partial gastrec- 
tomy. Note especially that the whole of the lesser curvature is removed. The 
arrows indicate the direction of the lymphatic currents. 

From the above description it will be seen that two varieties 
of glands may be described in respect of their vascular afferents. 
There are glands which receive vessels directly from the stomach, 
there are others which receive only the efferents vessels from other 
glands. The former glands are described as "primary/' the 
latter as ' ' secondary. ' ' There are certain groups which are both 
primary and secondary, receiving some vessels direct from the 
stomach, and other vessels from glands adjacent to them. 

The distinction between the primary and secondary glands 
is of the highest importance from the surgical point of view, be- 



298 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

cause it is clear that if any operative treatment of carcinoma of 
the stomach is to be considered radical, the first cordon of glands 
at least must be removed along with the growth. Leaving aside 
the "isolated area" of the stomach, wherein primary growths 
are almost unknown, and invasion by growths commencing else- 
where is very rare, the primary glands are: 

The lower coronary. 

The upper coronary. 

The right paracardial. 

The suprapyloric. 

The right suprapancreatic. 

The gastro-epiploic, upper and lower. 

The retropyloric, when present. 

In cases of cancer of the pylorus or prepyloric region all these 
glands may be invaded by growth conveyed along vessels directly 
from the stomach. To the affection of these primary glands 
Cuneo gives the name ' ' immediate adenopathies " ; to the affec- 
tions of the secondary glands, the name ''distant adenopathies ^ 
Jamieson and Dobson describe an additional primary gland. 
They have found a vessel which, arising from the upper border 
of the pylorus, separates itself from other vessels, and turns to 
the right behind the duodenum, to end in a gland lying behind the 
head of the pancreas, on the lower end of the common duct, a 
gland of the biliary chain. Poly a and von Navratil in one case 
found an efferent vessel going from a retropyloric gland to a 
gland in the hilum of the liver. 

Glandular invasion occurs early in cancer of the stomach. 
According to Cuneo, it is found in all cases at autopsy and in 
87.5 per cent, of the specimens removed by gastrectomy. To 
determine the existence of carcinoma a minute examination of 
the glands microscopically is necessary, for, as Carle and Fantino 
("Archiv. f. klin. Chir.," 1898, Ivi, 226) have shewn, the glands 
may be found grossly enlarged, yet not invaded by growth, 
whereas small glands are found full of growth. The invasion of 
the glands of the lesser curvature is that most commonly found; 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 299 

it is present, according to Cuneo, in 91.4 per cent, of cases (opera- 
tion specimens) ; the glands of the greater curvature* are affected 
in 62.5 per cent, of cases. 

There are certain features of carcinoma of the stomach other 
than those connected with the glandular implication which it is 
essential to bear in mind in planning and in carrying out a ' ' rad- 
ical" operation. These are concerned with the local enlarge- 
ment of the growth, the invasion of the lesser curvature, and the 
invasion of the duodenum. Cuneo and Borrmann have studied 
these points with conspicuous care. 

1. The Local Increase of the Growth. — When the growth is in- 
spected from either its mucous or serous surfaces, no adequate 
idea of its real size is obtained, for it is in the submucous layer 
that the widest extension takes place. For some distance be- 
yond the edge of the palpable or visible growth a vertical section 
of the stomach-wall shews a continuous infiltration of the sub- 
mucosa, and beyond this scattered nodules may be seen, nodules 
which, according to Borrmann, are still connected with the main 
growth. The extent of this submucous invasion cannot be pre- 
dicted, but it is never safe to allow for it a margin of less than 3 
cm. (Cuneo) when the division of the stomach is made in partial 
gastrectomy. 

2. The invasion of the lesser curvature is very pronounced in 
the great majority of cases. In Borrmann's series of 63 cases he 
found the following disposition. 

The two curvatures were equally invaded in 32 cases — 52 

per cent. 
The greater curvature was more invaded than the lesser in 

19 cases — 30 per cent. 

*It is sometimes said (see Jamieson and Dobson, page 1065) that there is a 
great discrepancy in the estimates of the frequencj^ of glandtilar complications 
in the statistics of Cuneo and Lengemann. The fact is not realised that Lenge- 
mann's percentages refer to the number of glands affected out of the total num- 
ber of glands which were present, whereas Cuneo's percentages refer to the num- 
ber of cases in which any glandular involvement occurs. If Lengemann' s cases 
are examined in the same manner as Cuneo's (as is easily done, full details being- 
given), it will be found that their results are almost identical. 



300 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

The lesser curvature was free in three cases. 
The greater curvature was free in i case. 
Both curvatures were free in i case. 



Cuneo found the lesser curvature affected in 19 cases out of 
22, and explains the discrepancy between his figures and Borr- 
mann's as being due to the shrinkage the lesser curvature rapidly 
undergoes after removal of the specimen from the body. The 
greater implication of the lesser curvature is to be expected if the 
commonest place of origin of the growth is borne in mind. Cuneo 
has shewn, moreover, that the extension of the growth along the 
lesser curvature is in reality an invasion of the stomach along the 
lymphatic vessels. The removal of the whole length of the lesser 
curvature is, therefore, an essential part of any operation, as 
V. Mikulicz, and those who worked under him — Most and others 
— were the first to shew. 

3. Invasion of the Duodenum. — From the time of Rokitansky 
and Brinton to Mikulicz and Most, all observers commented 
upon the integrity of the duodenum in cases of cancer of the 
stomach. This integrity is more apparent than real. Carle and 
Fantino shewed that in many of their cases the bowel was in- 
volved, and Cuneo and Borrmann have demonstrated the fre- 
quency and the extent of this invasion. In 11 cases examined 
by Cuneo the duodenum in 7 was healthy, in 4 it was invaded, 
but in only i case was the disease found i cm. beyond the pylorus. 
Borrmann, in 63 cases, found the duodenum invaded in 19 cases; 
in 9 of these the bowel was diseased at the point of section ; in 2 
cases the disease extended over 2 cm. in a continuous growth on- 
wards from the pylorus. The indication, therefore, is that the 
removal of the whole of the first portion of the duodenum is nec- 
essary in all cases of gastrectomy for carcinoma. Some informa- 
tion of value is to be derived from an examination of those speci- 
mens, removed by partial gastrectomy, in which it is evident that 
the operation has been incomplete. Borrmann, in his exhaustive 
examination of 63 specimens (p. 333), found no less than 20 in 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 3OI 

which it was evident that a complete removal of the growth had 
not been accomplished. In these 20 cases there were 13 in which 
the incompleteness was on the side of the lesser curvature, in 

8 at the cardiac end, in i at the duodenal end, and in 4 at both 
ends. 

In 2 cases the greater curvature had been too scantily removed, 
in I on the stomach side only, in the other, both on the stomach 
and the duodenal sides. 

In 5 cases both lesser and greater curvatures were insuffi- 
ciently removed. In 2 this insufficiency involved the duodenal 
extremity above and below, and the lesser curvature; in i the 
duodenal extremity above and below ; in 2 the cardiac end of the 
two curvatures; that is to say, that in 16 of the 20 incomplete 
operations it was the lesser curvature that was involved, and in 

9 of the 20 it was the duodenum. On the other hand, it was 
only in 4 cases that the greater curvature on the stomach side was 
involved. 

After a study of all the facts previously discussed, we are in a 
position to lay down the lines upon which an operation for the 
removal of a malignant growth beginning in the pyloric region 
of the stomach should be based. It is essential that the whole 
growth should be taken away, and such a margin beyond the 
visible and palpable tumour as shall ensure that the outlying 
nodules are within the lines of section; that all the lesser curva- 
ture should be removed; that one half of the greater curvature 
should be removed; that an inch at least of the duodenum 
should be removed; that all the "primary" glands at least 
should be taken (these are the lower and upper coronary, the 
right paracardial, the suprapyloric, the right suprapancreatic, 
the right gastro-epiploic, upper and lower, and the retropyloric) . 
The removal of all these parts is possible, and therefore the 
somewhat mournful view of the possibilities of the surgical 
treatment of cancer of the stomach taken by Lengemann, Polya 
and von Navratil, Jamieson and Dobson, is not justified. The 
difficulties to be encountered will chiefly lie in the removal of 



^02 



ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIOXS. 



the right suprapancreatic glands, but that these difficulties are 
exaggerated is, I think, quite certain. In several cases I have, by 
using the "gauze stripping" method, removed the glands with- 
out any injury either to the hepatic artery or to the pancreas. 

The following are the details of the operation of partial gas- 
trectomy : 

PARTIAL GASTRECTOMY. 

The operation is carried out in the following manner: An 
ample incision is made in the middle line, reaching, as a rule, 




Fig. 1 12. — Gastrectomy shewing the ligature of the pyloric arterj^ and vein. 



from the ensiform cartilage to the umbilicus. The central in- 
cision is more convenient than the lateral incision, which is com- 
monly employed for the operation of gastro-enterostomy ; it 
gives easier and more immediate access to all parts of the opera- 
tion area. An inspection of the extent of the cancerous invasion 
of the stomach itself, of its adhesion to the pancreas or abdominal 
wall or liver, of the number and position of any glandular enlarge- 
ments, and finally of the liver, peritoneum, and parts immediately 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 303 

in the neighbourhood to discover if secondary growth be present, 
is rapidly and carefully made. Neither adhesions nor the in- 
volvement of lymphatic glands preclude removal of the stomach, 
though they may render the mechanical difficulties rather more 
serious. When a resection has been decided upon, fiat gauze 




Fig. 113. — Partial gastrectomy. The growth is shewn, and the position in 
which the gastro-epiploic artery is secured on the greater curvature. 

swabs, wrung out of hot saline solution, are packed around the 
stomach so as to afford a barrier between the field of work and 
the general peritoneal cavity. As a rule, two layers of swabs are 
mtroduced, the first consisting of very large ones, which are un- 
changed throughout the operation, and the second of smaller 
ones, which, when soiled, are changed at once. No care is too 



304 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

punctilious so long as absolute security of the peritoneal cavity 
is ensured. 

Around the wound edges the rubber and gauze squares are 
tucked. The transverse colon with the omentum is allowed 
to lie out of the abdomen with the stomach, in order to render 
easier the manipulations concerned with securing the integrity 
of the middle colic arter\^ During the time the colon is not en- 
gaged immediately^ in the operation it is covered with a rubber and 
gauze sheet kept moist and warm. I find it a great convenience 
to make at once the opening in the transverse mesocolon which 
will presently be used for the purpose of enabling the jejunum 
to be passed through it when the anastomosis with the stomach 
is made. Through this opening the finger can from time to time 
be passed, and in this manner the exact position of the middle 
colic arten,^ and of the gastroduodenal artery can be determined. 

The first step in the operation consists in tearing through 
the gastrohepatic omentum close to the liver. As a rule this 
structure is of exceeding tenuity, and its vessels require no liga- 
ture, but occasionally, and especially towards the p^doric end of 
it, one or more little vessels may need to be secured. At once the 
fingers of the left hand pass into the lesser sac, and feeling behind 
the stomach are able to ascertain whether any inseparable ad- 
hesions exist between the stomach and the pancreas, and gener- 
ally to determine the conditions of the growth on its posterior 
aspect. 

The arteries which supply the stomach are then secured. It 
was formerly my practice to secure the coronary artery at the 
very first, but this is by no means easy, and is indeed very un- 
satisfactory; for, approached from the front, it is ph3'sically im- 
possible to ligature the vessel close to its origin from the coeliac 
axis. The highest possible point should be chosen for the di- 
vision of the artery, otherwise the highest group of coronary 
glands, which we know to be primary, will be left behind. The 
early ligature of the coronary artery is then not only difficult, 
but it is dangerous and inefficient and a ligature applied to it at 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 305 

the beginning of the operation may sHp and sharp haemorrhage, 
not easily controlled, may occur. The first vessel to be secured, 
then, is the pyloric artery, which is given off close to the upper 
border of the pylorus, by the hepatic artery. It may arise sepa- 
rately or in a common trunk with the gastroduodenal artery; 
if separately, it is surrounded by a double ligature and divided 
as far away from the stomach as possible. From the point of 
section a cut or tear is made through the peritoneum above the 
pylorus and the first part of the duodenum, in such manner as to 
secure that all the glands and fat are stripped upwards to the 
stomach. Care is taken not to wound the common duct. 

W. J. Mayo mentioned ("Jour. Amer. Med. Assoc," 1910, 
i, 1608) that in one case of his the duct was wounded, and bile 
drained from it for some days. The left forefinger is then passed 
behind the duodenum from above downwards, separating the 
first part of the intestine from the pancreas, and is made to pro- 
ject at the lower border of the bowel, well to the right of the sub- 
pyloric group of glands. As the finger is withdrawn two clamps 
are passed along its track, and the duodenum is firmly embraced 
by them both. The distal clamp is of the curved pattern shewn 
in the figure, the blades being grooved longitudinally. The 
duodenum is then cut across about i inch from the pylorus, as 
close to the distal clamp as possible, the knife shaving the bowel 
off so that nothing projects beyond the blades. At once the 
mucosa of the proximal end is thoroughly cauterised and rendered 
sterile. To prevent the clamp from slipping, a couple of liga- 
tures may be passed through the stomach on the cardiac side of 
the clamp and tied over the clamp blades. At this point, as 
the cut end of the duodenum is turned over to the left, the gas- 
troduodenal artery may be seen to give off the right gastro-epi- 
ploic artery, and one or other of these vessels is now' secured. 
As the aneurysm needles surround the vessels, the colon and 
omentum are turned upwards so as to display the middle colic 
artery, which must be clearly seen to be intact. 



3o6 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



The distal end of the duodenum is now closed in the following 
manner (Parker-Kerr method, slightly modified) : 

The clamp is held vertically in the right hand of the assistant, 
with the tip of the blades pointing to the surgeon's right. The 
suture begins at the extreme upper border, on the left of the clamp. 




Fig. 114. — Author's clamp, modified from the Parker-Kerr clamp, for use in 
closing the cut end of the duodenum or other parts of the small intestine. 

Here a stitch is taken, about Yi inch from the clamp, and at right 
angles to it. The needle, when withdrawn, is taken across the 
front of the clamp blades, Mobile the clamp itself is twisted by the 
assistant over to the left so as to make the surface of the bowel to 
the right of the clamp jjresent. In this a turn of the needle is 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 



307 



taken, about I4 inch from the clamp, parallel to it, and starting 
as close to the upper edge as possible. This stitch is drawn 
tight, so that a thread is now seen to pass over the front of the 
needle, from the first to the second turn of the needle. Again the 




Fig. 115. — Partial gastrectomy. The pyloric artery has been secured, and 
the gastrohepatic omentum divided (fewer ligatures than are shewn are gener- 
ally sufficient) . The gastro-duodenal artery has been secured and the duodenum 
is about to be divided. The smaller drawings shew the method of closure of 
the duodenal end. 



clamp is twisted by the assistant until the left side of the bowel 
presents, and in this a turn of the needle is taken about >4 inch 
from the clamp, and parallel to it. So the stitch proceeds, first 
on one side of the bowel and then on the other, as the clamp is 



308 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



turned in the assistant's hands and each aspect of the bowel is 
made prominent. The last turn of the needle is taken on the 
side opposite to that on which the stitch began, and it is longi- 
tudinal (as was the first turn) , the needle being entered near the 
clamp, at its tip, and taken along the bowel in a direction away 




Fig-. 1 1 6. — Partial gastrectomy. The duodenum closed. The gastrohepatic 

omentum divided. 



from t?ie clamp. The stitch is then grasped at each end by the 
surgeon, while the assistant opens and disengages the clamp. 
Then at once the stitch is drawn tight by pulling with both 
hands, and instantly the cut- edges infold, and the closure of the 
bowel is secure. The suture is then made to return along the 
bowel to the starting-point, where it is knotted and drawn tight. 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 



309 



SO that the cut end of the gut puckers up very tightly. I gener- 
ally introduce one or two interrupted sutures over the dimpled 
end of the bowel, though probably this is not necessary, and fin- 
ally one or two sutures are passed through the pancreas and the 
duodenum, so as to make the closed end of the bowel fit accu- 
rately against the anterior surface of the head of the gland. 




Fig. 117. — Partial gastrectomy. The stomach, wrapped in gauze, is turned 
over to the left, and the coronary artery is now easily secured close to the aorta. 
This is the only method by which the artery can be easily tied at a point suffi- 
ciently high to ensure that the primary glands which lie on the vessel are below 
the point of division. 



The next step consists in the division of the gastrocolic omentum 
along the greater curvature of the stomach, or rather along, and 
as close as possible to, the upper margin of the transverse colon. 
The concavity which the duodenum makes in its second portion 
is cleaned of all the fat which lies within it, fat which contains 
often-times one or more possibly affected glands. It is most 
important to see that this subpyloric group of glands and all the 



3IO 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



' ' dropped glands ' ' from this group lying in the gastrocolic omen- 
tum are included in the parts to be removed. As the stomach 
is lifted away from the pancreas a few retropyloric glands 
may be seen, or some adhesions to the pancreas discovered. 
These adhesions may be light and easily divided, or they ma}' be 
firm and inseparable. If the latter, then it is better not to tear 




Fig. ii8. — Partial gastrectomy. The coronary artery being divided, the 
"anchor" which held the stomach has gone. The stomach is now turned well 
over to the left, and gastro-enterostomy performed. It is quite easy to do this, 
because the hold on the stomach allows it to be drawn up and retained easily 
in position. 



them away from the pancreas, but with a sharp knife to take a 
superficial shaving from the gland. There is no danger in this, 
provided that the duct of the gland is not reached. There may be 
a little bleeding but a hot, moist swab, or a few fine sutures of 
catgut soon cause its arrest. A series of ligatures is passed by the 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 



311 



aid of the aneurysm needle, through the gastrocoUc omentum 
from right to left and as the needle lies in position for each liga- 
ture the transverse colon and the omentum are turned upwards 
so as to make sure that the trunk of the middle colic artery is not 




Fig. 119. — Partial gastrectomy. The dotted line shews the position of the 
gastro-enterostomy, which has already been performed. The clamps are placed 
on the stomach; between them the stomach is divided. The line of section and 
the gastro-enterostomy opening are generally made about i inch further to the 
left than is shewn in the figure. 



embraced. It is impossible to emphasize too strongly the need 
for care and caution in this matter. Operators, so distinguished 
and so careful as Kocher and Finney, have ligatured the middle 
colic artery with the result that gangrene of the colon has oc- 
curred, or such pallor or lividity of it has been seen before the 



312 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

completion of the operation that a resection of the intestine in- 
volved has been necessaty. One after another the ligatures are 
passed, below the arch of the gastroepiploic vessels, until the mid- 
point of the greater curvature of the stomach is reached. Be- 
yond this point, for the reasons already given, it is not necessary 
to go. At this point, therefore, the gastroepiploic vessels are 
ligatiured and divided. The ligature of these large trunks is best 
done, I think, at this stage of the operation, though I have many 
times placed a preliminary double ligature at this point, before 
the duodenum is cut across. 

i\s soon as this stage in the operation is reached, it will be 
found easy to turn over the stomach to the left, the posterior sur- 
face being now to the front, so that the anterior surface of the 
pancreas is seen in all its length. Into the lesser sac a large hot 
swab is now, or at an earlier stage of the operation has been, 
packed. By pulling a little forcibly on the stomach the origin 
of the coronary artery from the coeliac axis is now readily seen and 
felt. It is a perfectly simple matter to surround it with an 
aneurysm needle and to ligature it in two places close to its origin. 
The upper coronary group of glands must remain with the stom- 
ach when the vessel is divided, and to make sure of this it is as 
well to strip the glands downwards from the vessel and to leave 
the trunk quite bare. On the instant that the vessel is divided 
the stomach, freed from its main anchorage, is readily drawn down- 
wards and can be more easily turned over to the left. While it 
is held in this position the anastomosis with the jejunum is made. 
It is now quite easy to do, for the stomach, held in the assistant's 
hand, cannot slip away from the clamp. If the gastro-enteros- 
tomy is performed after the stomach has been divided, it is often 
a matter of extreme difficulty to grip the posterior wall of the 
stomach with the clamp in exactly the position required, and it is 
a still more difficult matter to prevent it from slipping away. A 
small rent is made in the transverse mesocolon, and the first few 
inches of the jejunum are drawn through. The clamps are ap- 
plied to the stomach and jejunum in such manner that the open- 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 



313 



ing which is to be made in them is antiperistaltic — it runs, that 
is to say, obhquely from the lesser curvature above downwards 
and to left to the greater curvature. By making the anastomosis 
in this way a rather larger portion of the stomach may be removed. 
Curved clamps are more easily applied than straight ones. 

The anastomosis is now performed in the ordinary manner. 



'^Y- 


^^ 


^^ 




^^y^__,-^ 


\ &^ ■/ 


-•^ 


^^fe^ 




^^^^ 


.>iii>fci^"Wf!^MBK 




^^^^fe 


^^ 1 


\ 


T?S5«R 




r^^^^ 




1 
1 




ffl 


^9kL^ 


^Mwi 


1 


!■ 


\ Y^^ 


•• ^^^i 


^^w*^ ™ 


^^ 








- 1^" 


^^^ 


1 
j 








i 
i 


I- "5°'? .. - -, 








^ 



Fig. 120. — Partial gastrectomy. Closure of the stomach, 
with the jejunum is seen. 



The anastomosis 



When it is completed, the time has come to sever the stomach. 
This is done between two pairs of large curved clamps, which 
are applied so that their convexities lie towards the pylorus. 
When placed in this manner, the lesser curvature of the stomach 
is gripped at its very highest point. If the clamps are placed 
with the convexity to the left, it will be found that the tip of the 
highest one does not securely grip the oesophageal portion of the 



314 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

lesser curvature. I have once had great difficuhy at this point 
in the operation as a resuh of the upper end of the divided stom- 
ach receding from the clamp. To prevent this the reverse appli- 
cation of the clamp is possibty quite sufficient, but in addition I 
always introduce, before the stomach is divided, at the highest 
point, one or two sutures, which take the posterior and the an- 
terior walls on each side of the line of the intended incision. By 
holding these firmly upwards the stomach is absolutely pre- 
vented from retraction. When the clamps are secure, the stom- 
ach is cut across about 3/^ inch distal to the line of the gastro- 
enterostomy opening. The serous and muscular coats are first 
divided, back and front, and are pushed backwards from the 
mucosa, which is then divided as near as possible to the proximal 
clamp. The whole length of the mucosa is now thoroughly cau- 
terised, or still better, wiped with pure carbolic acid. A cat- 
gut suture, which takes all the coats, is introduced, beginning 
at the lesser curvature and ending at the greater. It is an 
interlocking suture, the individual turns of which are placed 
close together, and the catgut at each turn is drawn as tight 
as possible. This, as a rule, secures all vessels, but if. when the 
clamp is loosened, any bleeding point is seen, it is secured with 
a separate stitch or a ligature. A second line of sutures is now 
inserted. A continuous thread of Pagenstecher's material is 
used, and extends from the lesser to the greater curvature, in- 
folding the former line of sutures securely. The needle is intro- 
duced on each surface of the stomach about ^2 inch from the 
former suture line, so that the cut end of the stomach is deeply 
infolded. 

At the lower end it has sometimes been a matter of difficulty 
to me to secure a quite satisfactory appearance of closure. Re- 
cently, instead of continuing the running suture the entire length 
of the incision, I change its character about an inch from the end, 
and here pass the needle three or four times in the direction of 
the suture line, about y2 inch away from it on the anterior sur- 
face, downwards to the greater curvature, and then upwards 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 315 

along the posterior surface at the same distance, so as to surround 
the last inch or so of the divided edge of the stomach by a purse- 
string suture. As this suture is tightened the suture line is 
pressed inwards and buried. A few more interrupted sutures 
may here and there be necessary and finally the two interrupted 
sutures applied at the lesser curvature before the stomach was 
cut across are tied. 

Glands are now sought along the hepatic artery at the upper 
border of the pancreas — the right suprapancreatic glands. As a 
rule, none are found, but if any be discovered, they can be strip- 
ped away by gauze pressure, especial care being taken to avoid 
any damage to the trunk of the hepatic artery. The operation 
area is now wiped gently over with hot moist swabs. The omen- 
tum and the transverse colon are turned upwards, the jejunum 
at its origin pulled upon, until the gastro-enterostomy line is 
seen, and the edges of the divided mesocolon are then stitched to 
the gastrojejunal suture line in the usual manner. A final in- 
spection of the whole area is made, and the omentum then turned 
vertically upwards to lie over all the operation area and to make 
all the rough places smooth. The blood lost by the patient in 
this operation, from beginning to end, should be less than an 
ounce. Drainage is not necessary unless the pancreas has been 
deeply injured or the common duct wounded. 

The immediate union of the duodenum to the stomach by 
the method of Billroth and Kocher is not to be recommended. It 
is not easy to accomplish even after the duodenum has been mo- 
bilised — it leads to parsimony in the removal of diseased areas, 
and is apt to be followed by a stenosis at the new opening which 
may call for the performance of gastro-enterostomy in the future 
stages. Throughout the operation the nicest care is taken to 
avoid loss of blood, the exposure of viscera, and the contamination 
of the operation area. Every manoeuvre is carried out with the 
daintiest and most delicate manipulations. Rough handling or 
rough wiping, indeed, roughness of an}^ kind, is to be scrupulously 
avoided. Here, as always in the abdomen, the light hand is es- 



3i6 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



sential. Patients who need this operation are often seriously 
wasted, and their tissues are drained of all fluids. Their appear- 
ance often suggests desiccation. It has fallen to me very often 
to operate upon such wasted patients, and in order to supply 
them with fluid I have passed a stomach-tube through the gastro- 




Fig. 121. — Kocher's method of uniting the duodenum to the posterior surface 
of the stomach after partial gastrectomy. 

enterostomy opening as soon as it is made. The tube passes 6 
or 10 inches into the jejunum, and through it two pints of pep- 
tonised milk with a little brandy are slowly poured, while the sub- 
sequent stages of the operation are completed, and the parietal 
wound is being secured. The patient, indeed, is having a good 



OPERATIVE TREATMENT OF CANCER OF STOMACH. 317 

meal during the time that his stomach is being cut away. As 
soon as the patient returns to bed, as a matter of routine, the con- 
tinuous administration of sahne fluid by the rectum is begun and 
is continued for twenty-four or forty-eight hours. It is really 
astonishing to see how fresh and bright a patient looks who is 
in this manner well supplied with fluid. There is, as a rule, little 
or no shock after this operation, which lasts an hour, or a little 
longer, in the ordinary case. 

In the matter of oral feeding, the customary routine after 
gastro-enterostomy is followed; the patient, that is to say, is 
allowed fluids in unrestricted quantities. It is fluid the patient 
needs, and the more he can take, the better. 

In some cases anterior gastro-enterostomy may have to be 
performed instead of the posterior operation. Since I adopted 
the method described above, the performance, that is, of the gas- 
tro- jejunal anastomosis before the detachment of the stomach, 
I have never had to resort to the anterior method. Should it 
ever be necessary, the usual procedure is, so far as possible, car- 
ried out, a point on the jejunum about 15 to 18 inches below the 
flexure being chosen for the new orifice. 

Instead of closing the cut end of the stomach and making an 
opening from the posterior surface of the stomach to the jejunum, 
Reichel and Wilms have suggested that the cut end of the stom- 
ach should be united in all its length to the jejunum. I have no 
experience of the method. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

THE CHOICE OF OPERATION IN CANCER OF THE STOMACH. 

In Pyloric Cancer. — Surgeons of some experience in opera- 
tions upon the stomach are divided in their opinions as to the 
better operation in cases of malignant disease of the pylorus. 
On the one hand are those who, believing that a diagnosis of 
malignant disease cannot be made while yet the disease is local, 
advocate a palliative operation, — gastro-enterostomy, — with 
the idea of giving rest to the diseased area, and thereb}^ re- 
tarding growth, as in colotomy for malignant disease of the 
rectum. On the other hand are those who, having been tempted 
to employ a radical operation in some favourable case or series 
of cases, are so impressed with its advantages that they become 
apostles of a broader creed and advocate local extirpation. My 
opinion emphatically is that, in all cases, whenever possible, a 
radical operation should he attempted. Under present con- 
ditions of diagnosis the probability is that, when a patient is 
submitted to operation, gastro-enterostomy is, in general, a 
safer operation than pylorectomy. But although the comfort 
and sense of well-being of the patient may improve A^ery de- 
cidedly for a time after the former operation, the tumour is 
still slowly enlarging in size, and will eventually cause death. 
How much of the general ill health, cachexia, and so forth are 
induced by absorption from the growth, by necrotic changes in 
its mass, by ulceration and hemorrhage upon the surface, is 
quite unknown, but one may presume that such influences are 
not trivial. Krokiewicz and Pilliet believe, indeed, that cancer 
cachexia is the result of intoxication with the by-products of 
metabolism of the cancer-cells. A local extirpation, then, even 
if followed by a recurrence, will probably prolong life for a greater 
period and in greater comfort than a gastro-enterostomy. It 

,318 



CHOICE OF opi<:ration in cancer of stomach. 319 

was doubtless an opinion similar to this which led Terrier to 
remark that "the best form of gastro-enterostomy was done 
after removal of the pylorus." But increasing experience in 
the most competent hands tends to shew that in properly 
selected cases pylorectomy is not an operation of very grave 
risk, and is an operation of generous promise. 

Partial gastrectomy in the early days of its employment 
was an exceedingly serious operation, with an appalling death- 
rate. Latterly the mortality is seen to be a gradually, but per- 
sistently, diminishing one. 

In order to form some estimate as to the chances of life, of 
the condition of health, and of the relative values of different 
operations in patients afflicted with malignant disease of the 
stomach, it is desirable to enquire closely into the records of a 
number of cases, preferably in the practice of one surgeon, ob- 
served over a series of years. The fullest account of the sur- 
gical side of the question has been given by Kronlein, of Ziirich, 
and by von Mikulicz, of Breslau. The questions that are in 
urgent need of settlement are the following: 

1. Will a palliative operation upon the stomach prolong life? 

2. Will it make the remnant of life more tolerable? Will it 
make the patient feel that the ordeal of operation is justified in 
the greater comfort of his later days ? 

3 . Will a resection give a reasonable prospect of cure ? 

4. Will a resection, if followed by recurrence, give increased 
length of days and better health ? 

It is necessary, in fact, to know whether, in the stage in which 
we now meet with the cases, an operation is worth doing, and, if 
it is, whether it should be palliative, or whether an attempt should 
be made to eradicate the disease. 

In order to have some means of comparing the surgical cases 
with those not operated upon, it is necessary that exact details 
should be kept of all cases coming to the surgeon, whatever their 
destiny — to operation, to internal medication, or to absence of 
treatment — may chance to be. 



320 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

Kronlein tabulates the cases which came under his observa- 
tion from April i, 1881, to February, 1902. All the cases were 
recorded, without exception. There were 264, and the follow- 
ing table gives a brief sketch of their classification: 

A. NOT OPERATED UPON. 

1 . Inoperable 53 

2 . Refusing operation 14 

Total 67 

B. OPERATED UPON. 

Death Under 
Operation. 

1. Exploratory laparotomies 73 7 — -9.5 per cent. 

2. Gastro-enterostomies 74 18 — 24.3 " 

3. Gastrectomies 50 14 — 28.0 " " 



Total 197 39 — 19.8 " " 

Of the 264 patients, all but 13 were traced. Of these 13, the 
majority had not been treated by operation, and not one of them 
had been submitted to gastrectomy. 

The fate of these patients is shewn in the following table : 

Not traced 13 

Dead 229 

In consequence of operation 39 

Later, from intercurrent disease 2 

' ' from suicide i 

" from the primary carcinoma 166 

' ' from recurrence after gastrectomy 21 

Living 22 

Gastro-enterostomies 9 

Gastrectomies 13 



Total 264 

Of the 264, it will be seen that 67 were not operated upon (25.3 
per cent.). In 53 of these an operation was contra-indicated; 
in 14 it was refused by the patients. 

Of the 264, 73 had exploratory laparotomy performed (27.6 
per cent.). After the surgeon had opened the abdomen and had 
become convinced of the impossibility of radical extirpation, 
the abdominal wound was closed. 

Of the 73 patients, 7 died within the first week after operation 



CHOICE OF OPER.\TIONS IN CANCER OF STOMACH. 32 1 

(4 from exhaustion, 2 from pneumonia, and i from pulmonary 
embolism) . 

In 74 patients gastro-enterostomy was performed. At first 
sight this number appears small, but Kronlein has laid it down 
as a rule of his practice that in cases of carcinoma of the stomach, 
where extirpation is impossible, the palliative -operation of gastro- 
enterostomy shall not be performed unless there is evidence of 
stenosis. If this evidence fails, the operation becomes merely 
"exploratory." The only exception that has been made is in 
those cases in which there has been marked stagnation of food 
without evidence of stenosis. Of the 74 gastro-enterostomies, 
18, or 24.3 per cent., died under the operation. 

Fifty patients were submitted to the operation of gastrectomy. 
Of these, 14 died in direct consequence of the operation. Of the 
total 264 cases, therefore, only 18.9 per cent, underwent the radi- 
cal operation. One of the 50 was the well-known case of total 
extirpation of the stomach performed by Schlatter. 

The subjoined table shews the percentage in which each form 
of operation was attempted : 

264 CASES. 

No operation in 25.3 per cent. 

Operation in 74.7 " " 

Exploratory .27.6 

Gastro-enterostomy 28. o 

Gastrectomy 1S.9 

OPERATION MORTALITY. 

Exploratory laparotomy 9.5 per cent. 

Gastro-enterostomy 24.3 " " 

Gastrectomy 28.0 " " 

In order to obtain a comparison between the life-chances of 
those patients who survive operation and those who are not 
operated upon, it is necessary to cancel the following: 

Patients who withdrew after examination 13 

" " did not survive operation 39 

" died of intercurrent disease 2 

" committed suicide i 

Total 55 

VOL. I — 21 



322 ■ ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

Deducting these 55 from the total of 264 we have 209 patients, 
who may be classified thus : 

A. NOT OPERATED UPON. 

1 . Inoperable 51 

2. Declining operation 12 63 

B. OPERATED UPON. 

1. Explorator}' laparotomy 58 

2. Gastro-enterostomy 54 

3 . Gastrectomy 34 146 

Total 209 

The report as to these 209 cases at the beginning of March, 
1902, when these enquiries were concluded, was as follows: 

Died from carcinoma of the stomach 187 

Living 22 

There died : 

A. OF THOSE NOT OPERATED ON. 

1 . Inoperable cases 51 

2. Declining operation , 12 63 

B. OF THOSE OPER.\TED ON. 

1. All the explorator}' laparotomies 58 

2. Of the gastro-enterostomies 45 

3. Of the gastrectomies 21 124 

Of those operated on and not operated on 187 

There are still living : 

1. Of gastro-enterostomies 9 

2. Of gastrectomies 13 22 

Total 209 

The duration of disease in patients suffering from carcinoma 
of the stomach was also reckoned. It was found that, on the 
average, the time from the first onset of symptoms up to the day 
of the patient's admission to the hospital, or up to the day of 
operation, was from eight to nine months. Means were also 
taken to discover the number of days from the patient's ad- 
mission or from the date of operation to the patient's death. 



CHOICE OF OPERATION IN CANCER OF STOMACH. 323 

The duration of time from entrance into hospital (time of 
operation) to date of death: 

A. In the non-operated cases 102 days. 

B. In the operated cases: 

1. Exploratory laparotomies 114 " 

2. Gastro-enterostomies 193 " 

3. Gastrectomies , 520 " 

If in these groups we sum up the values found for both periods of 
duration of the disease, we gather the following to be the average 
time for the whole duration of the carcinoma from the onset of 
the first symptoms until time of death : 

A. In the non-operated, 9 months and 102 days — about 12^ 

months. 

B. In the operated cases: 

1. Exploratory laparotomies, 9 months and 114 days, or 13 

months. 

2. Gastro-enterostomies, 9 months and 193 days, or 15^ 

months. 

3. Gastrectomies, 9 months and 520 days, or 26^ months. 

Kronlein, from this experience, draws the following con- 
clusions : 

1. That carcinoma of the stomach without operation has a 
fatal termination in about a year. 

2. That gastro-enterostomy prolongs the life of the patients 
suffering from this disease for about three months, on the average. 

3. That gastrectomy, so far as it is followed by recurrence, 
prolongs life on an average about fourteen months. 

At the time this report was published there were 22 patients 
still living after operation. Of these, 9 were cases of gastro- 
enterostomy and 13 of gastrectomy. The former will, of course, 
prove fatal within a few months. So far as the latter are con- 
cerned, their length of life since operation is shewn in the follow- 
ing table : 

I case is in the eighth year since gastrectomy. 

1 case " " fourth " " " 

2 cases are " third " " " 

3 " " " second " " " 
6 " " " first " " " 



324 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

Von Mikulicz, in 1901, published the results of his experience 
from April, 1891, to March, 1901. During this period 458 cases 
of cancer of the stomach had been under observation in the clinic 
at Breslau. This number includes 46 cases of cancer of the 
cardia. The diagnosis was confirmed either at the operation, 
or by observation of the progress of the disease, or by examina- 
tion after death. In several cases of cancer of the cardia the 
diagnosis was confirmed by cesophagoscopy or by the removal and 
examination of a small portion of the growth. In 128 cases no 
operation was performed, chiefl}^ because radical removal was no 
longer possible, and because there was no indication for any pal- 
liative procedure, such as gastro-enterostomy. In exceptional 
cases the operative interference was declined by the patient. 
The total duration of life from the commencement of the disease 
(as inferred from the symptoms in 67 cases in which it was possible 
to ascertain the facts) varied from a few months to 38 months — 
an average of iii months. 

In 320 cases recourse was had to operation as follows : 

1 . Simple exploratory incision 44 

2 . Gastrostomy (in cancer of cardia) 27 

3 . Jejunostomy 12 

4. Gastro-enterostomy 143 

5. Resection of stomach 100 

6. Extirpation of stomach 3 

Exploratory Incision. — Four deaths followed this operation, 
giving a mortality of 9 per cent. The average duration of life 
after operation was 4y^,j months, and from the beginning of the 
disease, i4y-o months. If the cases submitted to exploratory 
laparotomy be added to those in which no operation was per- 
formed, we get an average duration of life of a little over 13 
months from the beginning of the disease, a figure which is 
adopted by the author as a basis for judging of the results of the 
operative treatment of gastric cancer. 

Gastro-enterostomy.— There were 48 deaths in 143 cases — a 
mortality of 33 ,'„ per cent. Although during the last three years 
the mortality has been reduced to 26^ per cent., it is still very 



CHOICE OF OPERATION IN CANCER OF STOMACH. 325 

high in proportion to the same operation in non-cancerous con- 
ditions. The average duration of Hfe after operation was 6y\ 
months, and from the beginning of the disease, 14 months; 
but if the operation deaths are included, this is reduced to T-2f-^ 
months, slightly shorter than the duration of life when no opera- 
tion is performed. 

Resection of the Stomach. — There were 37 deaths in 100 
cases. In the last three years the death-rate has been reduced to 
25 per cent. ; that is to say, a mortality slightly lower than that 
of gastro-enterostomy. The results, as observed in 58 patients 
who survived the operation, and whose subsequent history is 
known, are as follows : 20 are still alive between 6 months and 8^ 
years : 

Longer than i year, 17 are alive. » 

" " 2 years, 10 " " 

" " 3i years, 4 " " 

These last four may be regarded as radically cured. The author 
regards these results as quite as good as those after operations 
for cancer of the tongue or rectum. 

It will thus be seen that there is no great divergence in the 
results taken from the two clinics, allowing for the fact that the 
number of cases in the one is almost double that in the other, 
while the period covered by the observations is only one-half. 
Kronlein records 264 cases extending over 21 years ; von Mikulicz, 
458 in 10 years. The results may be compared in this way: 

Kronlein. Mikulicz. 
Months. Months. 

The non-operated cases lived, from the begin- 
ning of the disease 12J iii 

The cases treated by exploratory laparotomy . . 13 i4to 

The cases treated by gastro-enterostomy 15 J 14 

The cases treated by gastrectomy 26^ 24^ 

In comparison with these statistics quoted from Mikulicz 
and Kronlein I will offer those given by W. J. Mayo ("Jour. 
Amer. Med. Assoc," 1910, i, 1908), which may be taken as rep- 
resenting the highest modern achievements. In the Mayo Clinic 



326 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

from April 21, 1907, to January 27, 1910, the cases of cancer of 
the stomach treated b}^ operation are arranged as follows: 

Total number 627 

Explorations — hopeless condition found 206 

Gastro-jejunostomy performed 169 

Gastrostomy 26 

Excision of ulcer (cancerous changes being found) 2 

Resection for cancer 224 

The appended details of the cases of partial gastrectomy are 
given : 

TABLE I.— OPERATIONS FOR Cx\RCINOMA INVOLVING THE 
PYLORIC END OF THE STOMACH 

Total number 224 

Males 163 

Females 61 

Age of oldest 81 

Age of youngest 30 

Average age 53 

Patiexts Operated on Over Five Years Ago. 

Total number 50 

Present condition known 39 

Alive and well (one eight years, two and one-half months; one 
eight years; *one seven years, two months; one six years 11 
eleven months; one five years, three and one-half months; 
one five years) 6 

Patients Operated Upon Over Four Years Ago. 

Total number 85 

Present condition known 64 

Alive and well 13 

Patients Operated Upon Over Three Years Ago. 

Total number 117 

Present condition known 88 

Alive and well 18 

Patients Operated Upon Less Than Three Years Ago. 
Total number 107 

Cases in the last group (operations less than three years 
ago) are too recent to be of any statistical value as to the question 
of cure. 

A careful study of the wealth of experience laid bare in these 
records will enable us more clearly to formulate our ideas as to the 

*Has since died of recurrence. 



CHOICE OF OPERATION IN CANCER OF STOMACH. 327 

principles that should guide us in dealing with this most serious 
disease. In the first place, it must be admitted that our means 
of obtaining cases sufficiently early are almost as meagre as it is 
possible for them to be. Until more accurate methods of diag- 
nosis are established, it is absolutely imperative that recourse 
should be had earlier and more often to the exploratory laparot- 
omy. At present that operation is limited to the examination 
of patients when the diagnosis has been made, and when the only 
question to be settled is whether or not the growth is removable. 
But in order to better our results we must explore, not to confirm, 
but to make, a diagnosis. 

When the diagnosis has been made and the patient is sub- 
mitted to operation, it is difficult to decide upon the exact sur- 
gical procedure which it is wisest to adopt. Von Mikulicz, 
Kronlein, and not a few other surgeons have spoken strongly 
upon the question of gastro-enterostomy, saying that this method 
should be adopted only in cases where stenosis, either at or near 
the pylorus, is caused, or in cases where stasis of food is marked. 
There can be no doubt that in such cases gastro-enterostomy is 
productive of the most remarkable benefit to the health and well- 
being of the patient. The weight increases, the appetite and the 
power of gratifying it return, and vomiting, often the most dis- 
tressing and unceasing symptom, stops at once. But there can 
also be no doubt that in some instances, when the growth does 
not actually obstruct, by its bulk, the onward passage of food, a 
decided benefit results from the operation. The stomach is 
better and more quickly drained, and, as a rule, food can be 
taken more frequently and with greater comfort. In the ma- 
jority of these cases, however, little or no benefit results from 
gastro-enterostomy. The position, therefore, may be thus 
briefly stated: If, after exploration, a growth is found to be ob- 
structing the pylorus or to be narrowing the stomach and caus- 
ing an hour-glass condition, or if stasis of food has been a marked 
symptom, then gastro-enterostomy will give very decided relief. 
If, on the other hand, the growth be confined to one or other 



328 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

of the curvatures, and if neither stenosis nor stasis be present, 
gastro-enterostomy wiU give Httle or no relief: it will not pro- 
long life nor give a greater degree of comfort. 

I am entirely in agreement with the advice given by the man 
most competent to express it, W. J. Mayo, to the effect that gas- 
trectomy may with great benefit be performed not only as a 
possibly curative operation, but also deliberately as a palliative 
operation when growths are present in inaccessible glands or in 
the liver. 

The mortality of gastrectomy has been so much reduced by 
the perfection of the technique of the operation that the figures 
of Kronlein and Mikulicz, though they must still be quoted, do 
not represent the best practice of today. Gastrectomy does not 
now involve a greater immediate mortality than lo per cent., and 
the relief to the patient from the removal of a noxious ulcerating 
mass in the stomach is very considerably greater than that which 
attends gastro-enterostomy alone. 

The operation of gastrectomy in the hands of von Mikulicz 
and of Carle and Fantino has given a lower mortality than gastro- 
enterostomy. Its advantages as compared with gastro-enter- 
ostomy are that it gives a greater prolongation of life— ten or 
eleven months longer — and that it affords a greater degree of 
comfort to the patient. Though recurrence may follow, yet in 
the majority of cases the patient is relieved greatly by the re- 
moval of a foul, ulcerating growth, from the surface of which an 
offensive and septic discharge is constantly occurring, and from 
which haemorrhages, more or less copious, are often likely to 
take place. If, after removal of a malignant growth of the 
stomach, the surgeon will open the viscus and inspect the sur- 
face of the tumour, he will realise, when he sees the foul, ulcerous 
mass, that its removal cannot but be of vast benefit to the pa- 
tient. It is true that in the great majority of cases the growth 
will recur either locally or generally; but the question may 
arise as to whether gastrectomy should not be performed de- 
liberately as a palliative operation in cases where an early 



CHOICE OF OPERATION IN CANCER OF STOMACH. 329 

secondary deposit can be seen in the liver, or inaccessible or 
irremovable glands be found in the pancreas or along the aorta 
and vena cava. If we take into account the following ad- 
vantages of gastrectomy as compared with gastro-enterostomy — 
that in the most competent hands its mortality is not greater, 
but is even less, than the mortality of gastro-enterostomy; 
that a prolongation of life for ten months longer than the period 
given by gastro-enterostomy is the rule; that the comfort, the 
general health, appetite, and well-being of the patient are all 
emphatically better; and, finally, that the patient has always a 
chance, even though it is of the slenderest, of a complete re- 
covery from his disease — if we take all these into our considera- 
tion, there can be no doubt that the operation of choice will 
always be gastrectomy. Gastrectomy will be done always 
when a radical operation is attempted : it will probably be done 
often when nothing more than a palliative operation is intended. 

If, after the abdomen has been opened, it is found impossible 
or imprudent to attempt either gastro-enterostomy or gastrec- 
tomy, some relief may be obtained by performing duodenos- 
tomy or jejunostomy. The scope of these procedures is very 
strictly limited; but in rare instances, when the prolongation 
of life for even two or three weeks is of the greatest importance, 
then either of these operations can be done with propriety. The 
operations are simple, speedily done, and cause little or no shock, 
and they can, if need be, be readily performed with cocaine 
anaesthesia. 

In Mural Cancer.- — In these cases obstruction may be absent. 
Diagnosis is, therefore, not so early, so that when the abdomen 
is opened a large area of stomach may already be affected. 
Even if no narrowing is produced, a gastro-enterostomy, by 
determining rest, will assuage pain and lessen the rate of growth. 
A complete local removal, however, is the ideal for whose at- 
tainment we should strive. 

The extent of such removal will vary from the minimum of 
an hour-glass stomach to the maximum of a general infiltration 



330 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

of both walls. The surgeon will be guided in a decision by the 
extent of such growth and by his personal capacity and pref- 
erence. It is, I think, possibly open to question whether a 
complete gastrectomy is a scientific operation or a brilliant ex- 
ploit in surgical gv^mnastics. The records of the cases so far 
performed are certainly far better than could have been an- 
ticipated — one case of my own did ver^^ well (see next chapter) . 

In all cases of local excision, whether in the body of the stom- 
ach or at the pylorus, a wide healthy area surrounding the 
grovv1;h should be removed. Experience goes forcibly to shew 
that it is from local recurrence that patients die, even when the 
incisions have been made, as it would seem, wide of the disease. 
The direction of the spread of the gro^^1:h should be carefully 
noticed. If the growth is spreading circularly in the line of the 
vessels, it shews little tendency to recur after removal; if it is 
spreading transversely along the curvatures, there is said to be 
a strong tendency to recurrence (Mayo). The importance of 
Cuneo's observations, already referred to, may be again em- 
phasised. 

In Growth at the Cardiac End. — Only palliative operations are 
possible when the growth involves the cardiac orifice and the 
adjacent portion of the stomach. Le\'y has, indeed, planned an 
operation — and practised it upon the cadaver — for the purpose 
of removing such a gro\vth (" Langenbeck's Archiv," 1898), but, 
so far as we know, a procedure of this kind has only once been 
attempted during life. This was by Mikulicz, who removed a 
primary carcinoma of the cardia and a portion of the oesophagus 
between 3 and 4 cm. in length. The operation was exceedingly 
difficult on account of spreading of the growth towards the pan- 
creas and implication of the retroperitoneal lymphatic glands. 
The patient died of peritonitis. Mikulicz expresses the hope that 
not only carcinoma of the cardia, but even of the lower end of the 
oesophagus, may soon prove to be within the safe reach of a capa- 
ble surgeon. 



CHOICE OF OPEILA.TION IN CANCER OF STOMACH. 33 1 

Krehl has shewn that in dogs the two pneumogastrics may be 
completely destroyed at the lower end of the oesophagus without 
interfering in any degree with the processes of digestion. 

In all cases gastrostomy should be performed at the earliest 
moment after the diagnosis is assured. 
^ 



CHAPTER XVII. 

COMPLETE GASTRECTOMY. 

The following are the notes of a case in which I removed 
the whole stomach on account of its universal implication in 
a malignant growth. 

The patient, a married man, aged forty-three years, who had 
been under the care of Dr. Peter Macdonald of Acomb, was ad- 
mitted to the Leeds General Infirmary on May 24, 1907. He was 
the father of two healthy children and had always been healthy 
himself, the only illnesses which he could remember being 
influenza two or three times and an ischiorectal abscess some ten 
years previously to admission. He had always had as his occu- 
pation the management of horses and had been in his present situ- 
ation as coachman for five years. He said that all his relatives, 
so far as he could remember, had died from "old age. " He had 
been in good health up to two years ago when he gradually began 
"to go off his food. " By this he meant that he did not want his 
food quite as he had been accustomed to do. He could eat any- 
thing but was afraid of the pain which he knew would come on 
after taking anything. This pain, which was relieved by food 
for an hour or so, was situated in the epigastrium and continued 
until he vomited, when it at once subsided until an hour after his 
next meal. The kind of food taken made no difference to the 
pain experienced. The vomiting commenced as a profuse gush, 
and in the vomit he recognised food which he had taken at his 
last meal. There was never to his knowledge any haematemesis. 
After the first six months he was free for some weeks from pain 
and vomiting, but at this time he was under medical supervi- 
sion and was taking liquids chiefly ; he had his stomach washed 
out ever}' other day for two weeks and was away from work for 
eight weeks. The stomach contents at this time were analysed 
as there was a suspicion of cancer in the medical attendant's mind; 
but the analysis gave a normal result. After eight weeks he re- 
turned to work still taking fluids and feeling much better, but 



COMPLETE GASTRECTOMY. 



333 



every now and again he had attacks of vomiting and pain; he 
noticed that he began to feel the pain at shorter intervals after 
his food was taken, but he was still relieved by vomiting. All 
this time he was steadily losing weight, which had fallen from 1 1 
stones 4 pounds to less than 9 stones. He had also noticed that 
the amount of fluid taken at any one period was much less than 
formerly, until last Christmas, when the amount was so dimin- 
ished that he was only able to take three or four mouthfuls at a 
time before he experienced a feeling of discomfort and vomited. 




Fio-. 122. — View of the stomach from the outside. 



From that time to the time of his admission this diminution in 
amount continued. 

On admission the patient was in fairly good condition, but 
he looked as though he had been a stouter man at some time, 
his skin was somewhat loose, his muscles were flabby, and his 
cheeks were a little hollowed. His weight was 8 stones 2 pounds. 
When he was given some fluid to drink he merely sipped it a 
mouthful at a time and had to wait a few seconds (about ten sec- 
onds) before the fluid ' ' settled ' ' — he gulped and strained his neck 
forward as though trying to get the liquid to pass an obstruction. 
After a few seconds he would appear comfortable and ready for 



334 



ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 



another mouthful. He still vomited occasionally — the vomit 
was not fermented or sour. He could not take any solid food at 
all with the exception of cheese, a few "nibbles" of which he en- 
joyed. He never had any desire for food; in all about from 30 
to 40 ounces of fluid were taken daily. 

Abdominal examination. — The abdomen looked thin and 
excavated ; its anterior surface receded sharply from the raised 
costal margin. Palpation revealed nothing abnormal; the walls 
were rigid and nothing unusual could be felt through them. Two 




Fig. 123. — The stomach laid open. 



very small doses of tartaric acid and bicarbonate of sodium were 
given separately. Instantly some foam gushed out of the mouth. 
On examining the abdomen a puffy swelling of about the size of a 
billiard ball was seen and felt in the left upper half of the epigas- 
trium immediately below the costal margin. No other part of 
the stomach was distended, and the inflated portion was every- 
where quite definitely circumscribed. The conclusion reached 
from this examination was that there was possibly an hour-glass 
stomach with a very small cardiac complement, and that this 



COMPLETE GASTRECTOMY. 



335 



was due to the cicatricial contraction of an ulcer on the lesser 
curvature close to the cardia. A stomach-tube was then passed. 
It went 17 inches quite readily, but not further than that. Only a 
small quantity of fluid could be introduced. A little over four 
ounces was the most that could be retained ; when this had flowed 
into the stomach the patient began to complain of pain, great 
tightness and oppression, and was obviously greatly distressed. 
The fluid soon returned clear ; on one occasion a little blood was 
seen. Bile was frequently seen in the washings. At one exam- 
ination it was found that when a measured quantity of fluid was 




Fig. 124. — Skiagram of the stomach filled with bismuth. X and X are placed 
opposite the cardiac and pyloric constrictions. 



used for the washing only two-thirds of it was returned through 
the tube. On two subsequent occasions the stomach was inflated ; 
on one the swelling at the cardiac end was again well seen; on 
another it could not be demonstrated. The following was the 
result of an examination of a test-meal. Macroscopic : Food 
badly digested; blood. Chemical: Blood; no free hydrochloric 
acid ; no lactic acid. Microscopic : Yeast present ; sarcinse pres- 
ent ; bacillus geniculatus present and other organisms numerous ; 
pus abundant. 

The diagnosis was made of hour-glass stomach with a ver>^ 
small cardiac complement. Owing to the impossibility of in- 



336 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



flating the distal or pyloric part of the stomach, reference was 
made, when the case was demonstrated to the ward-class, to the 




Fijr. 125. — The stomach freed from both omenta and attached only by the 

oesophagus. 



possibihty of its being an example of "leather-bottle " stomach, the 
"linitis plastica" of Brinton. 



COMPLETE GASTRECTOMY, 



337 



Operation was advised and was performed on May 31st in 
the following manner: The abdomen was opened in the middle 




Fig. 126. — A loop of the jejunum has been pulled upwards through an open- 
ing in the transverse mesocolon and a layer of sutures unites it to the oesophagus. 
The stomach is used as a tractor. 

line by an incision which at first was about three inches in length, 
sufficient to allow of exploration, but which was increased subse- 

VOL. I — 22 



338 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

quently to a length of eight inches. At the outset there was a 
ver}^ serious difficulty in exposing the stomach. The patient was 
a man who had been stout but who had lost weight rapidly ; the 
anterior abdominal wall therefore shelved downwards from the 
elevated costal margin in such manner as to make the upper part 
of the stomach appear to be at great depth from the surface. 
The patient, moreover, was not at all comfortable under the 
anaesthetic and I had to w^ait a long time after opening the ab- 
domen before I could proceed with the operation. 

When the stomach was exposed it was seen to be small in 
size with walls of great thickness and sohdity. The whole organ, 
indeed, felt solid, resembling a very large uterus, having thick 
walls and an insignificant cavity within it. (This is well shewn 
in the skiagraph subsequently taken.) The surface was smooth, 
white, and opaque ; there were no adhesions and but few obviously 
enlarged glands along the curvatures. Towards the cardiac end 
the stomach was larger than elsewhere, so that the organ had 
something of the shape of a Florence flask ; the larger part, how- 
ever, was still very much smaller than the normal. This being 
the condition of the stomach it was at once evident that the per- 
formance of gastro-enterostomy was impossible, for there was no 
sufficient cavit}^ in the stomach to admit of any anastomosis 
being made. The alternative procedures were complete gas- 
trectomy^ and either jejimostom}^ or duodenostomy ; after some 
dehberation I decided in favour of the former and I proceeded at 
once to remove the whole stomach. It was at this point that the 
abdominal incision was enlarged. Hot moist swabs in two lay- 
ers were then packed into the abdomen in the usual manner to 
isolate the field of operation. The stomach was now depressed 
as far as possible b}^ forcible traction by an assistant, and two 
long cHps were applied to the coronary artery at its origin from 
the coeliac axis. The artery was divided between the clips and 
its proximal end was ligatured. The upper and lower coronary 
groups of glands were detached downwards towards the stomach 
by gauze stripping and the cardiac end of the stomach was de- 
nuded by the same means. The gastrohepatic omentum was 
divided after ligature as close up to the liver as possible until the 
upper border of the pylorus was reached. Here, by gauze strip- 
ping, the pyloric artery and the gastroduodenal artery were ex- 
posed as they separately arose from the main hepatic trunk. 



COMPLETE GASTRECTOMY. 



339 



The pyloric artery was ligatured and divided and the finger 
was then passed downwards behind the pylorus and made to pre- 





Fig. 127. — Lines of incision into oesophagus and jejunum. 

sent at the lower border of the duodenum, where an opening was 
made in the great omentum. Through this opening the blade of a 
clamp was passed upwards behind the duodenum to present above 



340 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

the pylorus. When this clamp was closed it lay about one inch 
be^^ond the pylorus and on the stomach side of it there lay the 
subpyloric group of glands. A second clamp with rubber-covered 
blades was now applied distal to it and the duodenum was cut 
between them. A single strong catgut suture was then passed 
through the proximal part of the duodenum and round the clamp 
to prevent the clamp from slipping away. The distal end of the 
duodenum was then closed b}' a continuous catgut suture, taking 
all the coats, and by a double la^^er of Pagenstecher thread suture 
above this. The clamp holding the proximal part of the duo- 
denum was now covered with a gauze swab and was lifted well to- 
wards the left, exposing the gastroduodenal artery more con- 
spicuously. The artery was ligatured and divided. Along the 
whole length of the greater curvature the gastrohepatic omen- 
tum was divided at a distance from the stomach of from i to 2 
inches, so that all glands, including one or two dropped glands, 
were left attached to the stomach. The whole stomach was now 
free, for the gastrohepatic omentum had been entirely divided, 
the duodenum was severed, and the gastrocolic omentum lig- 
atured and cut free. The whole stomach hung pendulous from 
the oesophagus. At this point the anesthetist was asked to flex 
the patient's neck as much as possible, in the hope that this 
might enable the oesophagus to be pulled downwards a little more 
readily, and it seemed that this hope was fulfilled. The oesopha- 
gus was dragged upon with a fair degree of force until at least 
three-quarters of an inch of it was visible below the diaphragm. 
The next step, and the most important and difficult of all, 
was the anastomosis of the oesophagus to the jejunum. The 
transverse mesocolon was already exposed on its upper surface 
in the wound ; it was divided in an avascular area and the upper 
loop of the jejunum pulled through it. A point on this about 
eight inches from the duodenal- jejunal flexure was selected for 
the anastomosis. A piece of it about two and a half inches in 
length was laid transversely along a line immediately behind the 
oesophagus. As it lay there transversely, the right leaf posterior, 
its upper end was to the left, its lower to the right. The anas- 
tomosis was now begun by introducing eight light interrupted 
sutures between this portion of the jejunum and the oesophagus. 
The part of the circumference of the jejunum used was. that on 
the surface which was now posterior and on this surface about 



COMPLETE GASTRECTOMY. 



341 



three-quarters of an inch from the mesenteric attachment. As 
the sutures were introduced into the oesophagus this was made 
to present and was well exposed by a forcible and continuous 
downward traction upon the stomach. The stomach, wrapped 
in a hot gauze swab, was used, and most efficiently used, as a re- 
tractor, or rather as an instrument of traction, upon the shghtly 
dilated oesophagus. The help derived from this manoeuvre was 
far greater than could be believed from a mere description. It 
converted what would have been an excessively difficult feat into 




Fio-. 128. — Suture of margins of openings in oesophagus and jejunum. 



one of comparatively easy accomplishment. Eight interrupted 
sutures then were introduced until the whole of the posterior 
half of the oesophagus was securely attached to the jejunum. In 
front of these a continuous suture was now introduced, exactly 
as in the operation of gastro-enterostomy from left to right ; the 
needle carrying this suture was then laid aside to be presently 
resumed. The attachment of the oesophagus to the jejunum 
seemed now quite secure on this posterior aspect. In front of 
this continuous suture a small opening was made into the oesopha- 
gus and into the jejunum at the extreme left end of this attach- 



342 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



ment. A continuous through-and- through Pagenstecher thread 
suture was now began and a few turns of the needle taken until 
the whole length of the small openings made had been united. 
These openings were then enlarged little by little from left to 
right, and as they were enlarged their cut edges were sutured by 
the same continuous stitch. This sequence of a small incision, a 
few stitches, slight enlargement of the incision, a few more 
stitches, was continued until the whole of the posterior part of 
the oesophagus was divided and sutured to the incision in the 
jejunum. Around the anterior wall of the oesophagus the same 




Fig. 1 29. — Suturing almost complete. The stomach still used as tractor. 

sequence was continued, the stitch being now changed to the 
"loop on the mucosa" form. The result was that the stomach 
was retained as a tractor, drawing down the oesophagus until the 
last piece was severed, and at that moment the line of anastomosis 
was almost complete. Finally the outer continuous suture pre- 
viously laid aside was resumed and continued round the anterior 
surface of the oesophagus and jejunum to its starting point where 
it was tied and cut short. The suture line was now complete. 
There were, it will be seen, eight interrupted posterior sutures, 
intended as anchor sutures, and the two continuous sutures, as 
in the usual operation of gastro-enterostomy. A few anterior 



COMPLETE GASTRECTOMY. 343 

anchor sutures fixing the jejunum and the oesophagus to the dia- 
phragm were now taken and the main part of the operation was 
now complete. The great omentum was turned upwards over 
the operation area and the abdomen closed. 

The patient had borne the operation well. There had been 
no soiling of the operation field nor any exposure of viscera. As 
soon as the patient was put back to bed the continuous adminis- 
tration of saline fluid by the rectum was commenced. In the 
first twenty-four hours nine pints were taken; in the second 
twenty-four hours, six pints. After this it was discontinued. 
The help given by the absorption of 1 5 pints of normal saline solu- 
tion within forty-eight hours is probably difficult to exaggerate. 
During this time, contrary to my usual practice, I gave no fluid 
by the mouth, but the patient was allowed to flush his mouth 
as often as he wished. He never complained of thirst and did 
not suffer any great amount of pain. He was kept lying flat on 
his back, with the head propped well forward. The administra- 
tion of fluids by the mouth was begun very cautiously on the third 
day. Two teaspoonfuls of water were given every half-hour; 
on the fourth day this quantity was increased to two ounces every 
half hour. On the fifth day five ounces were given hourly; 
water and peptonised milk and albumin water were given in suc- 
cession. On the sixth day two pints of these fluids were taken 
while the day nurse was on duty and one pint six ounces during 
the night. These quantities of the same fluids were slowly in- 
creased until on the tenth day five pints were taken in the twenty- 
four hours. On the eleventh day beef-tea and Benger's food were 
given, on the fourteenth day milk pudding, and on the eighteenth 
day bread and butter. During the third week the patient told 
us every day that he was hungry, a sensation which he had not 
experienced so keenly for two years. At the end of the third 
week he began to take meals of fair quantity consisting of minced 
chicken, milk puddings, etc. He was kept in bed for eighteen 
days, and on the twenty-second day was sent to a convalescent 
hospital. On leaving the hospital his weight was 8 stones 12 
pounds, a gain of 10 pounds. On August 21st he weighed 10 
stones and was able to eat all foods. 

This is the second occasion upon which I have been called* 
upon to perform complete gastrectomy. The circumstances 

* "Brit. Med. Jour.," 1903, vol. ii., p. 149S. 



344 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

present in the two cases were similar; the stomach was small, 
with thickened w^alls and a cavity greatly reduced in size ; it was 
invaded in every part by cancer, the glands were only slightly 
affected, there were few adhesions, no invasion of the parts 
around by the growth, and no secondary deposits. It has been 
computed by Fenwick* that 14 per cent, of all patients dying 
from carcinoma of the stomach shew no extension of the disease 
bcA^ond the stomach. The type of cancer in both these patients 
was atrophic and the malignancy was probably of a low grade. 
It would seem that conditions of the kind enumerated are essen- 
tial to the successful carrying out of the operation of complete 
gastrectomy. In my first case, which proved fatal, I adopted a 
technique w^hich I thought satisfactory. After the operation I 
gave much thought to the details of the operation and endeavoured 
to construct a method which I should carry out if the opportunity 
again came to me. I had determined to make use of the stomach- 
tube passed through the oesophagus into the jejunum as a sort 
of cylinder upon which to suture, and I considered that the fixa- 
tion (by a catgut suture) of the tube to the cut end of both 
oesophagus and jejunum (the suture being, of course, buried by 
the continuous sutures along the line of anastomosis) would help 
to make the feeding of the patient during the time of healing of 
the wound a simple and a safe matter. But when I came to per- 
form this second operation I realised as I saw the stomach pen- 
dulous from the oesophagus that it might be used with the very 
greatest advantage to hold the oesophagus in a fixed position 
until my suture lines were practically complete. I feel sure that 
this point is one which has solved the greatest of all difficulties 
in the operation of complete gastrectomy, and it embodies, 
moreover, a technical principle which is applicable to other op- 
erations than this. 

Pathological Report by Dr. Craven Moore. — The specimen in- 
cludes the whole stomach and about a quarter of an inch each of 
the oesophagus and duodenum. The stomach is greatly dim- 
inished in size, its length being four and a quarter inches, and its 
maximum diameter in the region of the fundus two and a half 
inches. In form it is tubular, gradually contracting towards the 
pylorus, and about the middle third it presents several deep trans- 
verse folds which it is impossible to obliterate by tension ; in con- 

* "Cancer of Stomach," p. 54. 



COMPLETE GASTRECTOMY. 



345 



sistency it is firm and elastic. Attached to the stomach are 
portions of the gastro-hepatic and the gastro-cohc omenta, and 
in the former are several lymphatic glands which are firm and of 
normal size; the omenta themselves appear quite normal. The 
serous coat of the stomach over the fundus and middle third of 
the organ appears somewhat thickened and more opaque, and 
here and there presents small white nodules about a pin's headin 



Cut end of duodenum closed 



Oesophagus 



Anastomosis 
with jejunum 




Fig. 130. — Post-mortem appearances three years and nine months later. 



size. The wall of the stomach is greatly thickened and indurated, 
the thickening being greater in the proximal two-thirds of the 
organ, where it measures half an inch, than in the pyloric portion, 
where it measures a quarter of an inch. The cut surface of the 
wall shews a mucous layer rather thinner than normal lying on a 
much thickened, greyish-white, dense submucous coat, a well- 
developed muscular coat in which the individual fasciculi are 
rendered more than usually evident in many places by an in- 



346 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

crease in the intermuscular connective tissue, and a subserous 
and a serous coat which also appear to be slightly thickened. 

It is very obvious that the great thickness of the stomach 
wall is the result chiefly of the increased extent of the submucous 
coat. The cavity of the organ, greatly diminished in extent, is 
divided into two distinct loculi by a zone of contraction situated 
in the middle region of the stomach, where the cavity is reduced 
to a narrow passage a quarter of an inch in diameter; this zone 
of contraction corresponds to the deep folds marking the external 
surface of the organ. The cardiac loculus corresponding to the 
fundus has a diameter of one and a quarter inches ; it is rounded 
in form and its mucous lining has a mammillated appearance. 
The pyloric loculus, of more tubular form, is divisible into two 
portions by the character of its mucosa: in the proximal portion, 
corresponding to the middle third of the stomach, the mucous lin- 
ing is smooth and thinner than normal; in the distal portion, 
which apparently corresponds to the pyloric antrum, the mucous 
lining is of normal thickness and is thrown into a series of irregular 
folds ; it is in this portion of the organ that the submucous coat 
shews the least change. The two orifices of the stomach shew 
no indications of contraction and the stomach wall is here of 
normal thickness. 

Microscopical Examination. — Sections of the wall of the card- 
iac loculus shew a thin mucous layer in which only the deeper 
parts of the tubules are present, and these present extensive and 
irregular proliferation of their cells, strands of which can be 
traced down into the underlying submucosa ; between these pro- 
liferous elements, and in which they appear to be embedded, there 
is granulation tissue. The submucous coat consists of a dense 
white fibrous tissue in which the fasciculi of fibrils are well de- 
fined, run more or less parallel, have a wavy oblique course, and 
resemble very closely the fibrous elements seen in dense fibromata 
and in the atrophic variety of scirrhous carcinomata. Towards 
the mucous layer this coat is sharply defined; on the other side 
it penetrates the muscular coat by a series of strands running 
between the muscular bundles. This dense fibrous tissue shews 
a great paucity in cells, but in its innermost layers it shews here 
and there small collections and strands of epithelial cells, man^^ 
of which can be seen to be directly continuous with similar cells 
in the mucosa; and in the remainder of its extent, even where it 



COMPLETE GASTRECTOMY. 347 

penetrates between the bundles of the muscular coat, there are 
to be seen isolated strands and small islands of similar cells be- 
tween the white fibres, the latter in particular being commonly 
adjacent to some blood-vessel and accompanied by a number of 
leukocytes. The blood-vessels are few in number and shew some 
thickening of their external coats but no obvious change in their 
middle or internal coats. The muscular coat does not appear to 
be increased in thickness; the muscular bundles are separated 
by strands of dense fibrous tissue penetrating it from the sub- 
mucosa, which become more and more attenuated in the outer 
layers and so disappear ; the muscle cells here and there shew in- 
dications of hyaline transformation but otherwise are normal. 
The subserous coat is slightly thickened and very occasionally 
one sees a few epithelial-like cells. The serosa appeared normal. 
Sections taken from the zone of contraction present similar 
changes, the mucosa is even thinner, and the folding of the stom- 
ach wall is seen to be due to contraction of the fibrous submucosa. 
Sections from the pyloric portion present appearances very little 
removed from those of the normal organ. Sections of the lym- 
phatic glands from the gastro-hepatic omentum .shew here and 
there small collections of cells, very similar to those described in 
the submucous coat, situated in the trabeculae and in the peri- 
vascular lymphatics. 

Attempting to interpret these appearances there can be no 
doubt that we have to do with an extensive fibrous hyperplasia 
commencing in, and chiefly limited to, the submucous coat and 
involving that coat almost exclusively in its proximal two-thirds, 
a condition which so far corresponds with Brinton's conception 
of plastic linitis. The presence of the scanty proliferous epithelial 
elements in the remains of the mucosa and in the midst of the 
new formed fibrous tissue of the submucosa demonstrates that 
the lesion is not merely an infiammatory one in this case but that 
it is essentially a neoplastic change of a particular type which has 
its analogue in the so-called atrophic scirrhus met with in the 
mammary gland. 

The patient made a good recovery from the operation. He 
was shewn at a meeting of the Section of Surgery of the Royal 
Society of Medicine on December 19, 1907; and in July, 1910, 
he was seen and examined by the members of the American So- 
ciety of Clinical Surgery who were than in Leeds. He died on 



348 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

January 31, 1911. During the three years and eight months 
that he Hved after the operation he was under the constant ob- 
servation and the occasional care of Dr. Geoffrey Thompson, of 
Scarborough, who has kindly given me very full details of his 
progress. 

The patient was perfectly well up to the early part of the 
year 1910, when he began to shew the evidences of a profound 
anaemia. He was strikingly pale and breathless, and he lost 
weight. Under treatment, however, he improved, and in May, 
1910, his colour had returned and he was able to ride and drive 
and attend to matters on the farm. In August, 1910, he began 
to fail again ; he became easily tired, though he still tried to carry 
out the greater part of his work. His appetite remained good 
and he had no indigestion. In October the signs of anaemia re- 
appeared, he grew much weaker, and had to cease work. He be- 
gan again to lose weight, his appetite vanished, and he occasion- 
ally vomited. There were no abnormal physical signs of any 
kind in the chest or abdomen throughout the illness. Soon after 
Christmas, 1910, he had to take to his bed, and he died on the 
last day of January, 191 1. 

I saw the man myself on many occasions. He expressed him- 
self as feeling well and vigorous, and he had gained 2 stones 10 
pounds after the operation, and he held the gain for nearly three 
years. His appetite was good, he experienced the sensation of 
hunger, and he was able to eat the ordinary foods ; but he had to 
take a rather longer time over a meal than in the days preceding 
his original illness. 

The post-mortem examination for which Dr. Geoffrey Thomp- 
son had arranged was made on February i, 191 1, by Dr. M. 
J. Stewart, and his report is as follows: "The body is that of a 
somewhat emaciated man. All the tissues and organs exhibit 
an extreme degree of anaemia and the blood within the heart and 
great vessels is very watery in appearance. On opening the ab- 
domen, the peritoneum is found to be free from disease, although 
there are some old fibrous adhesions between the first part of the 
jejunum and the operation cicatrix in the anterior abdominal 
wall, as also between the liver and the diaphragm. The cardiac 
end of the oesophagus is anastomosed to a loop of jejunum, which, 
for this purpose, has been brought through the transverse meso- 
colon. The proximal portion of jejunum and the duodenum, which 



COMPLETE GASTRECTOMY. 349 

ends in a cul-de-sac underneath the liver, appear to retain pretty 
much their normal dimensions, but at the seat of anastomosis 
and for a short distance beyond it, the jejunum appears to be 
slightly dilated. The whole intestinal tract, however, exhibits 
a marked degree of gaseous distension, and in the large intestine 
there are very numerous scybalous masses of considerable size. 
The liver is pale and somewhat fatty; the gall-bladder normal. 
The spleen contains a large and very old infarct, which occupies 
nearly the middle third of the organ. The kidneys are extremely 
pale and anaemic, while the capsules strip readily. The supra- 
rena's are normal. There is no evidence of malignant disease in 
any part of the abdomen. A few of the retro-peritoneal glands 
are enlarged, but on microscopical examination they are found 
to be quite simple. The heart muscle is very pale and flabby. 
The valves are normal. The aorta and coronary arteries are 
quite healthy. There are numerous old adhesions on both sides 
of the chest. The lungs are extremely oedematous ; they contain 
only a minimum of carbonaceous pigment. Microscopically the 
kidneys shew well-marked though early fibrosis, involving both 
the interstitial tissue and the glomeruli. The chief points of in- 
terest are: (i) Complete absence of any recurrence or dissemina- 
tion; (2) the very profound anaemia; and (3) absence of any 
striking jejunal dilatation at or near the site of anastomosis." 

The photograph of the specimen brought to Leeds was taken 
in my laboratory. It shews well the anastomosis between the 
oesophagus and the jejunum, the slight dilatation of the jejunum, 
the blind rounded end of the duodenum, and the absence of any 
secondary growths. 



CHAPTER XVII. 
GASTROSTOMY. 

The operation of gastrostomy consists in the making of an 
opening directly into the stomach, in cases of obstruction of the 
oesophagus or cardiac end of the stomach, for the purpose of 
introducing food directly into the interior of this organ. In the 
earlier cases it was found that the new orifice was not only an 
inlet, but also an outlet; that it permitted the free escape of 
food and gastric juice, and that, as a result of this, the skin 
around the opening became reddened and digested. The 
condition of the patients was often one of the most intense 
misery. The skin for four or five inches around the new orifice 
was intensely red, raw, and excoriated ; it was excessively tender 
and sensitive, and the escape on to it of the acid gastric juice gave 
rise to the most intolerable smarting and burning pain. Meas- 
ures were, therefore, devised for the purpose of making a val- 
vular opening — an opening, that is, that would permit the in- 
troduction of fluids into the stomach, while it prevented the 
escape of gastric juice or digesting food. 

A large number of operations have been described, and prac- 
tised with success, and the surgeon now has the choice of several 
methods, any one of which will serve his purpose fully. 

In the great majority of instances the cause which determines 
the necessity for the operation of gastrostomy is malignant 
disease of the oesophagus. Simple or syphilitic stricture of the 
pharynx or oesophagus or malignant disease of the cardiac end of 
the stomach may also call for the performance of this operation. 
In cases of malignant disease of the oesophagus it is important 
that the most suitable time should be selected for the performance 
of the operation. It was formerly almost always the case that 
the surgeon was asked to operate when the patient was in the 

35° 



GASTROSTOMY. 35 1 

last extremity of his illness, when he was unable to take any 
food, or, at the most, only a few ounces daily, and when his con- 
dition was so bad that the danger of the operation — in itself a 
perfectly simple matter — had become considerable. If a patient 
is first seen when in this deplorable state, it is most desirable that 
all means should be taken to improve his condition before the 
operation is undertaken. It will sometimes be found possible, 
though often perhaps difficult, to pass a small silk catheter 
through the stricture into the stomach. If this can be done, the 
catheter should be left in, its outer end being secured by a tape 
and strapping to the ear, the forehead, or the neck. Through 
the catheter several pints of nourishing fluids can be poured daily, 
to the evident improvement of the patient's condition. During 
a week, several pounds in weight may be gained and the fitness of 
the patient to bear the operation be greatly strengthened. In 
one patient who was almost starved to death I was able to keep a 
tube in for six weeks ; during this time she gained 2 1 pounds in 
weight. Had I performed gastrostomy at first, the result would 
almost certainly have been fatal; as it was, the operation was 
borne without the slightest shock. 

In all bad cases, therefore, feeding through an oesophageal 
catheter should be attempted before gastrostomy is performed. 

It is important not to delay too long in the advocacy of 
operation. It is equally important not to be precipitate. The 
operation, though of the greatest benefit to many patients, is 
nothing more than a forlorn and final measure of relief to prevent 
starvation; to many, it must be acknowledged, it has something 
revolting in its methods. When a patient can take enough fluid 
food by the mouth to keep himself alive and in fair condition he 
is not a suitable subject for gastrostomy. Early operation and 
late operation are both to be condemned. The proper time for 
operation is when the patient is ceasing to be able to take enough 
fluid nourishment to keep up his weight and strength, and it is, 
therefore, before he has lost of both so much that his power of 
resistance to surgical treatment is greatly reduced. 



352 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

The operation can be done quite easily in a few minutes 
under cocaine anaesthesia, but I prefer to give a general an- 
aesthetic if it can safely be administered. The usual prepara- 
tion of the skin is made. Owing to the great wasting of the 
patient, the abdominal wall shelves away steeply from the 
costal margin; the incision is made, therefore, through an 
abdominal wall which is more nearly vertical than horizontal. 

A great variety of incisions have been suggested. Some 
are vertical and pass through the rectus, or the rectus is bodily 
pulled aside; others are in varying degrees of obliquity. The 
valvular action of the stomach at the new opening is effected 
in several ways. In my opinion the operations which are the 
most satisfactory are the following: 

1. Senn's operation (E. J. Senn). 

2. Kader's operation. 

3. Witzel's operation. 

4. Frank's operation. 

I. Senn's Operation. — This is the operation which I have 
used for the last five years. It is, in my judgment, the best 
operation for these reasons: it is simple, speedily performed, 
effects a perfect valvular opening, and does not involve, as do 
some of the methods, a sacrifice of some part of a stomach 
already reduced in size for the purpose of forming a cone 
which is pulled through an incision in the abdominal wall to lie 
beneath the skin. 

The operation is performed in the following manner: 
A vertical incision is made over the left rectus muscle near 
its outer border, commencing a little below the level of the tip 
of the xiphoid cartilage and continuing downwards for about 
2 -2- inches. The fibres of the rectus muscle are separated, not 
divided, and the peritoneal cavity is opened. If the separation 
is done with the finger covered by gauze, no nerves will be divided. 
The stomach is then sought and is easily recognised. It is said 
that the transverse colon has been mistaken for the stomach 
and has been opened; one would think that such a mishap is 



GASTROSTOMY. 



353 



impossible, for there is not the smallest resemblance between 
the two viscera. The stomach is generally found at once, but, 
owing to the fact that it is often thin-walled and shrunken 
from long suppression of its normal activity, it may lie flaccid 
and empty at the back of the stomach chamber, with the trans- 
verse colon in front of it. When the colon is displaced down- 
wards, it comes at once into view. It is picked up, drawn for- 
wards to the parietal incision, and a portion of it, as far removed 





Fig. 131. — Gastrostomy (Senn's 
method). The stomach is opened 
and the tube fixed with a single 
stitch. 



Fig. 132. — Gastrostomy (Senn's 
method). The first purse-string 
suture. 



as possible from the pylorus, is selected for the operation. A 
point about midway between the lesser and the greater curva- 
ture is chosen for the site of the opening into the stomach. At 
this point a small incision is made with a scalpel of sufficient 
size to admit a No. 10 or 12 Jaques catheter or a piece of drain- 
age-tube of about the same diameter. The catheter or tube is 
passed into the stomach through this opening for a distance of 
two to three inches, and is then fixed by a single catgut stitch 
which passes through all the coats of the stomach, at the edge 

VOL. I — 23 



354 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



of the incision, and then picks up a portion of the tube. When 
this stitch is tightened, the tube is held fast and remains so held 
until the catgut is absorbed — or cuts through — in about ten days. 
The tube so fixed is now buried in an inverted cone formed 
from the walls of the stomach b}^ the insertion of three purse- 
string sutures. The first purse-string suture is applied in a 
circle whose centre is the tube, and whose radius is about half 
an inch. The suture picks up the stomach-wall at about six 
points. As it is tightened, the tube is depressed into the stomach 





Fig. 133. — Gastrostomy (Senn's 
method). The first purse-string 
suture tied. 



Fig. 134. — Gastrostomy (Senn's 
method). The second purse-string 

suture. 



by an assistant whose other hand holds the stomach steady, 
so that when tied, the suture closely embraces the tube. A 
second suture is now introduced at a distance of half an inch 
from the tube, picking up the stomach-wall at seven or eight 
points. As it is tightened and tied, the tube is again pushed 
inwards so that the suture again embraces the tube closeh^ A 
third, and, if necessary, a fourth, suture can be similarly intro- 
duced. The result is that a cone of the stomach is inverted into 
the cavity of the organ ; and in the centre of this cone there lies 



GASTROSTOMY. 



355 



the tube or catheter closely embraced by the outer wall of the 
stomach. The stitches are all 
tightened with sufficient firm- 
ness to embrace, though not to 
constrict, the tube. When the 
last stitch has been cut short, 
two sutures are passed above 
and below the tube in order to 
fix the stomach to the parietal 
peritoneum. These sutures in- 
clude the posterior sheath of the 
rectus and the parietal perito- 
neum on each side, and pick up 
a broad strip of the stomach 
about I inch distant from the 
tube. They serve to draw the 
stomach up to the parietal in- 
cision and to fix it there firmly. 
The incision is now closed by 
suture in the usual manner; a 
continuous catgut stitch picks up the parietal peritoneum and 




Fig. 135. — Gastrostomy (Senn's 
method). The purse-string sutures 
completed; fixation of the stomach 
to the anterior abdominal wall. 




Fig. 1 36. — Gastrostomy (Senn's method) . Shewing the invaginated cone and 
the line of the purse-string sutures. 

the posterior sheath of the rectus, and, returning, picks up the 



356 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

anterior sheath of rectus. Two stitches are used. — one above 
and one below the tube. The skin is then sutured with silk- 
worm gut. 

At the conclusion of the operation the patient is fed : about 
ten ounces of warm milk, with egg or brandy, are introduced 
through the tube into the stomach. At the outer end of the 
tube a second India-rubber tube is attached, a piece of glass 
tubing about one inch in length forming the medium of at- 
tachment. A glass funnel fits on the outer end of this second 

tube, and into it the food is 
^_^ ^_^ poured. 

This method ensures an abso- 
lutely secure valvular opening. 
I have never known leakage to 
occur from the opening. At the 
end of ten or twelve days, rarely 
earlier, the tube will be found to 
be loose. It can then be re- 
moved and a second tube be in- 
troduced. It is better to keep a 
! tube always in the opening, as, 

Fig. i37.-Gastrostomy(Senn's Otherwise, there may soon be 
method). Diagram of the position evidence of Contraction, and the 

around the tube of the purse- . ^ . » ^ 

string sutures. remtroduction of a tube may 

then be difficult. 

A dressing is kept on the wound for the first fortnight, and 
is secured by an abdominal bandage. Through the dressing 
the tube passes, and its outer end is attached to the bandage 
by a safety-pin. 

The condition of the patient may be so reduced that early 
and frequent feeding is necessary. The best food is warmed 
milk to which eggs or egg and brandy are added. Water should 
be given occasionally, and beef -tea or soups may afford a change. 
After a week or two of direct feeding the patient may find that 
he is again able to swallow thin fluids in small quantities. This 




GASTROSTOMY. 



357 



he should be encouraged to do, if no distress results, for the loss 
of the opportunity to taste food is often the most serious de- 
privation of which the patient complains. In some cases the 
patient may obtain satisfaction from masticating a little under- 
done beef, mutton, or some chicken or game, and feeding him- 
self through the funnel or tube with the finely chewed food. 
If the patient will not, or cannot, use his mouth and teeth, 
great care must be exercised to keep them thoroughly clean. 
The teeth should be brushed three or four times daily, and the 
mouth well jElushed with some fragrant mouth-wash. 





Fig. 138. — Kader's method of 
gastrostomy: tube fixed by a single 
stitch; a fold on each side is raised 
up by a Lembert suture. 



Fig. 139. — Kader's method of 
gastrostomy: first layer of sutures 
tied, second layer in position. 



2. Kader's operation consists in the vertical infolding of a 
portion of the stomach by interrupted sutures passed above 
and below a tube introduced through a small incision. The 
tube is first secured by a single catgut stitch, as in Senn's opera- 
tion. Two vertical parallel folds of the stomach are then raised 
up on each side of the tube by four or six sutures. When these 
sutures, which include only the serous and muscular coats, are 
tied and cut short, a further series are introduced which pick 



358 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



up the stomach- wall on each side of the original line of stitches. 
On tying this second row the first row of sutures is buried. A 
reference to Figs. 98 to 100 will make matters plain. The stom- 
ach is then fixed to the anterior abdominal wall, as in Senn's 
method. It will be seen that b}^ this operation exactl}'' the 
same kind of valve is produced as by Senn's procedure. The 
advantages of the latter over Kader's operation are that the 
operation is more speedy, that it is simpler, that fewer stitches 




^ 




Fig. 140. — Kader's method 
of gastrostomy: second layer 
tied; fixation sutures left long. 



Fig. 1 4 1 . — -Kader's method of gastrostomy 
the parts seen in section. 



are required, and that a cone, instead of a cube, is made to pro- 
ject into the cavity of the stomach. 

3. Witzel's Operation. — In this operation the stomach is 
brought into the wound, and opened by a small incision into 
which a tube is fastened by a single catgut stitch, as in the two 
operations just described. The tube when thus secured is laid 
against the anterior wall of the stomach and is buried in a sort 
of trough or gutter formed by raising up a fold on each side of 



GASTROSTOMY, 



359 



the tube. The summits of the folds are brought together o^^er 
the tube by interrupted sutures. One or two sutures are passed 
beyond the end of the tube, so as to be sure that the opening 
into the stomach is also walled off. About two inches of the 
tube are thus covered in and made to lie in a sort of canal in the 
stomach-wall. Witzel himself recommends that a second la^^er 
of sutures should be introduced, but this is quite unnecessar}". 




Fig. 142. — Gastrostomy (Witzel's method). 



Marwedel has modified Witzel's method by passing the tube be- 
tween the mucous and muscular coats for a couple of inches 
between the openings on the serous and mucous surfaces. There 
is no advantage in this. 

Witzel's method proves most satisfactory in practice. In- 
deed, von Mikulicz, in an experience of 150 cases, is so satisfied 
with the results of both Kader's and Witzel's methods that he 
considers that there is no excuse for the introduction of more 



36o 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



complicated methods. I have used both and have found both 
to be good, but for the reasons I have already given I consider 
that Senn's operation is better than either. 

4. Frank's Operation. — This operation has received a great 
amount of support from many operators. Though the results 
are good, thev are no better than those seen after any of the 




Fig. 143. — Gastrostomy (Frank's method, as moditied by Kocher). The whole 
of the rectus is pulled to the outer side. 



preceding operations (indeed, leakage has been occasionally ob- 
served), and they are obtained only after a more prolonged and 
more complex operation. 

An oblique incision, about 2^ inches in length, is made 
parallel to the costal margin and about one inch from it, near 
the outer border of the rectus. The abdomen is opened, and 



GASTROSTOMY. 



361 



a cone of the stomach close to the cardiac end is then stitched, 
by four interrupted sutures or by a continuous suture, to the 
parietal peritoneum at the edge of the incision. A second in- 
cision is now made over the costal margin, about | inch in 
length, at a distance of about one inch from the first incision. 
Between the two incisions the skin is undermined until the finger 





Fig. 144. — Gastrostomy (Frank's method). The operation completed. 



can be passed through the one opening, beneath a bridge of 
skin, and out of the other. Beneath this bridge of skin the 
cone of the stomach is passed until its apex projects like a 
nipple from the second opening. Here it is stitched or is held 
by a pair of hare-lip pins, which transfix it. The original 
woimd is now completely closed by suture. The tip of the 
stomach cone may now be opened, and a catheter passed into 



362 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

the stomach, or the opening may be deferred for twenty-four 
hours or more. 

As von jMikuhcz and others have shewn, the original obhquity 
of the passage does not long persist; the tube, after a time, 
passes directly backw'ards into the stomach. To prevent this, 
as far as possible, the second opening must be made well over 
the costal margin, whence it cannot be dragged down to lie in 
front of the posterior opening. 

This operation cannot be easily performed when the stomach 
is very much shrunken from long-continued emptiness. It is, 
moreover, under any circumstances, wasteful in the amount of the 
stomach which is used up by the formation of the cone. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 
JEJUNOSTOMY. 

Jejunostomy is an operation that can be but rarely called 
for. It is suitable only for those patients suffering from ad- 
vanced malignant disease of the stomach in whom, owing to the 
position, extent, or character of the growth, gastro-enterostomy 
or gastrostomy is deemed imprudent or impossible. 

Indications for Operation. — (i) Extensive infiltration of the 
stomach with carcinoma, when there is little or no healthy 
stomach-wall that can be utilised for the purpose of gastrostomy. 

(2) General cicatricial contraction of the stomach, simple 
in character, dependent upon the swallowing of caustic fluids. 

(3) Neumann has suggested that in cases of pronounced 
hyperchlorhydria jejunostomy should be performed in pref- 
erence to gastro-enterostomy. He points out that the intensely 
acid secretion of the stomach, passing into the jejunum through 
the new opening, may produce ulceration, which will rapidly 
destroy the intestinal wall and lead to perforation — that is to 
say, a peptic ulcer of the jejunum results, in a manner precisely 
similar to that occurring when a peptic ulcer of the first portion 
of the duodenum develops. Peptic ulcer of the jejunum is 
recorded by Braun, Halm, Kausch, Korte, Steinthal, Hadra 
and Neumann, and others. In many cases the ulcer has caused 
death by perforation, and in all there was a great excess of free 
hydrochloric acid. 

(4) Cackovie and others have suggested that in cases of 
persistent hsematemesis rest might be afforded to the stomach 
by an artificial mouth in the jejunum. This plan received the 
sanction and approval of Professor Mikulicz. It is also suitable 
in certain cases of chronic gastric ulcer where, owing to massive 
inflammatory adhesions between the stomach and the pancreas, 

363 



364 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



the ideal procedure — excision — cannot be performed. In these 
cases gastro-enterostomy, either the anterior operation with a 
lateral antero-anastomosis or the modified Roux operation in 
Y, is the routine. In many cases these large chronic ulcers, sur- 




Fig. 145. — Jejunostomy (Maydl's method). 



rounded by a mass of inflammatory tissue, do not heal after an 
anastomosis. In such cases jejunostomy combined with the 
modified Roux operation affords complete physiological rest for 
the stomach, and promotes the healing of the ulcer. 



JEJUNOSTOMY. 



36 = 



Several methods for the easy performance of the operation 
have been suggested. Only three are of value. The first was 
suggested by Maydl; the second is the modification of Witzel's 
operation, which I was the first to suggest ; the third is Ma3^o Rob- 
son's method. 

Maydl's Operation. — In this operation the abdomen is opened 
by a small incision through the left rectus muscle, and the upper 
end of the jejunum is sought. The bowel is cut completely 




Fig. 146. — -Jejunostomy (adaptation of Witzel's method as used by the author). 

across, and the proximal cut end is implanted into the side of the 
distal, a few inches from its divided end. The distal open end 
is then stitched to the abdominal wall. The figure (Fig. 145) 
will explain the exact condition of things. The similarity of this 
method to that adopted in Roux's operation of gastro-enteros- 
tomy in Y is at once apparent. 

Second Method. — The following is the description of the 
method I carried out in my first case ("Brit. Med. Jour.," June, 
1902) : 



366 ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 

The abdomen was opened a little to the left of and above 
the umbilicus, through the rectus muscle, whose fibres were 
split. The duodenojejunal junction was sought, the jejunum 
traced downwards for six or eight inches, and a loop drawn 
out of the abdomen. On the side of this loop farthest from the 
mesentery a small longitudinal incision was made, opening the 
bowel, and a piece of drainage-tube about the size of a No. 
12 catheter was introduced, and fixed by a single catgut stitch, 
which included the cut edge of the bowel and the side of the 
tube. The tube was then laid along the bowel upwards to- 
wards the duodenojejunal flexure. A continuous stitch was 
now passed from side to side of the groove made by the tube, 
so that the tube, when the stitch was tightened, was buried by 
the overlapping of the edges of the groove. The stitch was 
begun about f inch below the opening in the jejunum, so that 
any leakage there might be effectually prevented. About two 
inches of the tube were covered by the stitch, which was then 
tied and cut short. The line of suture in the bowel was then 
made fast to the anterior abdominal wall by a stitch at each 
extremity, and the abdominal incision was tightly closed around 
the tube, which projected for about ten inches. 

When the patient is fed through such a tube, a funnel is 
fixed on to the end, and food poured in slowly. At the first only 
six ounces are introduced, but after the first few days up to a 
pint may be given in the space of ten minutes. 

The opening in the jejunum is made, therefore, at approxi- 
mately the point where Schlatter made the oesophago-intestinal 
anastomosis in his case of complete gastrectomy. It is clear 
from this case that enough food can be taken by the jejunum 
to enable weight to be gained and the general well-being of the 
patient to improve. If a jejunostomy were performed for any 
non-malignant condition of the stomach, the probability would 
be that, as in Schlatter's case, a decided increase in the capacity 
of the jejunum would he demonstrable, aftording a reservoir for 
the food. 



JEJUXOSTOMY. 



367 



Mayo Robson's Method. — Mayo Robson has described (Trans. 
Rov. Med. Chir. Soc, 1905) a method of jejunostomy which de- 
pends upon the exclusion of a loop of intestine which is brought 
to the surface for the introduction of a tube. He writes: 

" The operation I have performed, which I believe is new, con- 
sists in taking a loop of the beginning of the jejunum just suf- 




Fig. 147. — Jejunostomy (Mayo Robson's method). 

ficiently long to reach the surface without tension. The two 
arms of the loop are short-circuited about three or four inches 
from the surface, the short-circuiting being done either by means 
of sutures around a decalcified bone bobbin or by sutures alone. 
Personally I prefer the fonner. 

"A small incision is then made into the top of the loop just 



368 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

large enough to admit a No. 12 Jaques catheter, which is inserted 
and passed for three inches down the distal arm of the loop. This 
is fixed to the margin of the incision in the gut by a silk or a Pagen- 
stecher suture, and the entrance of the tube into the bowel is 
further guarded by two purse-string sutures, one over the other. 
The top of the loop is fixed to the skin by one or two stitches and 
the wound closed. The patient can then be fed at once with some 
peptonised milk and brandy. The whole operation can be done 
in from fifteen to twenty minutes and with very little viscera 
exposure. , 

" Should the patient be too ill to bear the little extra time oc- 
cupied by the short-circuiting, the tube may be inserted as directed 
and surrounded by two or three purse-string sutures, a proceeding 
which can be accomplished in a few minutes. In this case the 
loop of bowel must not be brought to the skin, but had better be 
fixed by sutures to the peritoneal margin and the aponeurosis, in 
order to leave part of the lumen of the attached loop within the 
abdomen for the direct passage outwards of the intestinal fluid 
with the bile and pancreatic secretion." 

The same variety of food may be given in jejunostomy as in 
gastrostomy; the staple article of diet should be peptonized 
milk. In some cases a duodenostomy may be preferred to gas- 
trostomy. Hartmann has recently reported an example of 
duodenostomy for a cicatricial narrowing of the stomach follow- 
ing upon the swallowing of a caustic fluid. A duodenal mouth 
may be considered as more efficient than one opening into the 
jejunum, in that the food is introduced into the bowel at a 
point higher than the orifice of the ampulla of Vater. For the 
performance of this operation the second method above described 
is the most satisfactory. 



CHAPTER XIX. 
GUNSHOT WOUNDS OF THE STOMACH. 

Gunshot wounds of the stomach vary greatly in character 
and in treatment, according to the nature of the weapon which 
produces them. In the South African War the rifles used by 
both the combatants delivered a bullet of small size, travelling 
with an extremely high velocity. The result was that there 
was a cleavage rather than an actual destruction of the tissues, 
and in those cases where a bullet traversed the abdominal 
cavity it was found that when the stomach or intestines were 
wounded, there was no leakage of the visceral contents, and that 
healing generally occurred without complication, especially in 
the case of a fasting man. It would appear that peristalsis comes 
to an end the instant the patient is struck, and the omentum, 
or a neighbouring coil of intestine, closes the minute line of cleav- 
age, thus preventing fsecal extravasation. 

The lessons of this war, however, have no application in 
civil practice. The rude weapons of the suicide or the would-be 
murderer are often clumsy and uncertain. With them a larger 
bullet is used and the rate of velocity is very much less. There 
are, as a result, a large destruction of tissue and a crushing or 
bruising over a wide area. In addition to the perforation in a 
gunshot wound made by such a weapon there is a considerable 
amount of contusion and of rough damage to the immediately 
adjacent parts. 

Sir Frederick Treves gave it as his opinion that it is in- 
advisable to operate in cases in which the abdomen is traversed 
above the umbilicus owing to the multiple character of the in- 
juries ; while the cases in which the abdomen is traversed below 
the umbilicus get well without operation. 

Forgue and Jeanbrau ( " Rev. de Chir.," September and Octo- 

VOL. I — -24 369 



370 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 




Fig. 148. — Relations of anterior wall of stomach 
(Testut) . 



ber, 1903) have collected the notes of 112 cases of gunshot wound 

of the stomach in 
which the lesion was 
verified either at the 
postmortem examina- 
tion or at an opera- 
tion. In 64 of these 
cases the ball passed 
completely through 
the stomach, wound- 
ing both surfaces. In 
some cases only one 
wall was injured, the 
ball remaining in the 
stomach, or passing, 
in one case, into the 

intestine. In other cases the bullet had struck a curvature and 

clipped a piece away. 
Seven of the cases 

died of haemorrhage, 

which was due gener- 
ally to the wounding 

of a large arterial 

trunk, such as the 

coronary. In one 

case, related by Gui- 

nard as having oc- 
curred at the Lari- 

boisiere Hospital, an 

abdominal exploration 

was undertaken in a Fig. 149- — Relations of posterior wall of stomach 
1 . (Testut). 

patient who presented 

no signs of injury except an abundant haematemesis. A very 
minute examination of the stomach was made, but nothing 
abnormal was found. The patient died, and at the autopsy 




GUNSHOT WOUNDS OF THE STOMACH. 37 1 

the bullet was found free in the peritoneal cavity. It had not 
perforated any viscus, but on examining the interior of the 
stomach a wound of the mucosa close to the pylorus was found, of 
the size of a franc-piece. This was the source of the haemorrhage. 

Peritoneal infection depends upon the size of the wound and 
upon the state of repletion of the organ. If the stomach is full, 
and if vomiting occurs, the contents escape freely into the gen- 
eral cavity of the peritoneum. 

Spontaneous recovery is possible. Socin records the case of 
a man who was shot in the abdomen. It was thought that the 




Fig. 150. — ^The two preceding figures superimposed. The unshaded area 
shews the only part of the stomach which can be woimded without injur}- being 
done to other organs (Forgue and Jeanbrau). 

Stomach was woimded, but the patient recovered without opera- 
tion. Five months later he died of a "medical illness." At the 
autopsy two wounds of the stomach soimdly cicatrised were 
seen. Spontaneous heahng such as this depends upon the 
emptiness of the stomach, the smaU size of thewoimd, and the 
plugging of the wound by omentum, or upon the formation of a 
gastric fistula, which permits the instant escape of contents to 
the exterior, as in the oft-quoted case of Alexis St. Martin and 
in others related by Baudens, Cannizaro, and T. Smith. 

In all cases of revolver or pistol wound — indeed, it may be 
said, in all forms of gunshot wound — of the stomach in cbnl 



372 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

practice, the abdomen should be opened with the utmost ex- 
pedition. The records of the cases collected by Forgue and 
Jeanbrau shew that the mortality increases in direct proportion 
to the delay. The result of their enquiries is shewn by the 
following table: 

WOUND OF THE STOMACH ALONE, WITHOUT OTHER VISCERA. 

Recovery. Death. 

(o) Intervention within six hours 9 4 cases. 

(b) Intervention without mention of time 2 4 " 

WOUND OF THE STOMACH, WITH OTHER VISCERA. 

Recovery. Death. 

(a) Intervention within six hours 13 16 cases. 

; (b) Intervention within six to twelve hours 2 11 " 

(c) Intervention after twelve hours 2 ii " 

{d) Intervention without mention of time 3 5 " 

In examining the stomach the utmost care should be exercised. 
The figures given by Forgue and Jeanbrau shew that it is not 
unlikely that some other damage will be inflicted by a bullet 
which traverses the stomach. Search for such an injury must 
be made, and any wounds so found must be appropriately dealt 
with. So far as the wound in the stomach is concerned, the 
edges must be trimmed or turned in by suture. 

DETAILS OF THE OPERATION. 

The usual preliminaries having been observed, the abdomen 
is opened by a free incision in the middle line above the um- 
bilicus. In certain cases — in those, for example, in which the 
stomach is wounded near the cardiac orifice — a very free ex- 
posure may be necessary, and the median incision alone may be 
inadequate. Auvray has advised that in such circumstances 
a second incision should be made from the upper end of the 
central one, downwards and to the left along the costal margin, 
which may, if necessary, be partly excised. In all my opera- 
tions upon the stomach, including a complete gastrectomy, I have 
never found the need of anything more than a central incision. 

The abdomen being opened, a general inspection of the parts 
is made. There may be much blood-stained fluid and perhaps 
the contents of the stomach or intestine in the peritoneum. 



GUNSHOT AVOUNDS OF THE STOMACH. 373 

A rapid but efficient cleansing is then necessary. The stomach 
is then picked up with a piece of gauze, to ensure a firmer hold- 
ing, and the whole of the anterior surface carefully and method- 
ically inspected. A little bubbling of froth or the sizzling 
noise made by the escape of gas may be enough to direct at- 
tention to the wounded spot ; or if a vessel of moderate size 
has been wounded, the continued escape of blood will direct 
attention to the point of injury. 

If a wound on the anterior surface of the stomach be dis- 
covered, it should be closed at once by suture. As a rule, no 
excision of the edge of the rent is necessary, but if there be much 
contusion or fraying, then a free trimming away of the damaged 
wall may be necessary. If the opening be of sufficient size, it 
may be made use of for purposes of digital exploration or in- 
spection before being sutured. 

The wound is closed by a double layer of stitches, the inner 
including all the coats of the viscus, the outer only the serous 
and muscular coats. 

The anterior surface having been made perfect, an examina- 
tion of the posterior is necessary. This may be effected either 
by an opening through the gastrocolic omentum at the lower 
border of the stomach, as advised by Forgue and Jeanbrau, or 
by turning up the transverse colon and opening the transverse 
mesocolon. 

There may or may not be a second opening of exit on the 
posterior surface, and such an opening may or may not be near, 
or opposed, to the anterior. The bullet which has injured the 
anterior wall may remain in the stomach, be vomited, be passed 
on into the duodenum, or may penetrate the posterior wall. 
The surgeon, however, cannot neglect to make the most scrupu- 
lous examination of the posterior wall, and if a rent be found 
therein, he must deal with it as with the anterior wound. 

A search for other injuries must be made. It is remarkable 
how' often they are overlooked. Forgue and Jeanbrau quote 
many cases where, at the postmortem examination, gross dam- 
ages, overlooked at the operation, were laid bare. Bertram 



374 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

records a case where the spleen and the left kidney were found 
injured; Briddon, one where four perforations of the small in- 
testine were found; Gabzewicz, one where an injury to the 
colon was seen ; and Poncet and others, examples of injury to the 
liver. The minutest search must be made despite the fact that, 
because of the patient's collapse from shock or hsemorrhage, a 
prolongation of the operation is not without its own danger. 

In not a few recorded cases the movements of the surgeon 
are greatty hindered by the copious amount of blood-stained 
fluid in the general peritoneum. No sooner is the field of 
operation cleared than a slow oozing of blood or deeply blood- 
stained fluid causes further dela}^ by obscuring all things. 
Professor Forgue, in 1897, drew attention to a most important 
point, by suggesting that the patient should, in such circum- 
stances, be placed in the semi -recumbent position at an angle 
of 45 degrees. The viscera fall away from the wound, and 
venous oozing is checked. 

In some few instances the loss of substance caused by the 
blow of the bullet has been so great that when the wound is 
securely closed, a marked narrowing — in one case an oblitera- 
tion at the pylorus — has been produced. It would be necessary, 
then, to perform gastro-enterostomy to afford an efficient outlet, 
or to use the rent at the pylorus for the purposes of a gastro- 
duodenostomy. 

Closure of the perforation having been effected, the abdomen 
is cleansed by wiping or by lavage, and the abdominal wound 
is closed. Drainage may or may not be necessary. Forgue 
advises its unvaried adoption, for the reason that a bullet trav- 
ersing the clothes and the abdominal wall is certain to carry 
infection with it. Karlinski performed experiments upon rab- 
bits which were wrapped in garments made of military cloth. 
They were shot in the abdomen, and the abdomen opened and 
its contents subjected to the most minute examination. Fine 
fragments of cloth were found in the peritoneum. Drainage 
may be effected through the anterior incision or through poste- 
rior incisions specially made for the purpose. 



SECTION III. 
OPERATIONS UPON THE INTESTINES. 



CHAPTER XX. 
INTESTINAL LOCALISATION. 

It would undoubtedly be a matter of great interest and 
importance to the surgeon to discover if there were any means 
of determining with accuracy the exact position in the intestine 
held by any selected loop. Much labour and patience have 
been expended upon this task, and though the results are not 
so satisfactory as could be wished, they have, nevertheless, af- 
forded us some valuable information. It is to Mall ("Bulletin of 
the Johns Hopkins Hospital," 1898, vol. ix, p. 197) and to Monks 
(Trans. Amer. Surg. Assoc, 1903, p. 405) that we are in- 
debted for the best work in this matter. There are certain in- 
herent difficulties in the subject. The intestine, for example, 
may be of any length from fifteen to thirty feet ; the position of 
all its parts is hable to some variation from time to time, owing 
to unequal filling, to the position of the individual, and so forth; 
and the changes which occur in the bowel itself and in the mes- 
entery by which it is attached are not sharp and abrupt, but 
gradual throughout. 

Mall, in his examination of the condition of the mesenteric 
loops in 41 bodies, found what he called a normal arrangement 
in 21 of them. The sweep of the mesentery, and therefore of 
the bowel which it attached, in this "normal" arrangement 
was as follows: first to the left, then upwards and to the right, 
then obliquely downwards and to the left iliac region, then into 
the pelvis, and finally up to the right in the ileocecal region. 

375 



3/6 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

It is more than probable, howeA'er, that during health there is 
a constant journeying of the large and small intestine from one 
part of the abdomen to another, and that two loops of intestine 
which at one moment are in contact may, in a few seconds, be 
widely separated. This is shewn during operations for gun- 
shot wounds. Thus in a case of bullet wound where the shot 
traversed the abdomen directh^ from front to back, a little 
in front of the left anterior superior spine of the ilium, the 
jejunum in four places, the transverse colon in two places, and 
the lower end of the sigmoid were wounded. 

Monks found that in normal conditions the upper six feet 
or so of the intestine were generally confined to the left hypo- 
chondriac region, occupA^ing a deep fossa there, under the ribs, 
in such a position that its coils would not usually be encountered 
through any of the ordinary abdominal incisions. The middle 
portion usually occupied the middle part of the abdomen, while 
the lower part of the intestine lay generally in the pelvis and in 
the right iliac fossa. He writes: 

" In order roughly to indicate on the outside of the body the 
positions ordinarity occupied by the upper, middle, and lower 
thirds of the intestine, I have found that two straight lines run- 
ning obliquely across the abdomen at the two ends of and at 
right angles with the line of the mesenteric root will divide the 
abdomen into three regions, each of which will contain in raost 
bodies about one-third of the intestinal tube, the upper third 
being in the first region, the middle third in the second region, 
and the lower (or third) third in the third region, as shewn in 
the diagrams. 

"It will thus be seen that an incision anywhere above the 
first line will probably disclose loops belonging to (or near) the 
upper third of the intestine, anywhere between the first and 
second lines, loops belonging to the middle third, and anywhere 
below the second line, loops belonging to the lower third. This 
appears to be a pretty good general inile in intestinal topography, 
to assist us in determining, while making our incision, what part 
of the bowel we are likely to meet with first. We should not for- 
get, however, that there are occasional and marked exceptions to 
this rule." 




o o o-d c in >% 




r^ +J O D O 1^ 




o «,-:5 8^ ^ 








i^ Pi +e G rt Qj 1- 




the 
ight a 
ne (dc 
pper, 
: indie; 
middl 
stine 




wing 
at r 

he h 

he u 
here 

per, 
inte 






<u G ■'^ H -^ ^:=i 




' — 1 -^ M-4 G "^ ^ 




w j: o _ 0; (u G 




1 J-1 73 -M G rG Jo 




1 t3 oj o ;2 +^ 




. ,_'^ O Vh U3 (U 




(M V/'G ^ ni 0) jG 




._n ^ <U O jj O- 




(/3 


Fig 
Unes ( 
two ex 
tnesent 
lower c 
in mos 
thirds 


^4 
G 
O 


§ 



.iJB^aaaaHaKMiBiiuraffiK.-: 







a 


(1) 


G 


o 




CTl 


n 


-|J 


Vh 


t/) 


iX 


03 


P^ 


+j 


03 


C) 




O 


bn 


u 


G 


o 

•f-H 


W 


n) 



«' 2^ ^ 



-f, c 



bo, 



^ o 

CD TD 
G /2 



377 



378 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

When the small intestine is examined from end to end, it is 
found that it is funnel-shaped, and that the upper part of the 
jejunum is of greater diameter than the lower part of the ileum. 
This is, of course, well recognised clinically by the fact that the 
further a gall-stone travels down in the bowel the more likely 
it is to become impacted ; that a stone which easily passes through 
the jejunum is arrested in the ileum. The diameter of the last 
three or four feet of the ileum shews little or no narrowing as a 
rule. 

As the bowel narrows in this way its walls also become 
thinner. The upper part of the jejunum feels thick when rolled 
between the fingers, owing to the presence of large and numerous 
valvulae conniventse. The ileum is thin, and its walls are more 
supple. The last two feet, approximately, of the ileum again 
become thicker, and just above the ileocascal valve the muscular 
tissue in the ileum shews a decided increase. The condition 
of the mesentery is exactly the opposite of this: the thin- 
nest part is that which runs to the upper end of the jejunum; 
the thickest part is that which runs to the lower end of the 
ileum. The mesentery, therefore, becomes gradually thicker the 
lower down it lies. This increased thickness is largely due to 
the deposit of fat, at first in thin scattered islets, later in larger 
thick slabs between the leaves of the mesentery. The upper part 
of the mesentery is thin and translucent. Monks draws attention 
to a point of importance. He writes : 

' ' If one raises a loop from the uppermost part of the intes- 
tine and holds it in such a position that the light will shine 
through the mesentery, one will notice, in that part of the mes- 
entery close to the gut, little transparent spaces between the 
vasa recta. Some of these 'lunettes,' as I call them, are almost 
always present opposite the upper part of the gut even in the 
thickest mesenteries. I have found, as a rule, that they gradu- 
ally grow smaller, become streaked with fat, and disappear 
at about the eighth foot. They may, however, in exceptional 
cases, persist to the end of the gut." 



INTESTINAL LOCALISATION. 379 

Some idea of the position occupied by any loop drawn out by 
chance through an abdominal incision may be determined by 
pulling upon it until its mesentery is taut. The finger is then 
passed along the upper, right, side of the mesentery until the 
posterior abdominal wall is reached. The relation of the point 
reached to the line of the attachment of the mesentery will then 
be recognised. In this way, moreover, by passing the finge:p'on 
both sides of the mesentery, its upper right side will be distin- 
guished from its lower left side, and, therefore, the direction in 
which the bowel is running is determined. 

The arrangement of the vessels in the mesentery has been 
studied by Dwight and Monks. Dr. Monks writes: 

" Opposite the upper part of the bowel the mesenteric vessels 
are distinctly larger than opposite any other part of it. These 
vessels grow smaller and smaller as we pass downward until the 
lower third of the gut is reached, where they remain about 
the same size as far as the ileocaecal valve. The arrangement 
of the mesenteric vessels has some features which intimately 
concern the subject in hand, and which I shall describe with 
some detail. Diagrammatically speaking, the main branches 
of the superior mesenteric artery unite with each other by 
means of loops, which are called, for convenience, 'primary 
loops' ; in some parts of the tube, 'secondary loops' ; and even 
occasionally 'tertiary loops' are superimposed upon these. 
From these loops little straight vessels — ^the vasa recta already 
referred to — run to the bowel, upon which they ramify, alterna- 
ting, as a rule, as to the side of the intestine which they supply. 
The mesenteric veins are arranged in a manner somewhat similar 
to the arteries. Opposite the upper part of the bow^el there are 
only primary loops. Occasionally a secondary loop appears, 
but it is small and insignificant as compared with the primary 
loops, which are large and quite regular. As we proceed down 
the bowel secondary loops become more numerous, larger, and 
approach nearer to the bowel than the primary loops in the upper 
part. As a rule, secondary loops become a prominent feature at 
about the fourth foot. As we continue farther downward the 
secondary loops (and, possibly, tertiary loops) become still 
more numerous and the primary loops smaller, the loops all the 




Fig. 153. — A loop of intestine, the middle of which is exactly three feet 
from the end of the duodenum. The gut is of large size. The mesenteric loops 
are primary, and the vasa recta large, long, and regular in distribution. The 
translucent spaces (lunettes) between the vessels are extensive. Below, the 
mesentery is streaked with fat. The veins, which had a distribution similar 
to the arteries, are for simplicity omitted from this and from the subsequent 
drawings. The subject from which the specimen was taken was a male of forty 
years, with rather less than the usual amount of fat. The entire length of the 
intestine was twenty-three feet (Monks). 




Fig. 154. — A loop of intestine at six feet. As compared with Fig. 153, the 
gut is somewhat smaller. The vascularity of the intestine and mesentery is 
less. Secondary loops are a prominent feature. The vasa recta are smaller. 
The lunettes are also present, but are not so large as in Fig. 153. The subject 
was a male of about thirty-five years, with an average amount of fat. The 
entire length of the intestine was twenty feet (Monks). 

380 




Fig. 155. — A loop of intestine at nine feet. The secondary loops are large; 
the vasa recta are somewhat irregular and shew branches. No lunettes are 
present, and the mesentery is streaked with fat, and is, therefore, somewhat 
opaque. The specimen was taken from the same subject which furnished Fig. 
153 (Monks). 




Fig. 156 . — A loop of intestine at twelve feet . The vessels are smaller. The 
primary loops are lost in the fat, but secondary and even tertiary loops are 
visible. The vasa recta are shorter, more irregular, and branching. The speci- 
men came from the same subject which furnished Figs. 153 and 155 (Monks). 



3S1 




Fig. 157. — A loop of intestine at seventeen feet. The mesentery is opaque, 
and small tabs of fat begin to appear along the mesenteric border of the gut. 
The vessels are represented b}^ a somewhat complicated network, and are seen 
with difficulty in the thick fat of the mesenter}^. The specimen came from the 
subject which furnished Figs. 153, 155, and 156 (Monks). 




Fig. 15s. — A loop of intestine at twenty feet. The gut appears to be thick 
and large. The mesentery is quite fat and opaque, and large and niimerous 
fat tabs are present. The vessels, which are complicated, are seen with diffi- 
culty, and are represented by mere grooves in the fat. The subject was a stout 
woman, and the entire length of the gut was twenty-one feet (Monks). 

382 



INTESTINAL LOCALISATION. 383 

time getting nearer and nearer to the gut. Opposite the lower 
part of the gut the loops generally lose their characteristic ap- 
pearance, and are represented by a complicated network. Op- 
posite the upper part of the intestine the vasa recta are from 
three to five centimetres long, when the loop of small intestine to 
which they run is lifted up so as to put them gently on the stretch. 
They are straight, large, and regular, and rarely give off branches 
in the mesentery. In the lower third they are very short, being 
generally less than one centimetre in length. Here they are less 
straight, smaller, less regular, and have frequent branches in the 
mesentery."* 

* For the figures which are here reproduced I am very greatly indebted 
to the courtesy of Dr. G. H. Monks. 



CHAPTER XXI. 
INTESTINAL SUTURE. 

There are probably no pages in the histor}' of surger}^ that 
are so grossly encumbered with the description of useless methods 
of work as those dealing with the subject of the suture of in- 
testinal wounds. Of the methods which have been advocated, 
volumes might be written, and willing and patient authors have 
not been found wanting. It is true that there has been a con- 
stant and laudable striving after perfection, but the steps upon 
the road to success have been infinite in number, and they have 
not all been steps in a forward direction. Even at the present 
time this subject is not free from the incursions of the eager 
inventor, enthusiastic as to the claims of his newest contrivance, 
despite the fact that all mechanical aids to suture are tmnecessars' 
— ^in that one word may be summarised all that can be said of them. 
I do not venture to suggest that even 3^et any method has been 
advocated that will win universal acceptance. But of this there 
can be no question, that such a method, when established, will 
of necessity combine in the highest degree two essential princi- 
ples — simplicity and safety. A method that is simple, and 
therefore readily learnt, applicable to all forms of anastomosis, 
speedy because of its simplicity, and safe because of all its at- 
tributes, is the only one that is destined to survive. 

The following suture methods possess certain definite ad- 
vantages which have caused them to be practised by a large 
number of surgeons — they are recognised, that is, as good 
methods. 

Lembert's Suture. — This, which is the simplest of all in- 
terrupted stitches, is one that every surgeon finds it necessary 
to use on some occasion. The needle, bearing a suture of fine 
silk or thread, is passed transversely to the wound. It picks up, 

384 



INTESTINAL SUTURE. 385 

on each side, all the coats except the mucosa, and is introduced 
about a quarter of an inch, or rather less, from, and emerges 
about a line from, the edge of the wound, on one side, then 
passes across the wound, to enter on the opposite side at a point 
just clear of the cut edge, there to pass in the wall of the gut 
in the same manner as on the opposite side. When the suture 
is tied, the edges of the wound are inverted and broad surfaces 
of peritoneum on each side of the wound are brought into con- 
tact. The individual sutures lie about -J inch from each other. 
In tying the stitches it is impor- 
tant to avoid drawing them over- 
tight, and thereby causing a risk 
of strangulation necrosis. A snug 
apposition of surface is all that 
is necessary to ensure a perfectly 
firm, water-tight junction. When 
this suture is continuous and not 
interrupted, it is known as Dupuy- 
tren's suture. 

The width of the fold picked 
up on each side will vary accord- 
ing to the necessities of the case. 
If the wound be small and the 
bowel-wall healthy, so that sutures 

are well held, the fold need be but pig. i-g. Lemberf s suture. 

small and the inner row of needle 

punctures may be quite close to the edge of the wound. In 
other instances, as, for example, in the perforation of a duodenal 
or typhoid ulcer, a wider fold must be made, and greater care 
must be exercised in the introduction of the needle, since, owing 
to the thickened and stiffened wall of the gut, the needle will 
perhaps cut through, or the stitch will fail to hold when 
tightened. 

Halsted's suture, or the mattress suture, is in realit}' so 
devised that each separate suture is the equiA'alent of a double 
VOL. 1—25 




386 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



Lembert suture. The needle having passed from one side of 
the wound to the other is made to return, so that the two ends 
of the suture lie upon the same side of the wound. When the 

stitch is tied, there is no risk 
of undue constriction of ves- 
sels, and the stitch is little 
likely to cut through. Broad 
peritoneal surfaces are 
brought into apposition. The 
importance of the inclusion 
within the suture of the sub- 
mucosa was emphasised by 
Professor Halsted. It was 
claimed for this suture that 
it is so safe that a single row 
is all that is necessary; that 
the tissues are less constricted 
than they are by a Lembert 's 
suture, and that the suture does not so readily tear out when 
submitted to tension. 

Dupuytren's Suture. — This suture is similar to the Lembert 
suture, but is continuous, not interrupted. After the first suture 




Fie. 1 60. — Halsted's suture. 




Fig. 161. — Dupuytren's continuous suture: a continuous Lembert 's suture; it 

begins on the left. 



is introduced it is tied, and the suture is then continued from 
side to side of the wound to the opposite end. 



INTESTINAL SUTURE. 387 

Cushing's Suture. — Hayward W. Gushing (Trans. Amer. 
Surg. Assoc, vol. xvii, 1899) has described a suture that is also con- 
tinuous. The needle, on each occasion that it is introduced, is 
passed parallel to the edge of the wound, and not, as in the Lem- 
bert or Dupuytren suture, at right angles to it. 

All the sutures above described are passed with the intention 
of including all coats of the bowel with the exception of the 
mucosa. The layer which it is of the chiefest importance to 
secure, in order that the suture may hold well, is the submucous 
coat. This, as shewn by S. D. Gross and Halsted, is of great 
strength and toughness, and will bear a considerable strain 
when the suture is tied. 

The examination of specimens removed from patients upon 





^if-i/- 



y 

Fig. 162. — Cushing's right-angled continuous suture. 

whom the Lembert suture has been used shews, without doubt, 
that the ideal passage of the suture is not always achieved. 
In not a few instances it is found that the suture at some point 
has passed into or through the mucosa. The fear that haunts 
the surgeon's mind is that if the suture should penetrate the 
mucosa, a track for the escape of infected contents from the 
lumen of the bowel is open to the peritoneal cavity. Theo- 
retically the danger exists, but in practice it does not often 
prove serious, unless the perforation occurs at the point where 
a knot is tied, and then leakage is very likely to occur. In an 
interrupted suture, therefore, which perforates all the coats of the 
bowel, and in which the knot is tied on the serosa, there are the 



388 ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIOXS. 

elements of disaster. If, however, the interrupted suture is 
tied on the mucous side, it is found, as a matter of unvaried ex- 
perience, that no leakage occurs, or rather that what drainage 
or "capillars^ attraction" is excited by the suture, is towards 
the lumen of the gut, and not towards the peritoneal cavity. 
It has been the aim, therefore, of mam- operators to devise a 
stitch which, passing through all the coats on both sides of the 
wound, may be tied in such manner that all the knots shall He 
within the lumen of the gut. The advantages of such a stitch 
are obvious: a firm, accurate, and even hold is obtained upon 
the gut ; the A-essels in the cut edge of the gut are controlled 
when the stitch is made continuous, and a rapid introduction 
is easity accompHshed. 

The method which, among modem operations, was the 
pioneer of all those planning to effect union by through-and- 
through sutures, was suggested b}' Alaunsell ("International 
Jour, of the Medical Sciences," vol. ciii, 1892, p. 245). The fol- 
lowing is the description given b}" him: 

"Having cut oft" the cancerous, gangrenous, or injured por- 
tion of the intestine, bring together both ends of the bowel with 
two temporar}^ sutures passed through all the coats of the in- 
testine. The long ends of these sutures are left intact. One 
is placed at the mesenteric attachment of the gut and the other 
(exactly opposite) at the most distant portion of the bowel from 
the mesentery. 

"These temporary sutures are very important. They se- 
cure the complete peritoneal covering of the mesenteric at- 
tachment of both segments of the gut, help to maintain the 
proper relative position and accurate co-adaptation of the two 
cut ends, and facilitate their subsequent invagination through 
the opening made in the larger segment of gut . 

"When enterectomy is performed for gangrene or injury, 
the lower or distal segment of the bowel is generally the largest; 
but where the operation is performed for stricture, cancer, or 
tumour pressing on or constricting the lumen of the gut, the 
upper or proximal portion is often much larger than the lower. 

"If vou examine the gut in a living animal, vou will find 



INTESTINAL SUTURE. 



389 



that the blood-vessels pass into it from the mesenteric attach- 
ment. These divide and subdivide until they are lost in an 
invisible anastomosis in that portion of the intestine more dis- 
tant from the mesentery. 

"I propose to make an opening here in the larger segment 
of the gut, through which the invaginated ends of the divided 




Fig. 163. — Maunsell's operation. 

bowel may be dragged by the long ends of the temporary sutures, 
and when they are accurately sewn together all around, they may 
be pulled back into their normal position . 




Fig. 164. — Maunsell's operation. 



"The edges of the longitudinal slit made in the bowel, which 
begins about an inch from its transverse section, should be well 
turned in and brought together with a continuous suture 
passed through the peritoneal and muscular coats only. It is a 
well-ascertained fact that a slight longitudinal contraction of 



390 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

the lumen of the bowel does not interfere with its physiological 
functions. 

" By this simple device the perfect union by suture of a com- 
plete transverse section of the bowel, with its circumferential 
peritoneal surfaces in exact position and all the knots of the 
sutures on the inside, can be accomplished. 

" From an examination of the annexed figures it may be seen 
that the peritoneal surfaces are in accurate juxtaposition all 
around. While an assistant holds the ends of the temporary 
sutures, the surgeon passes a long, fine, straight needle, armed 
with a stout horse-hair or very fine silkworm-gut through both 
sides of the bowel, taking a good grip (quarter of an inch) of 
all the coats. The suture is then hooked up from the centre of 
the invaginated gut, divided, and tied on both sides. In this 



■<01t 




K ^'^' 



Fig. 165. — Maunsell's operation. 

way twenty sutures can be placed rapidly in position with ten 
passages of the needle. The temporary sutures are now cut off 
short, and the sutured ends of the bowel painted with Wolfler's 
mixture of alcohol, glycerin, and colophony, and blown over 
with iodoform — the same that he applies to the surface of the 
raw stump after removal of the tongue. The bowel is then 
pulled back. The longitudinal slit in the gut is well turned in 
and closed with a continuous suture and painted with Wolfler's 
mixture and iodoform powder." 

In actual practice, therefore, Maunsell was content to rely 
upon a single row of sutures penetrating all the coats of the 
bowel. Alany surgeons, however, being sceptical as to the 
security from leakage with one layer of stitches only, added 
an outer laver of Lembert sutures. One of the further ob- 



INTESTINAL SUTURE. 39 1 

jections to Maunsell's method was the possible formation of 
a diaphragm if an outer layer of Lembert sutures was used. 
In their experimental work, Edmunds and Ballance found that 
no diaphragm whatever was formed. Maunsell, by his work, 
shewed conclusively that a perfect suture-line resulted from 
the use of a single layer of stitches passing through all the coats. 
His method, however, in that it involved the making of a special 
longitudinal opening into the gut, was found to be unneces- 
sarily tedious and complex, and efforts were, therefore, directed 
to such a modification of the method as would permit the prin- 
ciple to be retained while the steps to attain it were simplified. 
Dr. Gregory Connell and Dr. Wiggin have both succeeded 
in perfecting a simple and effective method. Connell's method 
is, it seems to me, one of the most satisfactory methods of 
suture in use at the present time. It is easy to learn, simple, 
rapidly performed, and the line of union is firm and free 
from any chance of leakage. The only difficulty that could 
possibly be experienced in its use is that which arises at the 
time of tying the final stitch. A very little practice makes 
this easy. The following description is given by Dr. Gregory 
Connell in "American Medicine," vol. v, January, 1903, p. 135. 
1 am greatly indebted to him for the excellent illustrations he 
has kindly sent to me, which are here reproduced. 

"In using the interrupted suture, the first stitch should be 
taken at the mesenteric attachment. This stitch is of the 
greatest importance on account of the separation of the serous 
covering of the bowel at this point, and great care should be 
exercised in securing a perfect serous approximation at this 
point. In order to do this in the most satisfactory manner 
a stitch should be introduced as follows : The needle is made 
to enter the bowel- wall of one cut end from the lumen, per- 
forate all coats, and pass through the serosa of one side of the 
triangular space formed by the separation of the serous coats; 
then on, over and through the serosa of the opposite cut end, 
at the same relative point, side of the triangular space, then 



392 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 




Fig. 1 66. — Connell's suture. 




Fig. 167. — Connell's suture continuec 



INTESTINAL SUTURE. 393 

on through the wall into the lumen. This completes one-half 
of the stitch, and is made with one movement of the needle. 

"The needle is next reversed, and a distance of about ^ of 
an inch (3 mm.) is made to repeat the steps in the opposite 
direction — i. e., entering the mucosa of the second cut end, 
passing through all coats of the bowel-wall, including the serosa 
of the triangular space, and then through the serosa of the tri- 
angular space of the first cut end, on through the wall into its 
lumen, where the needle end and the free end of the suture 




Fig. 168. — Connell's suture continued. 

are tied in a knot on the mucosa. This stitch, which acts 
similar to a brad, absolutely secures a perfect serous approxima- 
tion at this point, which is considered by all to be the most 
difficult portion of an enterorrhaphy. 

"The remainder of the union is closed by stitches exactly 
similar to this first stitch. The cut ends are held in proper 
position by any convenient means, such as the Lee holder, 
the Allis tenaculum forceps, or suspending loops of thread ; but 
the best method in my experience is the plan of introducing 



394 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

a stitch, such as are the other stitches, at a conveniently dis- 
tant point, and leaving the ends of this stitch long, to be held 
by an assistant while the intervening stitches are being in- 
serted. 

"This method has the advantage of consuming no additional 
time, for when the union is completed up to this stitch and the 
long ends are of no farther use, they are cut away, leaving the 
stitch itself in place. This method, which I described in 1901, 
has been adopted by Dr. Wiggin in the description of his method 
published in 1902. 

" With the ends thus held in proper position the introduction 
of the stitches is a very simple matter — merely one passage 
of the needle through all coats of both cut ends, and then at a 
distance of about -|- of an inch (3 mm.) the same process in the 
opposite direction, and, finally, the tying of the knot upon the 
mucosa at one side of the seam. 

"This is repeated till all but a small portion of the union 
is completed. Owing to the fact that it is impossible to place 
this last portion of the cut ends in the same relative position 
that we placed the first part — i. <?., seroserous apposition, it is 
therefore necessary, in order to introduce the same variety of 
suture, to proceed somewhat differently. 

"In order to place the last stitch and knot in exactly the 
same relative position as the first ones, we proceed in this manner : 

"The needle enters the gut -wall from the lumen, passes 
through all coats, and emerges from the serosa of one side. It 
is then made to cross over to the opposite wound margin, and, 
entering the serosa, passes through all the coats into the lumen 
of this side. The needle is then turned upon itself and made to 
retrace its steps at about \ of an inch (3 mm.) distant, passing 
from the lumen through all coats, emerging from the serosa; 
then over to the opposite side and entering through the serosa, 
and finally ending in the lumen of the cut end at which it began. 

' ' Now the two ends of the thread which are to make the knot 
are side by side, emerging from the mucosa into the lumen, and 
then extending from the ununited part of the enterorrhaphy out 
of the body. The needle, in introducing this stitch, has passed 
through the cut ends in exactly the same order as it did when 
inserting the stitches in the earlier part of the operation when 
the cut ends were held in seroserous apposition — /. e., mucosa, sub- 



INTESTINAL SUTURE. 



395 



mucosa, muscularis, and serosa, then immediately on into the 
other end cut through the serosa, muscularis, submucosa, and 
the mucosa, and then this order repeated in the opposite direc- 
tion ^ of an inch (3 mm.) away. 

"The needle and the free end of the suture now hang side 
by side from the mucosa, and in order that they be tied in a 
firm knot, proceed as follows: 

"At a point in the line of union, about opposite this last 
and still untied stitch, a threaded needle is inserted, eye first, 




Fig. 169. — Connell's suture continued. 



between two of the previously inserted and tied stitches. The 
needle is passed between the apposed serous surfaces into the 
lumen. 

" By passing the needle still farther onward it is made to 
present at the location of the last stitch, where the ends of the 
suture still protrude, and where the surfaces are not united. By 
sHghtly withdrawing the threaded needle a loop is formed with 
its thread; into this loop are placed the two free ends of the 
last stitch which is to be tied. By withdrawing the needle 



396 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 




Fig. 170. — Connell's suture continued. 




Fig. 171. — Connell's suture continued. 



INTESTINAL SUTURE. 



397 



and in its loop the stitch ends, these ends will be made to pre- 
sent upon the peritoneal aspect of the bowel on the opposite 
side, between two of the previously inserted and tied stitches— 
i. e., at the point where the threaded needle was inserted. Slight 
traction upon these ends will cause the remaining portion of 
the line of union to become inverted, and seroserous approxima- 
tion will obtain entirely around the site of suture. Upon greater 
traction the bowel will become flattened, bringing the mucous 
membrane upon which the last knot is to be located into in- 
timate relationship with the line of suture at the point where 




Fie. 



17: 



-Connell's suture continued. 



the free ends protrude. The knot is tied with the bowel m 
this flattened position, thus avoiding the occurrence of any 
slack. While still retaining the tension and the flattened posi- 
tion, the ends of the knot are cut off short, so preventing any 
long free ends in the lumen. Upon allowing the bowel to as- 
sume its normal contour, — that of a cylinder, — ^the knot will 
slip between the already tied stitches into the lumen, and as it is 
attached to the mucosa of the opposite pole of the diameter of 
the gut, it goes with that portion of the bowel-wall." 

The Connell stitch here described is, therefore, an interrupted 
stitch. In the same paper, however, Dr. Connell writes : 



398 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

"As stated on previous occasions, either the interrupted 
or the continuous suture may be employed, the choice depend- 
ing upon the teaching or the experience that the operator has 
had. This method may be applied equally well in circular en- 
terorrhaphy, lateral anastomosis, pylorectomy, pyloroplasty, 
gastro-enterostomy, and in incised wounds of the intestine 
or stomach, — ia fact, under any conditions where the ordinary 
sutures may be employed." 




Fig. 173. — Connell's suture continued. 

Though interrupted sutures are, in certain stages of work, 
absolutely indispensable, — for example, in reinforcing at a 
weak spot or in securing a vessel in a cut edge of the gut, — yet 
I am convinced that the continuous suture is very decidedly 
to be preferred. The continuous suture is easily and rapidly 
introduced — very much more rapidly than the interrupted 
stitch. In the latter, the needle has to be received from an 
assistant, to be passed, the knot to be tied, and the ends to be 
cut for each separate stitch; such a series of separate move- 
ments necessarily involves a waste of time. The continuous 



INTESTINAL SUTURE. 399 

suture is tightened to exactly the right degree without any 
difficulty. It acts, when embracing all the coats, as a haemo- 
static, making the separate ligation of bleeding points unneces- 
sary. It produces, when used as a Dupuytren's suture, very 
accurate and equal apposition of serous surfaces along the 
entire length of the Avound. It has never, in my hands, caused 
sloughing of the cut edges of the wound from constriction of 
the blood-supply, and I am, therefore, compelled to think that 
this fear, so often expressed, is but a legacy from an earlier age. 
The objections which have been raised to the continuous suture 
are — 

(a) If one part of it becomes loose, the whole is liable to be- 
come insecure. When properly introduced, in the manner to be 
presently described, there is no fear whatever of any part of the 
suture working loose, nor, on the other hand, of any part of the 
suture causing puckering by being drawn overtight. An even 
tension all along the line is secured by unconscious effort after 
a little practice. 

(b) If the bowel contract, the whole suture may become 
loosened and the wound gape. This might perhaps be true of 
a continuous serous stitch unsupported, but if a firm hold 
of all the coats is obtained, the fear of loosening is purely 
visionary. 

(c) A considerable length of ligature material is left in the 
coats of the intestine. It has been shewn, as the result of ex- 
perimental work and of observation upon man, that a stitch 
which perforates the mucosa will by degrees become loosened, 
and eventually pass entirely into the lumen of the gut. A 
stitch including the serous and muscular coats only will re- 
main imbedded in the coats of the gut for months or years, but 
may also, probably because of a too deep penetration of the wall, 
eventually be discharged into the lumen. This, I believe, 
occurs in the very great majority of instances. On several occa- 
sions I have had the opportunity of examining an intestinal or 
gastro-intestinal anastomosis many months after the operation, 
and I have, in almost all, found that no trace of the original 
suture of silk or thread remained. The objection to the length 
of the suture cannot be upheld. 



400 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

These supposed disadvantages of the continuous suture have 
no foundation in experience. It is true that the continuous 
suture can cause harm if improperly applied, but the same ob- 
jection holds good to all forms of suture, and, indeed, to all 
surgical methods. The vice then is not in the suture, but in the 
wrongful application of it. It is perfectly easy to learn exactly 
how to introduce the stitch and the degree of tension that is the 
safest. 

Of all methods of intestinal suture, it would seem to me that 
one is unquestionably the best for general use. It is the method 
in which two sutures, both continuous, are used. The inner 
suture includes all the coats, the outer, the serous, muscular, and 
subserous coats only. The inner stitch secures good and ef- 
ficient approximation, a firm apposition, in fact, and acts per- 
fectly in controlling the bleeding from the cut edge of the gut. 
The outer suture supports the inner and ensures a sufficient 
apposition of serous surfaces. 

It might be feared that such a stitch would cause an inversion 
of the suture-Hne to a degree sufficient to give rise to a spur or 
diaphragm. In practice, however, it is found that the fear is not 
justified. The little thickening at the suture-line, though plainly 
seen within the first few da^'S, gradually dwindles until a normal 
appearance remains. 

This method of suture is applicable to all forms of intestinal 
anastomosis, I have used it in gastro-enterostomy, after in- 
testinal resection in the small and large intestines, and after 
excision of the caecum, both for lateral and for end-to-end anas- 
tomoses. Its universal applicability is, of course, greatl}^ in its 
favour, for a surgeon can the more speedily complete a suture to 
which he is accustomed. It is simple and safe. I have used it 
in one part or another over 500 times, and the only occasion 
upon which the suture-hne has leaked was in a case of end-to-end 
ileocolostomy, where a small faecal fistula formed and remained 
open for about ten days. When the suture is completed, the accu- 



INTESTINAL SUTURE. 



401 



rate apposition ensured by the inner suture prevents leakage 
until such time as a perfect serous union is completed. 

The suture is applied in the following manner: The two open- 
ings, whether terminal or lateral, that are to be united are placed 



,0 



Fig. 174. — Intestinal suture for 
end-to-end or lateral anastomosis. 
The cut ends are clamped and the 
outer seromuscular suture is com- 
menced. 




Fig 175. — The seromuscular su- 
ture in its first portion is completed. 
The inner suture which embraces 
all the coats is begun. Note espe- 
cialh- the manner in which the gap 
in the mesentery is secured. The 
needle enters at the point, A, and 
passes at the direction of the arrow. 



side by side, the bowel in which they are, being held by a clamp. 
The outer or serous stitch is now commenced at the part of the 
gut farthest from the operator, and an ordinary Dupuytren's 
stitch is used, being continued around the posterior margin of the 
opening until the point nearest the operator is reached, when the 



VOL. I — 26 



^02 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

needle is laid aside. The needle, on each occasion that it is 
passed, picks up only the serous and muscular and in part the 
submucous coats. At least that is the intention of the operator, 
but I think it not at all unlikety that sometimes the needle may 
penetrate deeper than this, and include all the coats of the bowel. 
If this is done no harm comes from it. 

The second inner stitch is now started. The needle is passed 

through all the walls of the gut, 
which lies to the operator's right, 
at the point of the bowel which 
is farthest from him. After 
passing from the mucous to the 
serous coat, it is withdrawn and 
then passed through the oppos- 
ing gut from the serous surface 
to the mucous, and the suture is 
tied, so that this knot lies within 
the lumen of the bowel. If an 
end-to-end anastomosis is being 
performed, the first stitch is taken 
in the manner shewn in the 
annexed drawing. The end of the 
suture is left long and is held by a 
clip. The stitch is now passed 
along the hinder margins of the 
openings to be united, until the 
part of the gut nearest to the 
operator is reached. Half of the 
suture line is then completed. 
The suture now returns to the point from which it started 
along the anterior margin, picking up all the coats in the same 
manner until the original end of the suture is reached, when the 
stitch is knotted and cut short. If it is desired to infold the mucous 
membrane, which is better though not necessary, the anterior layer 
of this inner suture is passed in a different manner. The principle 




Fig. 1 76. — The first portion of the 
inner suture is almost complete. 
This is the point at which the char- 
acter of the stitch changes, as shewn 
in next illustration. 



INTESTINAL SUTURE. 



403 



to be then observed is to pass the needle twice consecutively 
through each side of the wound so as always to leave a loop on the 
mucous surface. On each wound edge the needle then passes 

from serous to mucous, and at once 
■' '^ back from mucous to serous sur- 

face. As the stitch is drawn tight 





Fig. 177. — The inner through- 
and-through suture is changed 
here. The needle having reached 
the mucous surface of the left 
opening is passed in on this side 
again from mucous to serous sur- 
face. Then on the right side it 
passes from serous to mucous and 
back from mucous to serous sur- 
faces, so that a loop is always left 
on the mucosa. 



Fig. 1 78. — The inner suture continued. 
Note the loops always on the mucosa. 
When the stitch is tightened the cut edge 
of the mucosa is infolded and serous appo- 
sition secured. 



the mucosa becomes infolded. The 

character of the suture stitch, from 

the ordinary continuous running 

stitch to the " mucosa-loop " stitch, 

is changed when the first half of it is almost complete at the point 

shewn in the figure. The needle is introduced at points about -^-^ 

or yVof an inch apart, and the stitch is tightened to the necessary 



404 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



degree b)^ holding it taut for the better demonstration of the next 
point for the introduction of the needle. When this stitch is com- 
plete, the clamps are generally removed. The outer serous stitch is 
now continued ; the needle which was temporarity laid aside being 

again picked up and the 
suture continued around the 
anterior margin of the first 
suture until the point is 
reached from which it 
started, when the suture is 
tied and cut short. The 
needle which it will be found 
most convenient to use is 
the ordinary curved intes- 
tinal needle; for suture 
material I prefer celluloid 
thread. The stitch is not 
interrupted or knotted at 
any point. 

Such are the chief forms 
of intestinal suture, and b}^ 
the help of these all forms 
of intestinal repair or anastomosis can be safely accom- 
plished. Of them all, I believe that the Connell stitch and 
the stitch just described, in which two layers of sutures are used, 
are those which possess undoubted advantages over all others. 
They are, in my opinion, the two sutures upon which surgeons 
of the present and of the immediate future will find it safest to 
depend. The use of mechanical appliances is no longer neces- 
sary; these have played their part— a most important part, I 
gratefully admit — in the development of surgical work, and it is 
now time that their use should be abandoned. The}'- have been 
useful, nay, indispensable, steps on the march of progress. To 
Murphy, above all other surgeons, — for his instrument is one of 
the most ingenious mechanical contrivances ever invented, — we 




Fig. 179. — The inner suture completed; the 
return half of the outer suture begun. 



INTESTINAL SUTURE. 



405 




Fit 



iSo. — The inner suture completed; the 
outer one (seromuscular) resumed. 



should gratefully acknowledge the debt we owe. Without the 
knowledge that work with his button has given to us the surgery 
of the stomach and intes- 
tines would never have 
reached its present stage. 
The weightiest argu- 
ment against all mechan- 
ical aids to anastomosis is 
this — they are unneces- 
sary. By their aid we do 
not accomplish anything 
that cannot be accom- 
plished with equal rapid- 
ity and with greater 
safety by the simple 
suture. We have noth- 
ing to gain from their use, and we risk much by leaving behind 
something which ma}^ be, and often has been, the direct cause 

of danger and of death. 
The day of mechanical 
aids is over. The buttons 
and the bobbins, the elas- 
tic ligatures and the for- 
ceps of many forms, have 
now no more than an 
historical interest. 

The method of end- 
to-end anastomosis by in- 
vagination has been per- 
fected by C. L. Gibson. 
In certain circumstances 
the method offers advan- 
tages over any other, and is especially applicable when the pelvic 
colon has to be united to the rectum. ("Trans. Amer. Surg. 
Assoc," 1910, xxxviii, 262.) 




Fig. iSi. — The two sutures complete; the linal 
knot ready for tying. 



CHAPTER XXII. 
ENTEROTOMY AND ENTEROSTOMY. 

ENTEROTOMY. 

By the term enterotomy is understood the opening of the 
intestine for the purpose of immediate drainage or for explora- 
tion, followed by the closure of the wound. Enterotomy is to 
be distinguished from enterostomy, in which the opening in the 
intestine is fixed to the abdominal wall in such manner as to 
ensure continuous drainage from the bowel. 

The operation of enterotomy is most frequenth" practised in 
cases of acute intestinal obstruction. It is also, though rarely, 
necessary, in cases of polypus of the intestine, or for the removal 
of a foreign body, such as a gall-stone. Enterotomy should be 
looked upon as an almost essential feature in cases of acute in- 
testinal obstruction. If the distension of the intestine above 

St 
the obstruction is considerable or of comparatively long stand- 
ing, the needed relief to the patient is not afforded by the mere 
act of freeing the constricted spot. The mechanical impediment 
to the onward flow of intestinal contents is not the cause of 
the serious condition of the patient. It is the overloading, 
distension, and the ulceration of the gut above the block, to- 
gether with the absorption of contents whose bacterial viru- 
lence is greatly increased, which call for instant relief. No 
operation for acute obstruction can be considered complete which 
leaves an intestine, whose function it is to absorb, overdistended 
by contents of an offensive and poisonous nature. To empty 
the bowel of its fseculent contents is not to add a danger to the 
operation by reason of the opening and subsequent suture, but 
to remove, at the expense of a trifling expenditure of time, 
that condition which makes most speedily for failure. 

406 



ENTEROTOMY AND ENTEROSTOMY. 407 

In a case of acute obstruction the operation is performed in 
the following manner : 

The abdomen is opened, the point of ensnaring located, and 
the gut made free. The details of this procedure will be sub- 
sequently considered. The bowel which had been constricted 
is brought up to the surface and examined. A point about ten 
inches above the site of the constriction is chosen for the in- 
cision. It is desirable not to select a point nearer than this, 
because of the probable damage to the bowel within the few 
inches immediately above the obstruction. A loop, having been 
drawn out of the abdomen, is temporarily emptied and clamped 
by the fingers of an assistant. A longitudinal incision about one 
inch in length is then made in the bowel at the part most distant 
from the mesentery. The edges of this incision are seized and 



li 




Fig. 182. — The author's tube for use in intestinal obstruction. 

gently held with the finest French vulsella. The lower portion 
of the distended bowel — that between the site of the obstruction 
and the incision — is now emptied. Two fingers are placed one 
on each side of the intestine, and the contents are "milked" 
upwards and emptied through the incision, the lips of which are 
held apart by the vulsella. A glass tube (a Bantock's tube 
does very well) about six to eight inches in length, to the outer 
end of which a large drainage-tube is attached, is now gently in- 
troduced into the opening in the gut and pushed gradually up- 
wards for three or four inches. The vulsella are now removed 
from the edges of the incision, and with a piece of gauze the bowel 
is drawn on the glass tube to within about an inch of the end to 
which the mbber tube is attached. At this point the bowel is 
held firm by an assistant, who wraps a piece of gauze, wrung out 
of hot sterile salt solution, around the tube and gut together. 



408 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

Leakage by the side of the tube is in this way avoided. The 
surgeon now draws more and more of the intestine on to the 
tube, and as this is done, the bowel so drawn down empties its 
offensive contents through the rubber tube into a receptacle 
held for the purpose. It will be found that upon a tube 6 inches 
in length eight or ten feet of intestine can readily be drawn. 
This manoeuvre must be carried out slowly and with great care. 
It is essential that the intestine shall be pulled on to the tube 
little by little. The tube itself must not be pushed into the bowel, 
but the bowel drawn over and along it. Time must be allowed 
for the perfect emptying of the bowel, and any damage to the 





Fig. 183. — The bowel being pulled gently along the tube. The tube must not 
be pushed into the intestine. 



bowel by the tube m.ust be diligently avoided. When as much 
of the bowel as possible has been drawn on to the tube, the tube 
may be gradually withdrawn as the bowel, now collapsed, is re- 
placed gently within the abdomen, or, if thought desirable, the 
bowel may be washed out with warm sterile salt solution. This is 
done by puncturing the bowel at the highest point reached with 
a medium-sized needle to which a long India-rubber tube and a 
funnel are affixed. As the salt solution runs into the bowel it 
gradually trickles downwards and escapes by the rubber tube. 
The glass tube is withdrawn slowly, and the fluid is "milked" 
downwards towards its outlet. If the fluid is found to be run- 
ning upwards in the intestine instead of downwards, the part of 



ENTEROTOMY AND ENTEROSTOMY. 



409 



the gut immediately above the point of entrance of the needle is 
lightly closed with a Doyen's clamp When the glass tube is 
almost withdrawn, the flow of saline solution is stopped. If nec- 
essary, one or two ounces of Epsom salts dissolved in water may 
be introduced through the needle and allowed to remain. The 
needle is now withdrawn, and the point of puncture closed by a 
few Lembert sutures which fold the intestinal wall transversely. 
The bowel is now replaced, with the exception of the loop in which 
the incision for the tube was made. This is carefully washed 




Fig. 184. — To shew the position of the tube when as much of the tube as possible 

has been drained by it. 

after the removal of the tube, and closed by a double line of sut- 
ures — one including all the coats, the outer picking up the serous 
and muscular coats only. Great care is expended upon these 
sutures, since they are being introduced into a gut already dam- 
aged by overdistension and perhaps by ulceration. A final 
cleansing of the loop is now made, and the whole bowel is replaced 
and the wound closed. If the bowel has suffered excessive dam- 
age from overlong distension, a point higher than ten inches from 
the constriction may be selected. On this, the operator must de- 
cide. It is essential to select a spot whose appearance and con- 
sistence are as little different from the normal as possible. 



410 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

ENTEROSTOMY. 

The operation of enterostomy consists in the fixing of the 
bowel to the abdominal wall and the opening of the bowel for 
the purpose of allowing an escape of its contents. Two forms 
of opening are made. In the one, the small intestine or the 
caecum, as a rule, is opened for the purpose of temporary drainage, 
a fcBcal fistula being made. In the other, the large intestine, as a 
rule, is opened for the purpose of permanent drainage, an arti- 
ficial anus being made. 

Temporary drainage of the intestine is generally adopted 
when, in cases of acute intestinal obstruction, the patient is 
in such peril that only the smallest possible interference can be 
tolerated. In circumstances such as these any search, how- 
ever brief, however skilfulty performed, would add a con- 
siderable danger to the operation. The purpose of the surgeon 
is then to give relief to the obstruction in the simplest manner, 
as speedily as possible, with the least possible disturbance of 
parts, leaving everything but the overloading of the intestine 
to be accomplished later. In some cases of obstruction, as 
Nelaton long ago pointed out, a mere rehef from overdisten- 
sion will permit a return to the normal. But such a fortunate 
event is of the greatest rarity, and it should, therefore, not be 
urged as a measure of persuasion to do an imperfect operation 
except in times of the greatest stress. 

Enterostomy may also be performed at times with con- 
spicuous success in cases of post-operative paralytic distension 
of the intestines where the patient is hastening to his end. 

The operation of enterostomy, the formation of a fascal 
fistula in the small intestine, is performed as follows: The 
skin being anaesthetised (a general anaesthetic is not necessary), 
the abdomen is opened by an incision about 2^ inches in length 
in the right iliac region. This position of the incision is that 
originally advocated in 1840 by Nelaton, and it possesses many 
advantages. The first and chief est is that if the caecum be dis- 



ENTEROTOMY AND ENTEROSTOMY. 



411 



tended, it can be opened, — typhlotomy, — but if it be collapsed, 
a point in the ileum low down is likely, as shewn by Monks 
and others, to present itself in the wound. The advantage 
of having the opening in the bowel as low down as possible 
needs no emphasis. As soon as the abdomen is opened the 
caecum or a distended coil of the bowel is seized and drawn gently 
outwards. The position and direction of the loop of gut se- 
lected should be changed as little as possible. The bowel is now 





Fig- 185. — Enterostomy. Faecal fistula — for drainage of intestine. The purse- 
string suture is tightened around a tube. 



fixed to the parietal wound. Two sutures, one at each end, 
are first introduced. They pass through all the layers of the 
abdominal wound on one side, then pick up a broad piece of 
the serous and muscular coats of the intestine, and then pierce 
the opposite edge of the wound, passing through all the layers. 
These two sutures, one at each extremity of the portion of bowel 
to be fixed into the wound, secure a good attachment. They 
are left loose until a later stage. The peritoneal edges are now 
seized with two pairs of clips on each side, and a continuous 



412 



ABDOMINAL OPEEATIONS. 



suture of fine Pagensteclier thread is introduced to unite the 
serous covering of the bowel to the parietal peritoneum and the 
muscle (or aponeurosis in the middle Hne) superficial to it . If the 
needle pass only through the peritoneum, it may tear, and 
a firmer hold is therefore desirable. It is most important, 
though sometimes difficult, to avoid a penetration of all 
the coats of the bowel when passing tliis suture. The skin 
should never be included. When this suture is completed, 
the through-and-through sutures are tied. The gut is now 

ready to be opened, 
but it is desirable to 
postpone the opening, 
if it can be done with 
safet}', for a few hours. 
A delay of even a couple 
of hours will ens-ure a 
fairly accurate sealing- 
off from the peritoneal 
cavit}^. From the in- 
flamed peritoneum, 
lymph is rapidly poured 
out. When the bowel 
is opened, it is desirable 
to have some appa- 
ratus at hand where- 
with to carry oif the 
profuse discharge. A Paul's tube to the outer end of which 
a large drainage-tube is attached is the most efficient of all. 
One of medium size will be found adequate. A somewhat 
similar tube, used in America, is known as "]\Iixter's" tube. 
Before opening the bowel a purse-string suture is apphed around 
the spot at which the opening is to be made. When the tube 
is introduced, this suture is tied aroimd the tube, and for the time 
prevents leakage. After two to five days, the suture works 
loose and the tube wih be found to sHp out. A second suture 




Fisr. iS6. 



-Typhlotomy. The chief sutures 
in position. 



ENTEROTOMY AND ENTEROSTOMY. 413 

can then be applied, which will act for a couple of days longer, 
and will thereby postpone the soiling and irritation of the sur- 
rounding skin. Around the tube sterile gauze is packed so as 
to keep it fairly steady, and this is changed from time to time 
as seems necessary. When the tube has finally worked loose 
and has been removed, the intestinal contents are discharged 
on to the surface. As a rule, it is not long before the skin shews 
signs of redness and excoriation, and finally an intensely red, 
angry-looking, eczematous condition results. If the opening 
be anywhere in the small intestine, the condition of the pa- 
tient is lamentable and an early closure of the fistula is desirable. 
As each peristaltic wave reaches the opening there is a spurt 
of faecal material or of intestinal juice, and the patient ex- 
periences a fresh accession of burning, almost intolerable pain. 
His condition, to say the truth, is one of abject misery. The 
only relief to be obtained in such circumstances is afforded by 
keeping the patient once or twice a day in a warm bath for 
an hour. The skin irritation can be to some extent prevented 
by a frequent cleansing and by painting over the skin a sat- 
urated solution of pure rubber in benzine. This should be 
applied from the first, and a protective coating thereby given 
to the abdominal wall. Despite all care, however, the sore- 
ness of the skin will almost inevitably occur. 

It is, as I have said, important that the continuous suture 
fbdng the gut should not include the skin. The fistula is the 
more likely to close spontaneously if the skin is not included. 
The gut is, in fact, stitched to the abdominal w^all in much 
the same manner as the gall-bladder occasionally is in the opera- 
tion of cholecystotomy, and in these cases, as in those, the fistula 
will shew a tendency to close. Closure of the gall-bladder is, 
however, a matter of certainty; closure of a fsecal fistula, per- 
formed in the manner described, is possible, though not frequent. 
In many instances the fistula has to be closed by operation in a 
manner to be presently described. 

It is a matter of great importance that the opening should 



414 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

be made into the intestine as low down as possible. The reasons 
for this are many. The high opening of the gut involves the 
risk of starvation. In those instances where the jejunum has 
been opened a speedy loss of weight follows, as might be an- 
ticipated. It is possible, in some such cases, to feed the pa- 
tient by the fistula and so keep him alive or improve his con- 
dition, but an early closure of the fistula is, as a rule, imperative. 
If the opening is made even three or four feet away from the 
caecum, the bowel below the opening shews, as was pointed 
out by Lennander, the most remarkable tendency to contract 
adhesions. At a secondary operation for the closure of the 
fistula the separation of these intricate adhesions may be ex- 
tremely difficult, and when the channel has been made com- 
plete, an intestinal obstruction may be caused by them. In 
one such case of my own a third operation had to be performed, 
and the gut at the site of the faecal fistula joined, by lateral an- 
astomosis, to the transverse colon. For these reasons, then, — 
the impossibility of recognising with the limited incision and 
with the necessary absence of handling the exact portion of the 
intestine which is seized, and the tendency to the formation 
of intricate and inseparable adhesions in the collapsed intestine 
below the fistula, — it is desirable to select for the opening, 
whenever possible, the caecum rather than the small intestine. 
It is said that subsequent closure of a cascal fistula is more dif- 
ficult than in the case of an intestinal fistula. This has cer- 
tainly not been my own experience; for in those cases of 
growth in the large intestine in which obstruction has been 
acute, the faecal fistula has acted well, and when a later re- 
section and end-to-end union of the colon have rendered the 
channel once more pervious, the fistula has often closed spon- 
taneously or become materially reduced in size, so that an 
operation for its closure was of the simplest character. If 
the caecum is found collapsed, the intestine must, of course, 
be opened, but, speaking generally, the opening of the caecum 
is to be preferred to enterostomy. 



ENTEROTOMY AND ENTEROSTOMY. 



415 



In some cases the appendix may be brought up to the sur- 
face, fixed to the parietal peritoneum, and opened by cutting 
away the last half inch. A catheter may then be passed along 
the lumen of the appendix, and the caecum can thereby be drained. 
When it is desired to close the opening, the wound can be re- 
opened and the appendix be removed. This operation, first sug- 




Fig. 1S7. — Appendicostomy. The incision in the skin is made long to shew 
the details of the operation. It need not be longer than i to li inches when the 
operation is performed during life. 



gested by Weir, of New York, is known as Appendicostomy 
("Medical Record," August 9, 1902). 

The operation of enterostomy, then, in certain cases, is un- 
doubtedly a life-saving measure. In cases of advanced intestinal 
obstruction, when the bowel is overdistended and the patient's 
condition is bad, and in cases of so-called paralytic distension as- 



4l6 ABDOMIX-\L OPER-\TIOXS. 

sociated with septic peritonitis, due more often to appendicitis, 
a patient's life may undoubtedly be saved. But it is only for 
such, exceptional cases that the operation should be reserved. 
It is true, as Nelaton claimed, that in a certain proportion of 
cases relief to the overdistension of the gut permits a readjust- 
ment of an entangled and obstructed gut, so that the normal 
condition is regained. Such an occurrence is, however, of the 
rarest and should never be expected. It is far more likely that 
even after relief to the overdistension the mechanical conditions 
of obstruction will persist and will lead to serious disaster. An 
ensnared loop will, for example, go on to gangrene, or perforation 
and extravasation will occur. Though recovery is possible, dis- 
aster is not improbably impending. The opening of the gut 
must, therefore, be considered only as a temporary' expedient — 
to be avoided, if possible; to be resorted to only under the 
pressure of urgent necessity. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

COLOTOMY. 

The discussions as to the advantages of inguinal over lumbar 
colotom}^ or vice versa, lose much of their interest and impor- 
tance if two points be conceded by the adA^ocates of both opera- 
tions. These two points are: 

1. That in all cases, wherever the incision may lie, the peri- 
toneal cavity should be opened. 

2. That in cases of acute obstruction demanding colotomy 
the old methods should be abandoned, and a Paul's tube be at 
once introduced into the bowel above the block. 

The necessity for the observance of the first point will be 
generally admitted. With modern methods the opening of the 
peritoneal cavity for such a brief period as is needed for the 
performance of an inguinal colotomy is quite devoid of risk. 
The chief point in the former advocacy of lumbar colotomy 
depended upon the fact that the operation could be performed 
without opening the peritoneum, and, in days gone by, this 
statement carried great weight. The extraperitoneal opera- 
tion, however, is most unsatisfactory, for when the colon is 
brought to the surface and opened on that side which is bare 
of peritoneum, a comparatively small opening is made, the open- 
ing shews a constant tendency to become narrowed, and, as 
there is no "spur" at the opening, there is an unhindered passage 
of faeces down towards the rectum. The lodgment of faeces, 
constantly increased in quantity, in the parts near the growth, 
teases the patient in many cases far more than all his other 
discomforts. Moreover, the necessity for an extraperitoneal 
opening being made belonged to an age of ruder surgery. 

So far as the second point is concerned, it is only necessary 
to say that it is by the use of a Paul's tube, and by that only, 
VOL. I — 27 417 



41 8 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

that it is possible for the bowel brought to the surface to be 
opened at once without risk of soiling the peritoneum. The 
old extraperitoneal lumbar colotomy derived its chief claim 
to consideration from the fact that the bowel could be opened 
instantly without any chance of peritonitis ensuing. In any 
form of colotomy, however, the peritoneum may now be freely 
opened and its soiling be secureh^ prevented by the use of a 
Paul's tube. This subject is considered further in the articles 
dealing with enterostomy and with the treatment of intestinal 
obstruction due to growth in the large intestine. 

For all these reasons the conclusion is reached that an 
intraperitoneal operation is alwa^^s desirable. The only ques- 
tion, therefore, to be decided is as to whether an opening in 
the loin is a matter of greater convenience to the patient than 
one in the inguinal region. For many reasons, which will be 
readily understood, an opening at the side is less revolting 
than one on the anterior surface of the abdomen — it is out 
of the way, so to speak. But being so, it is more difficult to 
attend to if the patient has to rely upon himself for his toilet. 
An opening in front is readil}" cleansed and the dressings are 
easily changed. 

From the anterior opening there is, as a rule, a greater ten- 
dency to prolapse of the bowel than from a lateral opening. 
But when the method to be presently described is adopted, the 
likelihood of prolapse to an extent causing discomfort is negli- 
gible. 

Much has been written about the distress and misery caused 
to a patient by the existence of a colotomy opening. I be- 
lieve that this is largely, if not solely, due to improper methods 
in the performance of the operation; to the extraperitoneal 
operation, with its absence of spur and consequent dribbling 
of faeces into the rectum ; and to the prolapse from an inguinal 
opening. I do not find that, with the method to be described, 
there is any discomfort or distress whatever after the first two 
months — after the time, that is, that the patient has acquired 



COLOTOMY. 419 

some control over the opening. I have recently written to 
eleven patients upon whom I performed colotomy followed by 
proctectomy at various times, all over six months ago. Ten 
of the patients expressed themselves as perfectly content, and 
all told me that they would decline any further operation to 
close the colotomy opening. The trouble caused by the opening 
was so slight that it was not worth while entertaining the idea 
of having even a trifling operation performed for the divert- 
ing of the faeces. One patient, though suffering no distress, 
said she would prefer to have an operation for the closure of 
the artificial anus. 

In the following description of the operation of inguinal 
colotomy the steps which are followed after the abdomen has 
been opened belong equally to the lumbar operation, and, in- 
deed, to colotomy wherever practised. 



INGUINAL COLOTOMY. 

When inguinal colotomy is performed the sigmoid flexure 
may be opened as high as possible or as low as possible. When 
opened as high as possible there is no fear of any prolapse, but 
there is little or no fascal continence. When opened as low as 
possible, there is a liability to prolapse, but the normal reservoir 
for the faeces, the sigmoid flexure, is preserved, and incontinence 
is not apt to occur. The ideal operation would be a low sigmoid 
colotomy performed in such a manner as to permit the patient to 
have good control over the faecal evacuation. I have recently 
practised an operation which seems to achieve this ideal: 

High Sigmoid Colotomy. — In performing the operation for 
inguinal colotomy it is perhaps in the majority of cases desirable 
to open the sigmoid flexure as high as possible. In this manner 
the undoubted tendency to prolapse is lessened or even abolished ; 
for the sigmoid is brought to the surface at a part where its 
mesentery is short, and the support of that segment of the bowel 
engaged in the operation is therefore firm. 



420 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



The abdominal incision is made on the left side, in a manner 
precisely similar to that which is adopted upon the right side 
in the removal of the appendix ; that is to say, that the muscles 
are spHt, as suggested by McBurney, and their fibres are not 
divided. 

The incision is made with its centre at a line which joins 
the umbilicus to the anterior superior spine of the ilium, at a 
distance of if to 2 inches from the anterior superior spine. 
If the abdominal wall is very lax and pendulous, the incision 
may be made an inch higher even than this. The skin is divided 
for a lensfth not exceeding two inches. When the fibres of 






Fig. 188. — Colotomy — the muscles are split in the manner shewn: a, Fibres 
of external oblique; h, external obliqvie split; a small nick in the internal 
oblique, at the outer border of the rectus; c, the internal oblique and trans- 
versalis split. 

the external oblique muscle are exposed, it will be found 
that the incision lies parallel to them. These fibres are 
split in the direction of their length, and are separated 
gently from one another. The muscular bundles of the in- 
ternal oblique are then exposed; their direction is almost 
at right angles to that of the fibres of the external oblique. A 
separation of these muscular bundles is effected similarly in the 
direction of their length. This, which is not always an easy 
matter, is best effected by beginning the separation of them 
as near as possible to the outer border of the rectus. A small 
incision here will divide or separate the fibres of the internal 



COLOTOMY. 421 

oblique and of the transA^ersalis which lie beneath it, the trans- 
versalis fascia and the peritoneum being exposed. This small 
incision is lengthened by gently tearing the muscular fibres 
apart for a distance of about i^ inches. A small retractor 
is then placed on each side of the wound, holding the muscles 
apart, and exposing the peritoneum, in which an incision of 
an inch, or rather less, is made. The cut edges of the perito- 
neum are seized with a cHp on each side. 

The forefinger is then introduced into the abdomen and 
the sigmoid flexure is sought. As a rule, there is no difficulty 
whatever in finding it and in bringing it to the surface. The 
simplest method of seizing it at once is to sweep the finger 
along the peritoneum on the outer side of the wound across 
the iliac fossa until the mesosigmoid is reached. A loop of 
the sigmoid is then drawm to the surface. I make a point in 
all cases of seeing that the part to be engaged in the wound is 
the highest part of the sigmoid. The desirability of this was 
first shewn by Mr. Harrison Cripps. As soon as a loop of the 
bowel is drawn out of the wound, its upper end is drawn upon 
until no more of the bowel will come out ; at the same time 
the lower portion of the gut is returned through the wound 
into the abdomen. AVhen the highest portion of the sigmoid 
has been reached, a good loop of the bowel is drawn out of the 
wound and its mesentery is made tense. A close examination 
of the mesentery is made, so that a bloodless spot can be chosen 
for the passage of the suture. This spot should be about i 
inch from the gut. The suture is now passed. In over 30 
consecutive cases I have used only one suture for the sup- 
port and fixation of the bowel. This stitch was first sug- 
gested by my colleague, ^Ir. Edward Ward. In introducing 
it I use a fully curved Hagedorn needle charged with thick 
Pagenstecher thread. The needle is passed from the centre 
of the incision on the upper or inner side of the wound, 
being introduced about ^ to f inch from the cut edge, 
through the skin, external and internal oblique and trans- 



422 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



versalis muscles, and the peritoneum. The dip which was 
put on to the edge of the peritoneum, immediately after 
it was incised, is drawn upon gentty, so that it may be seen 

that the needle takes a good 
hold of the serous surface. The 
thread is pulled after the needle 
until onl}^ 6 inches remain on 
the outer surface of the skin. 
The needle now passes through 
the mesentery of the sigmoid 
at the bloodless spot alread}^ 
selected. During and after the 
time that tliis is done the loop 
of the sigmoid with its mesen- 
tery is held« firmly in the sur- 
geon's left hand. The thread is 
again pulled after the needle, which now is made to transfix 
the outer or lower margin of the wound, through all its tliick- 
ness from peritoneum to skin. The thread is now pulled tight 
between the needle, and the end left hanging from the upper 




189. — Colotomy. Shewing 
Ward's stitch in horizontal sec- 
tion. 




Fig. 190. — Colotomy. Shewing Ward's stitch in transverse section. 



side of the wound. The needle is then returned through the 
same opening in the mesentery through which it has already 
passed, the needle is disengaged, and the stitch is ready 
for tying. On the upper side of the wound are the two ends 



COLOTOMY. 



423 




of the thread — one going into and through the whole thick 
ness of the abdominal wall, the other emerging from the open 
inginto the mesentery. 
On the lower side is a 
loop. When the su- 
ture is tied, a piece of 
medium-sized drain- 
age-tube is threaded 
through this loop, so 
that the thread may 
not cut into the skin. 
As the two ends of the 
thread are knotted to- 
gether, a similar piece 
of tube is placed in the 
loop so formed. The 
thread is drawn upon 

firmly and deliberately and a double knot is tied 
the thread are then cut, being left about 2 inches long. 

This stitch affords a perfectly firm support to the loop of 

the sigmoid. It secures that 
a good loop of the bowel shall 
lie external to the skin, and 
it draws the skin-edges into 
the closest approximation 
with the mesentery on each 
side. There is no risk, there- 
fore, of the bowel getting 
adrift or of the wound being 
opened more widely and a 
large amount of bowel being 
extruded. The suture, there- 
fore, possesses every advantage over the glass rod, or strip of 
gauze, passed through the mesentery, in the methods adopted 
by many surgeons. 



Fig. 191. — Colotomy. Operation completed. 

The ends of 




Fig. 192. — Ward's stitch, in "mattress 
form, as seen in horizontal section. 



424 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



No other stitches than this single one are necessary. If 
the skin incision has not been made unduly large, it will be 
found to fit the loop of the bowel quite snugly. If necessary, 
a silkworm-gut* stitch may be passed at each end of the wound; 
in these a few fibres of a longitudinal muscular band on the 
bowel may be included, so as to give a fixed point of firm union 
at each end. This, however, is not necessary, and is to be 
performed only when an unduly large wound through the 
abdominal wall has been made. 

Any loose appendices are now ligated at their attachment 
with fine catgut, and cut away. 




Fig. 193. — Ward's stitch in "mattress" form, as seen in transverse section. 



A square of boiled dental rubber, or of oiled silk, is now 
applied over and around the loop of the bowel, and an ex- 
ternal dressing of wool applied. The whole operation lasts 
from ten to fifteen minutes and may be done under local 
anaesthesia. 

The supporting stitch may also be passed in the same manner 
as a mattress suture. The details are shewn in the annexed 
drawings. My own preference is for the first form of the 
stitch. 

In order to keep the bowel from action and to quiet the pos- 
sible unrest of the patient, a hypodermic injection of I or ^ of a 
grain of morphine may be given, and repeated at the end of 
twenty-four hours. 



COLOTOMY. 425 

The time at which it is necessary to open the sigmoid flexure 
varies much in different cases. If there be an acute or sub- 
acute obstruction, it may be imperative to open the gut at once ; 
in such circumstances the use of a Paul's tube is essential, for 
it is only in this way that the wound and its immediate area 
can be kept free from contact with f cecal discharge. If, how- 
ever, there be no undue urgency, at least three days may be 
allowed to elapse before the intestine is incised; and in some 
instances as long as a week may be allowed to pass. 

I have in many cases opened the bowel at the end of two, three, 
or four days, and have allowed the supporting stitch to remain 
in for several days longer. It is true that until this stitch 
is removed the bowel does not empty itself quite satisfactorily, 
but there is free escape for flatus, and for fasces in sufficient 
amount to prevent distress. The bowel is opened, as a rule, 
by an incision with the knife of a Paquelin cautery. The open- 
ing is made lengthwise into the intestine, and at first should 
be approximately an inch in length. The cautery should be 
of a dull red heat, and the division of the coat of the gut made 
slowly, so that hemorrhage is prevented. As soon as the 
lumen is freely exposed it will be seen that the two openings 
leading from the surface into the proximal and distal limbs 
of the eventrated loop are separated by a well-marked spur, 
the end of which lies well above the level of the skin. It is, there- 
fore, a physical impossibility for faeces to pass onwards into 
the distal opening: they must first escape from the proximal 
opening on to the surface. Through the distal opening, however, 
some astringent or antiseptic lotion can be introduced which 
will pass down over the gro\\^h and out of the anus, through 
a rectal tube. An ulcerating growth in the bowel can there- 
by be rendered both cleaner and sweeter, and that condition 
of irritating, ichorous discharge which is sometimes seen can 
be lessened or prevented. 

Low Sigmoid Colotomy. — I have recenth' performed an 
operation having for its objects the provision of a controllable 



426 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



artificial anus and the preservation of the normal function of the 
sigmoid flexure. The sole disadvantage of the method just de- 
scribed is that the fsecal material as soon as it reaches the sigmoid 
flextire is free to escape on to the surface. The sigmoid flexure 
should act, and in health does act, as a f^cal reservoir. If, there- 




Fig. 194. — Low sigmoid colotomy. Shewing the bridge of skin under which 
the upper closed end of the sigmoid flexure, which has been cut through as low 
down as possible, is passed. The lower incision is shewn much larger than is 
necessary. 



fore, it is opened as low down as possible rather than as high up as 
possible, f^cal material coming down the descending colon will 
not instantly be discharged upon the surface, but will be col- 
lected and detained to a convenient time in a capacious loop of 
bowel destined for that purpose. As a rule, when the sigmoid has 
been opened low down there has been a prolapse of the gut through 



COLOTOMY. 



427 



the opening. This can be prevented by the method now to be 
described. 

The operation is performed in the following manner : 
The abdomen is opened by the muscle-splitting incision just 
described. As soon as the sigmoid is exposed it is drawn 11 p- 
wards as far as possible 
until there is a tight 
length leadingto the rec- 
tum. At this point two 
clamps are placed, and 
the bowel is divided be- 
tween them. Both ends 
of the gut are now in- 
folded and closed by 
suture. (Thebow^elmay 
be crushed, ligatured 
and closed in, if desired.) 
The distal end of the 
bowel is fixed to the 
lower angle of the wound 
by a couple of stitches 
which include the peri- 
toneum and the wall of 
the intestine. The up- 
per end is freed a little, 
so as to render it more 
mobile without denud- 
ing it of its blood-supply , 
and is brought out of 
the wound as far as pos- 
sible. A few stitches fix it to the peritoneum, and the muscles 
are allowed to return to their former position. The upper closed 
end of the gut is now" treated in one of two ways : either it is, if 
freely mobile and of good length, passed upwards and inwards 
under a bridge of skin, made by undermining the skin on the inner 




Fig. 195. — Low sigmoid colotom}'. Sec- 
tion shewing the lower end closed and re- 
turned within the abdomen, and the upper 
end brought to the skin. A pad pressing in 
the direction of the arrow prevents leakage. 



428 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

side of the T\-oiind for an inch and a half ; a second smaller incision 
is then made through which the end of the bowel is pulled, and 
the original wound is closed. Or, if the bowel be but little mobile, 
being held by a tight mesenter3^ it is brought at once to the skin 
surface of the original woiuid, being twisted on its axis for half 
a circle. 

If the former method is possible it is the more desirable ; for 
after the bowel has been opened, the subcutaneous part of it may 
be so compressed by a pad fixed upon an abdominal belt as to be 
perfectly controlled, — controlled so efficient^, indeed, as to pre- 
vent even the passage of flatus, to allow which to pass the pad 
must be lifted awa}^ from the abdomen. 

The opening of the bowel is left for two, three or four days, as 
seems necessarv^. 

I believe it is to Wyeth, of New York, that we are indebted 
for this suggestion as to the continued usefulness of the sigmoid 
reser\'oir. 

THE LUHBAR OPERATION. 

Limibar colotomy is performed in a manner precisely similar 
to that which is adopted in the inguinal operation; the sole 
differences are in the position chosen for the skin incision and 
in the fact that the descending colon, which is not at all or 
scantily provided with a mesentery, is opened instead of the 
sigmoid flexure. The incision which is most convenient is 
that which is generally known as Br^^ant's incision. 

The patient lies well over on the right side, and in the hollow 
of the right loin a firm, rounded sand-bag is placed. 

The incision is oblique and falls upon the skin between the 
last rib and the iliac crest. 

The line of the colon is marked on the surface from a point 
half an inch behind the middle of the line joining the anterior 
and posterior superior spines vertically upwards. The centre 
of the incision lies upon this line. 

The incision divides the skin, thick subcutaneous tissues, 



COLOTOMY. 429 

and the muscles down to the fascia lumborum, which is opened 
by a small incision. The opening is widened by gentle tear- 
ing. The fat around the kidney is now exposed and is gently 
displaced or torn away with the fingers. In front the perito- 
neum Avill be seen. 

The peritoneum is then deliberately opened on the outer 
side of the colon. When this has been done, there is no diffi- 
culty whatever in discovering the colon. As a rule, it comes 
unbidden to the surface and is seized at once. If it should 
not do so, the left index-finger is passed into the wound towards 
the spine, and is made to sweep along the front of the kidney 
until it is felt to meet the colon, which is hooked upwards 
and drawn out of the wound. By pulling gently upon the 
colon the peritoneum on each side of it is also drawn upon, in 
such manner as to fashion a sort of mesocolon. It is through 
this mesocolon that Ward's stitch, already described and 
illustrated, is passed. Mr. Ward devised this most satisfactory 
suture expressly for the operation of lumbar colotomy, and 
it is safe to say that no method for the performance of the 
operation approaches this one, so far as the perfect character 
of the opening — and, therefore, so far as the comfort of the 
patient — is concerned. 

In some patients the depth of the w^ound may make it neces- 
sary or desirable to introduce a small drain in the posterior 
half, or possibly in the anterior half also, in order to prevent 
an accumulation of serous fluid in so deep a pouch. In rarer 
instances the wound from the skin to the peritoneum may 
be of so great a depth that the colon cannot be made to reach 
the surface. In such circumstances there is nothing to be done 
but to close the wound and to open the abdomen in the manner 
already described by an incision for the performance of inguinal 
colotomy. Such a condition of things, it is true, is rarely met 
with, but I was unfortunate enough to experience it in one 
case. 

The difficulty due to an extremely short mesentery may 



430 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

also be encountered in inguinal colotomy. If so, it may be 
overcome in one of two ways : either the parietal peritoneum 
may be stripped from the edges of the abdominal wound and 
tucked down to the sigmoid flexure by a series of sutures, the 
opening of the bowel being delayed for several days; or the 
bowel may be cut completely across, and each cut end gently 
stripped up until it can be made to reach the surface, or, better, 
to project well beyond it; the bowel is then stitched to the 
skin. A part of the ends may slough, owing to defective nutri- 
tion, but enough will remain to ensiire an adequate opening 
on the surface. 

LILIENTHAL'S COLOTOMY. 

Colotomy after the method of Lilienthal is performed as fol- 
lows: A muscle-splitting incision 3^-^ to 4 inches long is made 
through the left rectus, the upper end of this incision reaching 
almost to the line of the umbilicus. The abdomen being opened 
and explored, a loop of the sigmoid flexure is drawn out. The 
two limbs of this loop are sutured as widely as possible apart, 
one to the peritoneum and rectus sheath, at the upper end of the 
incision, the other similarly at the lower. 

Silk or linen thread is used for the suture material. Lilien- 
thal stitches with a continuous suture, tying every third stitch 
so as to avoid closing the lumen of the gut. The mesosigmoid 
is sutured by a through-and-through stitch to the peritoneum on 
each side. The gut is now divided at the lower end of the loop 
between two ligatures, and the mucosa sterilised with pure car- 
bolic. 

Mattress sutures are passed through the mesosigmoid, which 
is then divided so as to separate a longer length of colon. 

At this stage of the operation the condition of affairs is as 
follows: There is a short piece of sigmoid — the distal loop — sut- 
ured to the lower angle of the wound, and a long piece (3 or 4 
inches) completely freed except at its attachment to the upper 
angle of the wound. Four clips are now placed on the mouth of 



COLOTOMY. 



431 



the proximal loop, and a finger inserted into the lumen up to the 
site of suture to the peritoneum. 

The clamps are then rotated by the assistant around the longi- 
tudinal axis of the gut in such a manner as to produce a certain 
degree of constriction, the degree of rotation necessary varying 
from 180 to 300 according to the thickness of the sigmoid. A few 




Fig. 196. — Lilienthal's colotomy. 

interrupted Pagenstecher sutures are now passed from the muscu- 
lar aponeurosis of the external oblique to the gut, taking in the 
submucosa. As many of these stitches as are necessary to hold 
the sigmoid in the twisted position are inserted. The anterior 
sheath of the rectus is now closed, a rectal tube is tied 6 inches 
into the gut, and the remainder of the wound packed with gauze. 
The tube is removed in about seven days, and the redundant 



432 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



sigmoid cauterised. The ligature round the lower piece of in- 
testine is removed in three or four da\'s. 

Lilienthal ("Annals of Surger^^ " 1910, vol. Hi, p. 384) claims 
that the advantage of this colotom}' over all others is that the 
patient has control over the opening and that consequenth' no 
appliance beyond a simple bandage need be worn. This control 




Fig. 197. — Lilienthal's colotomy. 

is dependent chiefl}^ on the sphincteric action of the left rectus. 
There is also a sphincter at the site of the rotation and an angula- 
tion at the point of peritoneal fixation. 

I perform the Lilienthal colotomy in a fashion exactly simi- 
lar to that followed in the inguinal and iliac operations, using 
Ward's deep stitch, but without division of the sigmoid at the 
primary operation. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

ENTERO-ANASTOMOSIS, LATERAL ANASTOMOSIS, OR 
SHORT-CIRCUITING. 

By lateral anastomosis, or short-circuiting, of the intestine 
is understood the creation of a communication from the bowel 
above to the bowel below an impenetrable or irremovable stric- 
ture. A lateral anastomosis may be used either as a final, 
perhaps the only possible, operation, as in cases of growth of 
the intestine causing partial occlusion, when secondary de- 







Fig. 19S. — Entero-anastomosis (isoperistaltic). 

posits in the liver or elsewhere are already present, or as a 
temporary measure, to give present relief to urgent symptoms, 
and thereby to prepare the way to a later resection of the growth. 
If, for example, there be a large, adherent, irremovable malig- 
nant mass in or near the csecum which is causing intestinal 

VOL. I— 28 433 



434 



ABDOMINAL OPER.\TIONS. 



occlusion, the ileum above the growth ma}^ be united to the 
colon at any point well beyond the growth — to the transverse 
colon or the sigmoid flexure, for example. The operation 
of short-circuiting is one of frequent use and of great service 
in any part of the alimentary canal. Gastro-enterostomy 
for pyloric obstruction, entero-anastomosis, ileosigmoidostomy, 
are all operations that have served the surgeon well. 

It is impossible, in any brief statement, to disclose the 
various indications for the performance of entero-anasto- 
mosis, but a few of the more important may be named. 

I. In intestinal ob- 
struction due to growths 
in the large or small 
intestine, where primary 
resection is impossible 
or inadvisable. The 
performance of enter- 
ostomy, formerly much 
practised, is consider- 
ably curtailed if this 
indication be observed. 
Lateral anastomosis in 
these circumstances is 
as simple and as safe as 
enterostomy, and is free 
.from all the unpleasing 
attributes of a faecal 
fistula. 

2. In cases of simple stricture of the intestine due to cicatricial 
contraction following strangulated hernia, etc. 

3. In cases of tuberculous disease of the intestine with ex- 
tensive and inseparable adhesions, with the matting together 
of many feet of intestine in intricate confusion. 

4. In some cases of multiple adhesions due to recurrent 
appendicitis, before or after the removal of the appendix, when 
symptoms of intestinal difficulty are present. 

5. As a part in the operation of intestinal exclusion. 

The range of usefulness of this operation is considerable 







Fig. 199. 



-Entero-anastomosis (antiperi- 
staltic). 



ENTERO-ANASTOMOSIS AND LATERAL ANASTOMOSIS. 435 

its safety remarkable, and its performance as simple as that 
of any abdominal operation. In comparison with end-to-end 
anastomosis it presents the undoubted advantage of having 
the line of anastomosis completely encircled by peritoneum. 
There is no weak spot, as there is at the gap in the mesentery. 
Leakage, therefore, and difficulty of suture have not to be 
reckoned with; the only point requiring care and judgment 
is the selection of the most fitting place for the anastomosis. 

In cases of obstruction due to growth a point some distance 
above the growth should be selected, for that condition of in- 
fection and ulceration of the mucosa which prevents the heal- 
ing of a wound in end-to-end anastomosis may also wreck 
a lateral approximation. It is just as essential in this opera- 
tion, as in resection, to suture only healthy portions of the 
bow^el. Lateral approximation should not be made, therefore, 
too close to the growth on either side, and portions of the bowel 
alone should be selected which permit of ready apposition with- 
out drag or tension. 

So far as the means of effecting the junction are concerned, 
it is only necessary to say that no other method than that of 
simple suture should ever be considered. In the early days 
of my experience I used the Murphy button to effect an ileo- 
sigmoidostomy, and despite the fact that the heavier end was 
placed in the sigmoid, the button made its way into the cascum 
and caused ulceration and perforation. Of the method of 
simple suture, one may safely claim that it is as easy as any 
other method; that with practice it can be performed with 
equal rapidity; that disaster to the suture-line is unknown; 
that it leaves nothing behind which can, in the after-days, be a 
source of danger, and that in actual practice it is undoubtedly 
the most satisfactory. In short, all its attributes are those 
of excellence : it leaves nothing to be desired. 

The following is the method I adopt: The appropriate 
loops of bowel having been chosen, they are drawn out of the 
abdomen and clamps are applied. It is necessary to ensure 



436 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

that the loops to be united are appHed to each other so that 
they are isoperistaltic. In the small intestine this is perhaps 
of little importance, but when the small and the large intes- 
tine are applied, it is undoubtedly an advantage. This dis- 
position of the parts is ensured by seeing that the proximal 
portion of the gut is always placed near the pivot end of the 
blade of the forceps, and the distal portion of the gut towards 
the tip of the blade. The forceps so embracing the bowel are 
now made to lie side by side, and hot moist mackintosh cloths sur- 
round them, and a special rolled compress lies between them. 
The suture is then applied. The needle is the usual curved 
needle, and the thread is the finest Pagenstecher. A contin- 
uous seromuscular suture is first introduced, along a line about 
2 to 3 inches in length. The suture is knotted after the first 
stitch and the end is left long; it is then continued without in- 
terruption or knotting. The suture-line lies about ^ inch from 
that portion of the bowel most distant from the mesentery, on 
the sides of the bowel which, in this position of the clamps, are 
in contact. After the suture reaches the portion of bowel 
at the tip of the clamps' blades, the needle is laid aside. The 
intestine in front of this line of suture is now opened by a straight 
incision about 2 inches in length, which divides all the coats 
down to the mucosa. As the knife cuts through these coats 
they retract, until, by the time the mucous membrane is reached, 
an ellipse of it lies in between the wound-edges. This ellipse 
is removed ; a snip of the scissors is made through the mucosa 
at one point, and the scissors are then carried around the whole 
ellipse until it is free. The same is done with each portion of 
the gut. There will be no bleeding from the cut edges of the 
intestine, for the clamp which holds it acts as a temporary hasmo- 
static. The lumen of each portion of the bowel is emptied and 
thoroughly cleansed with gauze swabs, which are thrown away 
as soon as they are soiled. Care must be taken that neither the 
fingers of the surgeon nor of his assistant nor any of the parts 
around are soiled with the intestinal contents. The inner su- 



ENTERO-ANASTOMOSIS AND LATER.\L ANASTOMOSIS. 



437 



ture is now introduced, beginning at the proximal end of the 
incision. A similar needle and the same size of thread are used. 
The suture embraces all the coats of the gut. After the first 
stitch the thread is knotted, the end left long, the suture then 
continued along the posterior margin of the incisions to the dis- 
tal end of the wound, and, finally, the suture is continued around 
the anterior margins until the point of starting is reached, when 




Fig. 200. — The inner suture in lateral anastomosis to shew the infolding of the 
mucosa which results. A loop of the suture lies on the mucous surface. 

the end originally left long is tied with the end in the needle 
and the threads cut short. This inner stitch secures a perfect 
apposition, which is water-tight, and it is drawn sufficiently 
tight to secure the vessels in the cut edges. As each stitch is 
passed the thread is drawn upon with sufficient tension to lift 
up those portions of the intestine into which the needle has next 
to pass. The stitch is continuous throughout ; there is no fear 



438 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

of its causing a puckering of the wound-edges. With this su- 
ture special care must be taken to infold the mucosa. This 
may be done by changing the suture when the posterior part 
of the intestine has been sutured. When this point is reached, 
the needle is passed from the mucosa of the bowel which lies to 
the surgeon's left through all the coats to the serous surface. 
Then on each side the needle picks up a piece of the edge in a 
suture which lies parallel to the cut margin, the loop of the 
suture being always on the mucous surface (Fig. 200). After 
the completion of this suture the clamps are removed, and a 
general cleansing of the bowel and of the hands is made, 
for the mucosa, which is probably infected, is now closed off. 
It is often desirable for the surgeon to change his gloves. 
If any point in the cut edges shews any sign of bleeding, an 
interrupted suture is introduced and tied with sufficient force 
to arrest the hsemorrhage. The first needle, which carried the 
seromuscular stitch, is now picked up and the suture continued 
round in front of the inner stitch and about ^ inch from it, 
until the point from which it started is reached. The end of 
this outer suture, if dragged upon by an assistant, will facili- 
tate the introduction of the stitch around the anterior half 
of the wound. The two ends of the suture are now tied and 
cut short and the anastomosis is complete. A reference to 
the diagrams used in the description of the operation of gas- 
tro-enterostomy will here be useful. 

A junction between two portions of the bowel effected by 
this suture is water-tight at once. The inner suture secures 
that. It is remarkable how rapidly the outer suture, secur- 
ing accurate peritoneal approximation, ensures a firm union. 
In one case, a woman of sixty-seven, I performed ileosigmoidos- 
tomy for acute obstruction depending upon a growth in the 
caecum. After the anastomosis was complete an assistant 
stretched the sphincter and I milked a very large quantity of 
thin faecal material through the opening into the sigmoid 
and rectum. The patient died twenty-three and one -half hours 



ENTERO-ANASTOMOSIS AND LATERAL ANASTOMOSIS. 439 

after the operation, and the suture could hardly be recognised, 
so perfectly was it sealed off by accurate peritoneal adhesion. 
The general appearance of the parts was such that it was diffi- 
cult to believe that so perfect a healing had been possible in 
so short a time. 

The same technique is adopted in all circumstances. The 
only difficulty that I have met with is that in some instances 
the mesosigmoid is so short that the bowel cannot be 
drawn outside the abdomen. I have found that a pair of 
Doyen curved clamps, applied so that the concavity is for- 
wards (towards the operator), is then a help. If these can- 
not be used, then the sigmoid must be temporarily held by an 
assistant. 



CHAPTER XXV. 
ENTERECTOMY. 

Enterectomy, or the removal of a portion of the intestine, 
may be performed upon the small intestine, in any part of the 
colon, or at the ileocascal junction. 

Removal of a portion of the bowel is necessary in the fol- 
lowing conditions: 

1. In new-growths. 

2. In stricture of the intestine due to former or present 
ulceration, most frequently tuberculous in character, or follow- 
ing upon strangulation. 

3. Gangrene of the intestine, due to strangulation in a 
hernial sac, or occurring in intestinal obstruction. 

4. Irreducible intussusception, associated with growth, simple 
or malignant. 

5. In some forms of perforation of the intestine where two 
or more wounds lie close together, as in gunshot wounds. 

6. In extensive lacerations of the intestine or of the mesen- 
tery, of the kind found in "buffer" accidents, or as the result 
of a bayonet or stab -wound. 

7. In certain cases of faecal fistula, designedly or accidentally 
produced. 

8. In cases of growth in the mesentery when the vascular 
supply of the bowel is endangered. 

The subject will be considered under the following headings : 
Resection of the small intestine. 

(a) For grow^th or stricture, or in cases of mesenteric 
tumour when the vascular supply of the gut is 
involved. 

(b) In cases of gangrene dependent upon stran- 
gulated hernia or in acute obstruction. 

440 



ENTERECTOMY. 44 1 

Resection of the large intestine, 
(a) For growth. 
(6) For growth causing acute obstruction. 

RESECTION OF THE SMALL INTESTINE. 

(a) Resection of the Small Intestine for Growth or Stricture. — 

Growth of the small intestine is infrequent. I have only been 
called upon to remove malignant growths from the ileum or jeju- 
num on seven occasions. Tuberculous stricture following upon 
ulceration is occasionally seen, and in some instances the thicken- 
ing in the gut may be so marked as to cause a strong resemblance 
to primary growth. 

The abdomen is opened, as a rule, through the middle line. 
If the tumour, perceptible before the operation, seems fixed 
in any part of the abdomen, the incision may be made directly 
over the most prominent portion of it. The abdominal in- 
cision is made in the usual manner, and the hand is introduced 
into the abdomen and a general examination of the parts is 
made. If, on careful exposure of the growth, it is found that 
a decided obstruction is caused by it and that the gut on the 
proximal side is acutely distended, no resection operation can 
be undertaken. Enterectomy, followed by primary suture in 
cases of intestinal obstruction due to growth, is doomed to 
failure. A lateral anastomosis between the bowel above and 
the bowel below the growth will then be undertaken. If, how- 
ever, all the conditions are favourable for resection, this should 
be done. 

The bowel is first carefully isolated. There may be adhe- 
sions binding the growth to the abdominal wall, to a neighbour- 
ing coil of intestine, or, as is most commonly the case, to the 
omentum. Many of these adhesions give way under gentle 
pressure or with gauze stripping. They should always be 
detached firmly but gently. Roughness and impatience are 
out of place. Omental adhesions are ligated off about i-^ to 
2 inches from the growth if possible. If any part of the intes- 



442 _ ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

tine is adherent to the growth, it should be separated ^ith 
especial care. In three cases of my own (two of gro-^i;h, one 
of tuberculous disease) a separation was quite impossible, and 
the adherent loop of bowel had to be excised, a double 
enterectomy being performed. On a subsequent examination 
with the microscope the adherent loop was found, in each case, 
to be invaded extensively by growth. In cases of tuberculous 
disease the adhesions are even more binding and more com- 
plex than in cases of gro\\i:h. 

The adhesions having been separated, the involved loop 
of gut is drawn well out of the abdomen, so that the full ex- 
tent of the disease and of the glandular enlargement can be 



*^ 





Fig. 20 1. — -Ligation of omentum. The interlocking ligatures. 

seen. The limits of the excision having been determined upon, 
as many large swabs as are necessary are placed in position, so as 
to isolate the area of operation, these being covered in turn by 
mackintoshes. 

The intestine having been isolated and the general perito- 
neal cavity shut off by the packing of swabs, the resection is 
begun. In the case of the small intestine it is always possible 
to do this outside the abdomen, and there is every advantage 
in so doing it. The limits of the gut to be removed being de- 
termined, the intestinal clamps are applied. Four pairs are 
necessary — two pairs at each point of section. If the intestine 
is at all distended with fa?culent material or with flatus, the lower 



ENTERECTOMY. 



443 



clamps can be first applied, the bowel divided, and the upper 
cut end drawn away from the wound, its clamp removed, and 
the bowel allowed to drain away its contents into a dish. The 
upper clamps are then applied and the intestine between them 
divided. As a rule, however, no emptying of the intestine is 




Fig. 202. — Enterectomy. Removal of growth of intestine, with mesentery and 
glands. The parts are ready for an end-to-end anastomosis. 



necessat^y, and the clamps both above and below may be applied 
at once. In placing them in position it is important to remem- 
ber that they must not be at right angles to the longitudinal 
axis of the intestine, but that they must lie obliquely, so that 
their tips approach one another. A triangular portion of mesen- 



444 



ABDOMINAL OPEIL\TIOXS. 



tery with its portion of bowel is therefore partly included in the 
grasp of the clamps, the apex of the triangle being towards the 
root of the mesentery, the base being, of course, the bowel to 
be removed. By so applying the clamps an adequate blood- 
supply for the cut ends of the gut is assured, and a slightty larger 
section of the intestine is left for the anastomosis. The bowel 
is now divided at each end, and the cut ends at once cleansed 
with many swabs wrung out of saline solution. As soon as 
the division is made, each end of the intestine is temporarilv 
wrapped in a swab of gauze and carefully protected so that no 




Fig. 203. — The lines of section of small intestine and mesenten" in a case of 
enterectomy (Hartmann) . 

soiling of any part of the operation area by contact with a cer- 
tainly infected mucosa can occur. The incision is carried on- 
wards, obliquely into the mesenter}^, and any bleeding points 
at once seized with clips. Or, as is my usual practice, the apex 
of the wedge of mesentery to be removed is found and isolated 
and a broad clip of my own pattern is applied to it. The clip 
is squeezed home and allowed to remain for a few seconds. When 
it is removed, a deep groove will be seen, all except the vessels 
and the peritoneum having been squeezed away by the pres- 
sure of the forceps. Into the groove so left a catgut ligature 



ENTERECTOMY. 445 

or a fine Pagenstecher ligature is placed and tied. A clamp is 
then applied about i inch distal to the ligature, and the mesen- 
tery between them is divided. The remainder of the mesentery- 
is now cut through on each side, and the whole affected loop is 
free. Some vessels in the cut mesentery near the bowel will 
require clipping. In this portion which is now removed will 
be the growth, a length of healthy bowel on each side, and a 
wedge of mesentery containing all the lymphatic vessels and 
glands draining the diseased intestine. The condition of affairs 
at this stage of the operation is represented in Fig. i6o. A 
general cleaning-up of the operation area is now necessary. 
The mackintoshes are changed, the ends of the bowel are cleansed 
again, and the hands are well rinsed in fresh sterile salt solution. 
The approximation of the divided ends by suture is now begun. 
The clamps are drawn together and laid side by side, and wrapped 
around with hot moist gauze. If the upper opening of the bowel 
is rather larger than the lower, as may be the case, a longitudinal 
incision is made into the lower portion along a line most distant 
from the mesenteric attachment. The stitches are now intro- 
duced. That portion of the bowel at the mesenteric edge is first 
stitched, and very especial care is taken with the first few turns 
of the needle. The first stitch is seromuscular, and picks up the 
outer covering of the bowel about % inch from the cut edge. 
The suture begins near the mesenteric attachment, and, in the 
first two passages of the needle, only the mesentery is pierced on 
each side. As the mesentery reaches the intestine its layers sep- 
arate, leaving a triangular gap. It is the mesentery bounding 
the triangular gap which is picked up by the first turns of the 
needle. The suture is then continued, including the serous and 
muscular coats only (perhaps the submucous, or a part of it, 
also), until one-half the circumference of the bowel is united, 
until, that is to say, the part of the gut most distant from the 
mesentery is reached. The needle is then laid aside. 

The inner suture is now introduced. This includes all the 
coats of the bowel, and ensures two results — a perfect mechani- 



446 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



cal approximation of the divided ends of the bowel and haemos- 
tasis. It is not necessary to clip and to ligate any points in 
the cut edge of either end of the intestine. To introduce the 
stitch skilfully some practice is required. Owing to prolapse 
or retraction of the mucosa, it may be difficult to pick up, 
on the needle-point, precisely that amount of intestine which is 
necessary. The stitch may at first be drawn overtight; it is 
more likely, however, that it will not be drawn tight enough. 
I have found the best standard of the necessary degree of tight- 
ness that which results from a drag upon the 
thread from the last stitch of a degree suf- 
ficient to raise up, prominently, that part 
of the walls of the intestine into which the 
needle is next to pass. If the thread be 
drawn steadily and held firmly upwards, it 
raises the portion of bowel through which 
the needle last passed, and makes prominent 
that part which is about to be caught up in 
the needle. It is the fiirst two turns of this 
suture which are of the chief est importance. 
By them the gap at the junction of the mes- 
entery and of the bowel is closed, and a 
perfect serous apposition ensured. As the 
two openings lie side by side there are two 
triangular gaps, in the right and left di- 
vided ends of the intestine. The stitch is begun by being 
passed from the mucosa of the lumen of the bowel on the right, 
through all the wall of the bowel, and through that portion of 
the mesentery which has just separated from its fellow at the 
gap; from there the needle passes to the bowel on the left, 
transfixing all the coats, beginning with the separating layer of 
mesentery and passing then into the lumen of the bowel ; from 
here it pierces the mucosa about | inch from the point of its 
last emergence through all the coats and through the other leaf 
of the mesentery ; and, finally, it passes from the mesentery to 




Fig. 204. — End- 
to-end anastomosis 
after enterectomj^ 



ENTERECTOMY. 



447 



the mucosa of the portion of intestine to the right, entering the 
lumen of this bowel through the mucosa about |- inch from its 
original point of entry ; the suture is tied and the end left long. 
(A reference to the annexed diagram will make the path of the 
needle clear.) The suture is now continued around the posterior 
half of the margins of the opening, embracing all the coats and 
being pulled fairly tight and even. No puckering of the gut 
need be feared. Each individual portion 
of the stitch must be separately tightened. 
If one loop be left slack, it cannot be 
tightened later without releasing all the 
stitch. The suture approximates first the 
posterior margins, and then, without 
change or interruption, is passed along 
the anterior margins until the end, left 
long at the first stitch, is reached, when 
the thread is knotted and cut short. As 
the stitch passes along the anterior margin 
it is important to see that the mucosa is 
infolded. This may best be done by chang- 
ing the type of stitch. The needle is passed 
twice through the bowel on each side: 
from serosa to mucosa and back again 
to serosa on the one side, then similarly 
on the opposite side, so that a loop lies 
always on the mucous surface. As the 
suture is tightened the mucous m.embrane 

is infolded. The last turn of this stitch passes from serosa to 
mucosa onty, and there the knot is tied. The clamps are now 
removed from the intestine, as the ends are securely closed, 
in order to see if the suture -line bleeds at all. As a rule, the 
haemostasis is perfect, but once and again a point will be found 
to bleed. A separate interrupted stitch is then passed to in- 
clude this point. The arrest of the hasmorrhage being complete, 
the bowel is again gently washed, and the seromuscular stitch. 




Fig. 205. — End-to- 
end anastomosis con- 
tinued. 



448 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



laid aside for a time, is now restarted. The circuit is com- 
pleted by carrying this suture along the anterior margins until 
the mesentery is reached. Two turns of the needle are then 





Fig. 206. — The first portion of the 
inner suture is almost complete. 
This is the point at which the char- 
acter of the stitch changes, as shewn 
in next illustration. 



Fig. 207. — The inner through- 
and-through suture is changed here. 
The needle having reached the mu- 
cous surface of the left opening is 
passed in on this side again from 
mucous to serous surface. Then on 
the right side it passes from serous to 
mucous and back from mucous to 
serous surfaces, so that a loop is 
always left on the mucosa. 



taken in the mesentery, and, finally, the needle is passed through 

the mesentery to the deeper (or posterior) side, where it meets 

the end originally left long. The two ends are tied and cut short. 

A perfect apposition results. The weak point in the suture- 



ENTERECTOMY. 



449 



line — the gap at the mesentery — is strengthened by both stitches, 

and a leakage is virtually impossible. 
Throughout the whole procedure 

of suture introduction the greatest 

neatness, precision and fineness must 

be exercised, for here, more than 

anywhere, the surgeon's reward is 

in strict proportion to his deserts. 

A faulty suture will always cause 

leakage; nothing can prevent its 

doing so ; a suture properly applied 

will secure perfect union. 

The slit in the mesentery has 

now to be closed, and the bleeding 

points in the cut edges to be ligated. 

It is generally advised that athrough- 

and-through stitch should be used to 

close the mesenteric wound, but I 

have found such stitches a source, 

not infrequently, of trouble. A 

small vessel may be punctured and 

a hsematoma rapidly forms, or at 

any point where the needle punc- 
tures some haemorrhage may be 
started. I have, therefore, ceased 
to use sutures in the mesentery. 
The plan I adopt is, to tie any 
bleeding point in the cut edge of 
the mesentery, and in the same 
ligature to include subsequently 
the exactly opposing point in the 
opposite cut edge. This is done 
at each point where a clip had been 
placed, and if the ligatures are 
not sufficiently close, a clip is in- 




Fig. 208. — The inner suture 
continued. Note the loop always 
on the mucosa. When the 
stitch is tightened the cut edge 
of the mucosa is infolded and 
serous apposition secured. 







.-y-- 



Fig. 209. — End-to-end anastomo- 
sis continued. 



-29 



450 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

troduced on the cut edge of one side, a ligature applied, the 
clip removed and at once put upon the corresponding point in 
the opposite edge, which is then taken in the same ligature. 

In cases of growth in the mesentery, when the removal 
of the growth involves the destruction of the blood-supply to 
the intestine, a resection of the gut cannot be avoided. So 
much of the bowel must be removed as seems, in each case, 
to be necessary. As a rule, there is no difficulty in seeing w^hat 
the limits of such a resection must be, though to one unac- 
customed to this branch of surgery, the extensive removal 
may seem surprising. The mesentery may be likened in its 





Fig. 2IO. — End-to-end anastomo- Fig. 211. — End-to-end anastomosis 

sis continued. continued. 

shape to an open fan, the smaller end representing the pos- 
terior attachment. This attachment is approximately six to 
eight inches in length, whereas the intestinal attachment of 
the mesentery is eighteen feet in length. A small wound in 
the posterior portion of the mesentery leaves perhaps several 
feet of the gut bereft of its blood-supply. A small wound in 
the terminal branches of the superior mesenteric artery is in- 
evitably followed by gangrene of the bowel. If the wound be 
in the second series of vascular arches, it is possible for the 
circulation to be carried on through the free lateral anastomoses. 
Resection for Tuberculous Disease of the Intestine. — Tuber- 



ENTERECTOMY. 



451 



culous stricture of the intestine possesses many points of espe- 
cial interest. The disease is far from uncommon; it affects 
the sexes indifferently, and, owing to the fact that fibrous 
hyperplastic changes are frequent, a mistaken diagnosis of 
carcinoma may be made. The favourite sites of the disease are 
the lower end of the ileum and the caecum; multiple strictures 
may exist close together, or they may be scattered at irregular 
intervals over several feet of the small intestine. When the 
ileocascal region is affected, a diagnosis of chronic appendicitis 











Fig. 212. — End-to-end anasto- 
mosis continued. Ligature of op- 
posing points in the divided 
mesentery. 



Fig. 213. — End-to-end anastomosis; 
the operation concluded. 



or of malignant disease may be made. The fullest and most 
accurate account of this disease is that given by Mr. F. M. Caird 
in the "Scottish Medical and Surgical Journal," vol. xiv, p. 20, 
and I therefore quote at length from this article : 

"The clinical features in the cases under consideration 
present a long history of failing health and indigestion associated 
with progressive emaciation. A personal and family history 
of tubercle can generally be obtained. The bowels are usually 
constipated, and purgatives are generally required. Severe 



452 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

colic, pain, and tenderness become gradually pronounced. A 
salient feature is the presence of loud borborygmi, which not 
only annoy the patient, but are frequently audible to bystand- 
ers. \^omiting may be frequent and often gives relief. Haem- 
atemesis is not met with, nor the passage of blood, although 
piles may co-exist. The abdomen becomes swollen and tense. 
Ladder-like patterns and marked peristaltic waves are seen. 
A tumour may be palpated in ileocsecal cases. Owing to the 
site of the lesion, complete obstruction does not readily occur, 
unless the stricture becomes impermeable and is blocked with 
some foreign body, or is complicated by adhesions to adjacent 
coils of intestine. 

"The principles common to enterectomy for malignant 
disease — gangrene of the bowel, etc. — guide us in dealing with 
tubercular stricture, but the operative measures are frequently 
more difficult, and this is especially the case when we have to 
deal with adhesions. One may shell a loop of intestine affected 
with carcinoma from out a mass of surrounding, dense, in- 
flammatory tissue, as in cases of adherent csecal and sigmoid 
tumour; but in tubercle there is greater infiltration, and while 
carcinoma may be shut in by the new fibrous tissue, the tuber- 
culous process frequently bursts through the muscular and 
serous coats and infiltrates widely. 

"The free, non-adherent strictures of the small intestine 
give rise to less trouble, but in any case an anxious element 
exists in the wide-spread implication of lymphatic glands, 
which may necessitate a far-reaching removal of mesentery 
and entail the sacrifice of healthy intestine. Or, again, some 
of the caseating glands may have softened or suppurated, and 
may rupture into the peritoneal cavity during manipulation, 
and so determine a fatal issue. In operating, then, let the 
patient be suitably prepared, cut wide of the diseased area, 
and see that the distended intestine above the stricture be 
thoroughly emptied. It is always important to plant the 
sutures in healthy, non-congested bowel. 

"We have three classes, which may be treated as follows: 

"t. If the strictured area be non-adherent, be localised , 
and solitary, divide well above the proximal dilated portion, 
since there is a tendency for development of secondary tu- 
bercle at points of erosion and ulceration above the primary 



EXTERECTOMY. 453 

lesion. Always search for other strictures. Should there be 
multiple strictures separated by a lengthy interval of healthy 
intestine, without glandular implication, it is better to deal 
with each stricture individually than to excise an undue length 
of the alimentary canal. 

"2. In dealing with an area of coils matted to each other, 
it is advisable to ascertain, in the first place, the extent and 
relation of the parts involved. One next carefully identifies 
the free, healthy proximal and distal intestine, and, applying 
clamps, pfoceeds to remove the entire mass. The mesenteries 
may be divided close to their origins, as this entails the Hga- 
tion of few-er, if larger, vessels, and allows one to remove all 
the lymphatic glands. As already indicated, since the latter 
cannot well be dissected out without damage to the blood- 
supply of the intestine, it may be necessar}^ to remove much 
bowel in clearing away the infected glands. Should the mass 
at any point be firmly adherent at one point to an adjacent 
healthy loop, it w^ould appear needful to excise the implicated 
wall of that loop and so avoid the possibility of leaving a future 
focus of disease. 

" 3 . When there are numerous adhesions of coils not only 
to each other, but also to adjacent strictures, so that the mass 
cannot be liberated without grave risk, it might be safer to 
sever the healthy proximal and distal coils of gut, and unite 
them end to end. The divided lumina in connexion with the 
diseased area may now be conducted externally, so as to open 
on the abdominal w^all. Had this method of complete oc- 
clusion been practised in one of the cases, the patient's life 
might have been saved, and the tuberculous area thus left 
in situ might have undergone atrophy, or might have been 
removed at a later date, under more favourable circumstances. 
It is also probable that a short-circmting by lateral anastomosis 
may occasionally give better results, as has been found by 
others, but, on the w^hole, radical measures are usually to be 
favoured." 

ih) Resection of the Intestine in Cases of Acute Obstruction 
or in Cases of Strangulated Hernia. — Gangrene of the intestine 
as the result of strangulation within the abdomen or in a her- 
nial sac depends in part upon the tightness of the constriction, 



454 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

in part upon the virulence of the micro-organisms which are 
present in the ensnared loop. An examination of the parts 
in such cases will shew that the acute infective process is most 
intense in this loop, but that it is by no means confined solely 
to it. The acute inflammation, leading on to ulceration or even 
gangrene, and the bacterial invasion of the coats of the bowel 
extend upwards and downwards in the bowel, but to a greater 
length and to a much more severe degree in the part above the 
constriction than in that below. In all resection operations 
undertaken for gangrene it is, therefore, necessary to cut through 
the bowel, on each side, wide of the gangrenous portion, but, 
especially, to remove freely on the upper side. The extent 
to which the bowel should be removed is not always easy to 
determine, for the gut, after division of the constriction, may, 
from a seemingly hopeless condition, slowly change its appear- 
ance and become almost normal. In all these cases, there- 
fore, the intestine should be subject to the most careful exami- 
nation, and the condition of the vessels of supply in the mesen- 
tery be determined. If the veins are thrombosed, and if the 
arteries have ceased to beat, the bowel, though it may recover 
its colour and appearance after release of the constriction, is 
probably not in a satisfactory condition for suture. In several 
recorded cases, and in some few observed by myself, an enterec- 
tomy performed in such circumstances has failed by reason 
of gangrene and leakage at the line of suture or from gangrene 
and perforation in the proximal portion of the bowel. It is 
better to err, if an error must be made, on the side of free re- 
moval. It is not the length of the bowel removed in these cases 
which makes the operation hazardous, for two feet of the in- 
testine are removed as easily as two inches, but the inadequate 
removal of bowel seriously damaged and gravely infected, with 
vessels thrombosed, and the performance of an end-to-end anasto- 
mosis in a part of the bowel which cannot heal. 

The removal of the bowel, therefore, must be free, espe- 



ENTERECTOMY. 455 

cially upon the upper side. The anastomosis of the divided ends 
is carried out in the manner already described. 

It is especially in these cases of overdistension of the intes- 
tine as the result of acute intestinal obstruction that the device 
already mentioned of emptying the intestine is of greatest ser- 
vice. The clamps on the lower side of the gangrenous loop are 
first applied and the bowel is divided between them. The prox- 
imal portion of the bowel is then freed from its mesentery to a 
degree which will permit its being drawn away from the wound 
for six to eight inches. The clamp which closes its end is then 
removed, and the gut allowed to empty itself of air and fluid 
motion. The bowel above the obstruction is emptied by "milk- 
ing" until the overdistension is completely relieved. The clamps 
are then applied above, and the diseased bowel removed. The 
removal of the mesentery to the same extent as in cases of 
growth is not necessary. The method shewn in the diagrams 
annexed (Figs. 214 and 215) may be followed. 

The length of the small intestine in man varies greatly, so 
that a standard measurement cannot be assigned to it. It varies 
according to the height of the individual and according to his na- 
tionality. The intestine in Russians and in Italians would 
seem to be longer than in the other races in Europe ; this is doubt- 
less due to the different character of their food. In those who 
live largely or entirely upon bulky vegetable foods a greater 
length of intestine is found. Beneke, after comparing the height 
of the individual and the length of the intestine in a series of cases, 
stated that for every 100 cm. of body length, there is, on the av- 
erage, 387.5 cm. of small intestine. 

In discussing the question of removal of great lengths of the 
small intestine it is, therefore, not of so great importance to know 
the amount of the bowel removed as it is to know the length of 
the bowel which remains. The extreme variations in the length 
of the small intestine are said to be 15 feet and 33 feet. The 
average length is given by Treves as 22 feet 5 inches (683 cm.). 
A patient whose intestine was 30 feet in length would, therefore. 



456 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



be able to submit to a more extensive resection than a patient 
whose intestine was 20 feet in length, or perhaps even less than 




Fig. 214. — Enterectomy. The mesentery is ligated off close to the gut (after 

Kocher). 




Fig. 215. — Enterectomy — folding of the mesentery (after Kocher). 



this. Furthermore, the functional activity of the remaining in- 
testine is of the first importance. If the gut which remains is 



ENTERECTOMY. 457 

thin and atrophied, as the result of being on the distal side of 
a long-standing obstruction, or if the coils of the bowel are in- 
timately adherent, then the value to the patient of such intestine 
is not represented accurately by a mere statement of its length. 
It would seem possible that the age of the patient is also a factor 
of importance, the intestinal canal in young patients being better 
able to undergo compensatory changes. In Ruggi's case 330 cm. 
were successfully removed from a boy eight years of age; and 
in Blayney's case, 255 cm. from a bo}^ of ten. In this connexion 
it may be mentioned that in Monari's experiments, as in Senn's, 
it was found that in the dogs which shewed no intestinal disturb- 
ance after operation a well-marked hypertrophy of the intestine 
was found. There is no ascertained difference in the results which 
follow removal of the jejunum from those which are found after 
resection of the ileum. Viewed from the standpoint of the physi- 
ologist, it might be expected that excision of say half the small 
intestine at the jejunal end would result in more serious conse- 
quences than a similar excision at the iliac end. Diliberti-Herbin 
("Zent. f. Chir., " 1904, No. 4) found no difference in the digestive 
capacity in two dogs who had lost one-half of the small intestine, 
the upper half having been removed in one, and the lower half 
in the other. Observations were continued for ninety-three 
days, and though at first there was marked lack of assimilation 
both of the nitrogenous material and of fat, the dogs soon began 
to gain in weight, and both recovered perfectly. 

These observations do not agree with those of TrzebiclvV', 
quoted by Blayney ("Brit. Med. Jour.," 1901, ii, 1456), whose 
conclusions as a result of 28 extensive resections of the small in- 
testine performed on animals were as follows : 

Resections of half the small intestine were tolerated quite 
well. Resections of two-thirds and upwards of the jejunum and 
ileum made such an inroad on the chemical and mechanical pro- 
cesses of digestion that the prolongation of life became impossible. 
There was incessant diarrhoea, followed at a later stage by vomit- 
ing; food was voided for the most part undigested, and, in spite 
of a craving appetite, the animals perished with symptoms of 



458 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

complete inanition. Trzebicky also observed that the effects 
of the resection of the beginning of the jejunum were more seri- 
ous than those of resection nearer the ileocaecal valve — a result 
to be expected considering the wider, thicker, and more vascular 
condition of the jejunum. Transferring his results to the human 
subject and taking 560 cm. fi8 feet 5 inches) as the minimum 
length of the small intestine, he declared that resection of one- 
half of it — that is, 280 cm. (9 feet 23^ inches) — was quite per- 
missible, provided no further complications were present. 

The changes which have been noticed subsequent to the re- 
moval of great lengths of the small intestine are fairly constant. 
The appetite is always greatly increased; the patients eat far 
more than they have ever done before. Diarrhoea is a constant 
feature for long periods, and though it can be controlled to a 
certain degree by careful supervision of the diet, it is apt to occur 
on the smallest provocation ; a milk diet seems particiilarly likely 
to excite irritation. In a few cases (e. g., Pauchet's, in which 
400 cm. were removed and only 125 cm. remained) the diarrhoea 
has led to gradually increasing inanition and death. In a few 
cases the patients have gained weight. 

There have been very few investigations into the metabolic 
changes in these cases. The only recorded cases are those of 
Frantino (Riva-Rocci) , Ruggi (Sabina), Schlatter fPlaut), 
Lexer (Albu), and especially by Zusch ("Deut. med. Woch.," 
1909, p. 739), Miyaki (Onodera and Jano), Nigrisoli (Vitali), 
Zeidler (Spassokukozkaja), Axhausen (Brugsch), Flint fUnder- 
hill), Brenner (Denk). They shew that absorption of fat and of 
nitrogenous foods is considerably lessened at first, but that this 
may be compensated for by an increased intake and by careful 
regulation of the food-stuffs. Emaciation is common at the 
first, and is due to the rapid passage of food, from which little 
absorption has taken place, through the intestine. But when a 
very large amount of judiciously selected food is taken the weight 
of the patient gradually increases. 

The outcome of a study of those recorded cases would seem 
to shew that a removal of two-thirds of the small intestine may 



ENTERECTOMY. 459 

be performed in the human being without serious risk to hfe. 
The remaining third is adequate to fulfil all the functions neces- 
sary to the maintenance of life, provided that it is healthy and 
that care is taken in the selection of the diet. 

The surgeon who is suddenly face to face with a case requiring 
an extensive intestinal resection usually has no choice as to what 
has to be done. 

A glance through the recorded cases will shew that the bowel 
involved, either in gangrene or in growth, had instantly to be 
sacrificed if the patient's life was to be saved. In nearly every 
case death would have resulted had the resection not been per- 
formed. To be niggardly in the removal of gangrenous intestine 
is to detract enormously from a patient's chances of recovery, for 
in such cases an anastomosis, to succeed, must be made between 
healthy, viable ends of intestine. The cases quoted in the table 
shew clearly enough that the most extravagant sacrifice of intes- 
tine may safely be made when an imperative necessity for doing 
so has arisen. The most extensive resection ever carried out on 
a human being was performed by Brenner; 540 cm. of the ileum 
were removed from a woman aged sixty-one, for gangrene due to 
torsion of the intestine in a large femoral hernia. The patient 
made an excellent recovery, and shewed but little disturbance of 
her metabolism. She had about five fluid stools a day, which were 
bad smelling and contained much undigested food. Later con- 
ditions improved, and Denk made a test of the functional effi- 
ciency of the intestine by Schmidt's method, which indicated a 
normal digestion. About one and one-half years after the opera- 
tion Denk repeated the test. At this time she had from three to 
four soft or fluid stools a day, the latter condition occurring par- 
ticularly after taking much coffee or milk. Although there was 
a diminished fat absorption, the patient maintained her weight 
and was able to do her housework without fatigue. Otherwise 
the metabolism was perfectly normal. 

A subsequent report on this case made by Denk recently 
shews the importance of a guarded prognosis even in apparently 
successful cases of extensive resection of the small intestine. A 



460 ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 

year after the last report was published, or two and one-half 
years after the operation, the patient died of marasmus. At 
the time of operation the patient weighed 48 kilos, and just be- 
fore death, 26^2 kilos. There was a general atrophy of all the 
organs, particularly of the omentum (Marshall Flint). 

The reader who is interested in this subject is referred to an 
excellent paper by Professor J. M. Flint, "Bull. Johns Hopkins 
Hospital," 1912, xxiii, p. 127. 

SOME INDICATIONS WITH REGARD TO AFTER-TREAT- 
MENT IN CASES OF EXTENSIVE INTESTINAL 
RESECTIONS. 

1. The diet should be rich in nitrogen and easily assimilated. 
Examples, sweetbreads, liver, white meats, sheep-brains, etc. 

2. It should not contain too great a percentage of fats, which 
are badly assimilated in these cases. 

3. Carbohydrates in an easily digestible form should be 
given in increased quantities. Sugar in good quantity, 
especially powdered glucose. 

4. Astringents may be used, and also intestinal antiseptics, as 
bismuth, in i-drachm doses, t. d. s., with lo-grain doses 
of salol. 

5. There should be no restriction of fluids. 

Experimental evidences and metabolic investigations on op- 
eration cases shew that : 

(a) There is a decreased digestion of nitrogenous food and 
consequently nitrogenous starvation. 

(b) There is a decreased digestion of fatty foods. 

{c) Carbohydrate digestion is but slightly interfered with; 
hence the necessity of a diet largely composed of carbohy- 
drate food. 
(d) Owing to the facts that foods taken arrive at the large in- 
testine in a shorter period, and therefore less adequately 
digested than is normal, and that they remain for the 
normal period in the large intestine, there is increased in- 
testinal putrefaction due to the food remaining under 
these altered conditions, exposed to the action of bacteria 
in the large intestine. Hence the necessity for intestinal 
antiseptics. 

Conclusions 
These patients should have a rich and easily assimilated diet, 
poor in fats, and relatively rich in carbohydrates. Bismuth as 
a colonic antiseptic should be tried with or without salol. 

The following table gives all the recorded cases of resection 
of great lengths of the intestine. 



U 
W 

CD 

w 
Pi 

< 

CD 
W 

H 



After Condition, or Cause of 
Death. 


Seven years later condition good, 
with light work and careful diet. 
Tendency to diarrhoea after eat- 
ing milk polenta or fruit. 


Two years after operation subjec- 
tive general condition good, with 
no digestive disturbances. 




1) 

3 

2 

CI 

> 

•5 





General condition good. Slight 
diarrhoea after carelessness in 
diet. 




§§ 

II 

— ■ " 

2i? 

(WO 
"a; . 

P| 
^^ +j 

u 3 >. 

caJ2 c, 
--Z 

^"0 ft 

« M 


o 

H 

li' 
¥ • 

> 
Z 


1 &'^|l 

>,ii-- C 3 3 

w m *" "OS 
3.i! -y <^ 

fc > 2 -ti S > 


a >: '^ o-n-^ 

3-0 S C'Sii.Q 
O Cil O ri n 

ca o >.0-;:fc o 


o 

Z 


aj 
C 

2; 




c 



11 

c 



c 

2 


H 

J 


i 


> 

o 


> 

o 

0) 

Pi 


t 



;-< 

> 
8 


> 

8 


;-• 

> 





> 


Oi 


H 

ISO 


3 

u 

"3 
>. 

-.5 3 

t-. 4-> 


ll 

q tu 
cm 

2 = 


^ 


.2 S 

"is §. 
3 " 

<; 




h 

u 

_ca 
■3 

'G 

>. 

ca 4j 


: 


3 
to 

1-, 

_ca 
2 



>. 

U 

.§ 3 


z 

fc. H S 

S « 

g" 
w o 


- -^ o 

nil 


"ca 

i 
s 

O-S 

o ■" 


B 
o 


"ca 
1 

B 

■O.S 


a 





c 
■3 

i 

E 

c; 
00 .s 
■" 


s 


E 

3 

s 


on 
P 


is. 

<« o ft 

tJ 3 ni 


E u 
2 "" to 


•a 

i .1 

sa.s 


1) 

to S 

ll 


ta 
'5 

u> 

V 
Si 

•0 

(U 

_ca 

be 
c 
ca 

w 


2 

3 

c. 

3 

;-• 

5 '3 
3 ^ 

2 ^ 


■tart ^ 

S ' g|^ 
2 "".S^ 

ta ^ 5; 1 
M ' :a . 3 ■ 1 

1 l-^'^i 


a Q J 


4 

r^ 


5- 


^ 


fa 




4 




i 

n 


Operator and 
Reference. 


•gm:<; a-S^ 


i . .s| 

i: ? -: 3 

- - . M . 

S X 3 o . 
J < 


^qS P= - .S^^^l oi;,^* I^SSo 


w.d': 
i 1 

to ^ C> 


d 


» 


D 


rO 


•* 


u, 





t^ 


t» 



461 



iO 



After Condition, or Cause of 
Death. 




aj 
3 

X! 

i-i 
3 

•5 

3 
.0 



c 

3 









Since operation, thin, pulpy stools, 
but increase in weight. 


Two and a half years later general 
condition good; no intestinal 
trouble; afterwards recurrence, 
formation of abscess, and death. 


General health good, but tendency 
to diarrhoea on leaving hospital. 
Ordinary diet, but avoided vege- 
tables. 


B 

5 




o 

H 

z 

^i 

H a 

> 
z 


C 
o 




2 





6 

2 


n 




2 


(1) 
a 

2 





1 :?^ 


a 

Pi 


> 

8 


8 


> 

8 




0) 




1 


S 
> 




'I t 

8 iS 
Pi Pi 


> > 

1 

CJ : ti 


Is 




3 
>> 








3 

m 

■3 

nJ fl3 
;-• -)-> 


3 

CS 

3 

>> 

CCI fli 


.2 3 

§2 

S3 

to ;>, 

_ 3 




to i 


2 


is , 
2a 

a M 

WZQ 

fc- H H 




1 

1 

s 


s 










s 

3 

s 


3 
B 


s 

3 

0, 


3 

1 

S 

"a; 
00 .S 


s 

u 




55 
o 
z 

o 
< 


U 

3 

■3 s 


ml 


3 




d 

bo 

3 

a 

'S 

0) 


m 


IS 

% 

S 

0) 

X! 


^"3 

Qj — 

° 

rt 
'Z 0; 


>;!i js 
s8 2 

3— \ 
cj.S .0 

2^.2 is 
III 11 


a p J 
o g a 




§ 








fa 
» 


(o 1 

ro 1 




Operator and 
Reference. 


.a bi-. 


• d 
.2 « 




d" 3 , - 

: C 0. 
3 M 


t: li -J > i " - . 


.•■ • 

pi 


1 >. ^ 
"" '^ to E -: X >< 

•£■§3 IS 3^-SS 


d 


a 




Hi 


::; 


01 


ro 


2- 


:? 


vO 


^ 


00 



46: 





'3 
11 
•a 

Z 


Appetite abnormally great; at 
first several motions daily; but 
later only two or three motions 
daily, these often effusive. 


1 
u 
•a 

Z 


Intestinal fistula healed when the 
Murphy button came away four 
months later. 


Good health eight months later; 
taking ordinary peasant food, 
with normal digestion and de- 
faecation. 






Death three weeks after operation; 
autopsy showed advanced tu- 
berculosis of lungs, and abscesses 
were found in the pelvis. 


Recovered and went home after 
operation. Some looseness of 
stools. Gradually lost weight 
and became nuirasmic. 




V 
3 

o 


1) 
e 

Z 




z 


3 


z 


V 

3 


z 


u 
3 

Z 






11 
3 


z 




3 


z 




Recovery. 


u 

n 

> 
8 


>. 

u 
11 
> 

8 


;-• 

1) 
> 

8 

D 
Pi 


>, 

11 
> 


D 
Pi 


> 


11 
Pi 


i-< 
1) 
> 


u 


11 
> 

8 


Recovery. 

Recovered. 
Lived 
seven 
months. 


> 

u 




V 

ta 



z 


End-to-end anastomo- 
sis with Murphy but- 
ton and a few Lem- 
bert sutures. 


i 

ta 


z 


Lateral entero-anas- 
tomosis between 
ileum and csecum 
with Murphy button. 


3 
to 

u 
_ca 
"3 
2 


P-, 






3 
3 
ca 

•3 

u 

< 


^1 
%° 

"go; 
m 3 t, 
X) ca 3 

:S2>. 
cax2 




S 

u 
o 


V 
3 

"ca 
1 

S 
"•I 


i 



u 
.3 

i 

2 

.O.S 
C>) 


_3 

"ca 
E 

3' 
" (J 

01 


E 

3 

_1) 
E 

Cl 
M 


E 




1 
E 


284 cm. ileum and 8 
cm. colon. 


E 


Ov 


Ov 




2>" 

<u 
^•m 
■^ 3 


Rupture of intestine 
and rent in the mes- 
entery. 


Ventral hernia, intes- 
tinal obstruction 
with adhesions. 


x!2.22 
MB.-y 
"S '^ _o 

° a 

S)^ C. 
3 

ca.D,o 





3" 


ig 

to 

3 3 

ca ^ 
in 


ca 
's 

x: 

•d 
11 

"3 
to 
3 

ca 

M 


U 
>-< 
3 

•n 

m <U 
3.S 

ll 

11.3 
X2u_ 


Carcinoma of the cae- 
cum with metastasis 
in the mesocolon and 
mesentery. 


i 

11 
to 

3 

ca 

bO 

's 
u 

X 






ta 


d 


fa 
•0 




4 

CO 






n 


fa 

d 




Enochin: Ref. Is- 
tomin, "Russ. 
med. Rund- 
schau," 1910, 
viii, 329. 


T3 
U 



3 ,;; 
Ph 


Blayney: "Brit. 
Med. Jour.," 
1901, ii, 1456. 

Lauwers: "Ann. 
de la Soc. de 
Chir. (de Beige)," 
1901, ix. 


Park: "Arch. In- 
ter, de Chir.," i. 
" Centrabl. f . 
Chir.," 1904, 
xxxi, 55, and 
"Buffalo Med. 
Jour.," 1903. 


"" 

X! i-i 

ca.i«i5 


IS 

5 s . 

03" 


Kopf stein: "Re- 
vue de Bohm. 
Med.," 1909, Ref. 
"Wien. med. 
Bl.," 1910. 


Maydl, quoted by 
Kukula: "Archiv 
f. klin. Chir." 

^Childe: "Brit. 
Med. Jour.," 
1901, ii, 891. 

"Practitioner," 
1909, cxxxii, 364. 

Lorenz: "Wien. 
klin.Wchnschr.," 
1906, xix, 610. 


Cv 





« 


M 






10 
PI 





M 


00 


Ov 

1 



463 



8 



!0 



2: 
o 

u 
w 
tn 
w 

Pi 

< 
Z 

to 



> 
CO 

Z 
W 



After Condition, or Cause of 
Death. 


Ten and one-half months later 
general health good and normal 
power of work; ordinary food; 
defcccation, 1,2, and 3 times daily. 
In 1910 quite well and fully able 
to work. 


Eats same kind of food but "half 
as much again as before"; stools 
formed and soft; one or some- 
times two actions daily. Heavi- 
est weight before operation, 158 
pounds; now, 146 pounds. He 
says: " I am just as well as ever 
in my life." 


aj 
>. 

a 

T3 



a 
.2 

8 
g« 


CI -J^-^ 
X i g 

•uE S 

if! 

c8 ■*" 

" 8 H 


3 

E 

g 

ca 


§s 

a_ca 

3 £ 
XI ca 

§s 

M 01 
P 3 

•2^2 

= -a 

e ^ 

0-S 


5^ 

g'5 
Eo 
o-Q 
Bo 

0-3 . 

gp 

•n ej ■■' 
■- >- ca 
•a <u 
p-a >. 

P OJ 

ca ? 
la -0 

aj CIS 
P -y CI 

gi5 & 




Investigations into 
Metabolism. 


V 

a 



p 


z 


.£fS^ag^-o^.2 

!E^^"|E§i 

rt >>^i; ^3p| 

c^p^^^gpp-Sip 
^S- p £ p.2.2 c p 


p 


2; 




j.ss'S-So 

■^2 ^ 

iigg^p 

■^ aj C-- h 

l>.B§-8&-5 


H 


ii 
> 
8 
Pi 


V 

> 

8 




1 


> 
8 


u. ™ rt r" ■ 1- 

|35gE|| 


>> 

> 

8 


0§ 


6S 

■ c — 
t? c 

fl 0) CJ 

rt G rt 


P"S g« P 
V — — 

P CS ^-^ 

tj St) cj m 
Si's ti 1=2 & 




p 
? 

6 

u 
11 

p 
aj 

2-i 
1) 

15E 




s 



1 

si 




la 



2 s 

3 

E3 
O.Q 
m >. 

p a 
ca 1- 

3 

Sxi 
CI ti 


2; , 

fe E-" H 

1= 


1 

1 

S 

" a; 
o.S 
^-' 


E 





E 

3 

_aj 

S 




Se 

^ 

Isf 

r<5 


ro 


E 



E 

3 
— 

E 
« 

ro 


Z 

o 
< 


P OJ S 
° == 5 m 

*'m'" 9 

sB P: 
.5 P 2i-a 
3 oj w a> P 

.g J^ Pt3 

^ CD a 


213 
p 

'3 aj 
P M P 

-.Si: 

P g! 

"p 3 J 

rt u ^ 
i-t3 X! 
W 


S P ji 

oj be 

•^ rr, P 

.S 5-a 

3- s 

C > 0) 

oj — •£ 

M-" In 

is S "^ 


1° 

_ 
pS 

!3'?8 


ea 

£ 

XI 

_ca 

■3 
bo 
P 

CD 


' >, ' ca A ;: • 
cu-c| Prtpii 

25 ■5-2>„° 

pli Ii°l 

2-2 . -,;S a p 

J 


f^ Q « 





4 

^ 


0" 



i 
•* 




0" 


0" 


Operator and 
Reference. 


OJ a; ^^ 
ON. 


1 - -o i . , . 
p- - P N i-:p 
-^ >, a 1 n! > 


aj Oi 
■u r 


CO. -"^ - . o,'-. 

: • - <^ ' (-1 0. M 

:p 1 "^ '~".S 
.L: '>< dp 

Mi ittl 

0^" ,PP"a. 


H 

^1p 

N 


6 









fO 


to j 




•S 



464 






l'oi^-6~^ 



OJ 



S.S ,. C"3g 









SCO 



J .. 3 'S d a 3 

^ g 3 MO S'^'^ 

o o rt a°S-a 
•" a > ^ . . S (u 

™.3 4j g O (U g 

jj ^^ a to j^ |5 in 

'~ S-0 t^ ^"O o 
ij ^.* rt _. O CT] .^^ 

— •a 



'33 



o ?:; - , 



■" M" „ „ 
I g g^.a Ur^ JJ 

s ft a.5 o " 2 

■ -2 CO T3 S "-13 
dj O V CO 

„, 5 1- o c o 



ajfj..j<'5rt°-5" 



5s^ 



ca^^^^S 



MOJ3 



30 C tl 



ft-r; .. 3 
> O'S 3 



'-' . 2 c3.a^> 
,„ -o — -a M 3 



■- °''c3 



> p 



OJ O O .C _g n! o> 



C CJ 3 u —; 



'"■OX, ... 



QcOfet^Dn " ftc ca.zn'o>^j:*j n'o Q rt 



IC o 

\< 



< Oi M £ o 

i 3 .rs m 



a; o u 3 
— " t. o ^ 



96 



3 J; £ ni £ 
OJ " o P <u 



o J? 



^ 2 1^ "J o 



2^2^ 



*J 


>,-a 




rt 


.Q 


aj 


m 


oJ 


T3 


•a 

c 


s 






en 












<u 




o 


rt 



oS 



.3 

cs 

Q 

n 2 
.2 '" 


Myxosarcoma of mes- 
entery. 


•0 
a 

1 

3 m 

C 

3.2 

2S 

a; J- 
■2 -a 


Three operations; (l) 
Obstruction due to 
an adhesion by an 
omental cord; (2) 
strictureat the stran- 
gulation groove; (3) 
inseparable adhesions 
of a large convoluted 
mass of small intes- 
tine. 








00" 


Whitall: "Ann. 
Surg.," 191 1, civ, 
669, and "Am. 
Surg.," 1913, vol. 
Iviii, No. 5- 


Morton: Ref. 
Kelly-Noble, 
"Abdominal 
Surg.," Phila., 
1908, p. 442. 


Miyaki, quoted by 
Flint: "Johns 
Hopkins Hosp. 
Bulletin," May, 
1912. 


Ruggi: "Policlin- 
ico," 1896, and 
"Centrbl. f. 
Chin," 1896, 
xxiii, 365. 




00 


0. 

r«5 






465 



SS 





^N- 




fo 


^ ^ t 


.« >, 


>>«= 


a -~ 






|.s>°^ 


•SS'U 




"a"g| 


■r; oj s 


S-.S^o 


o'o'^ 










rhoea 
pati 
roved 
need 
ne ol 


V B " 








.S ^ P S " 






"^ . "■" tc ts 


^•3 > 






■ScS-5 8^ 


u: =^ 




|<.t.-S 



.r; 


n 






rt 


a 


ij 




T1 


>, 


















lu 


•a 




V 










U 





•c: 


o mxi j- 


cd 5 lu GS 


cS ■- 




J3 oj::,;^ 


1" 




.2- £ « ^ 




J= o tiii 


.23 


^|pg§ 




rt:C3 




'^ 5 S .• -• 


rt pQ 


— O m c; — 
d ^1 g 


l-l^" 




p S S cs 


S-g s-ofe 



p-p= „', t-p 






1 cS ■— - — 



.2||tr7|-p 






ta 









o 








btl._- 














.- > 




z 








> X 




ii 












O J 








..r 






- o 








-^ t^ 






H a 








(8 






i^ 








&" 






1 p« 








0. 






1 ss 


<u 


<u 




a Wt 




aj 


> 


e 


c 




C -'.h 




C 


z 


o 







WJS 




c 


Z 


2 




2 |u 




Z 


H 


>, 


:A 


>i 


•s . -"-^ 1 >. 


>i 5 


^ 


u 




>» . -= ^ ' c 




.J 


(u 


OJ 




*J m n! ■" 1 S 




D 


> 


> 


> 


||.-|§ ^^ ^ 8 


> ^ .^ ^ . 




o 










a 


o 


u 






« 


(S 


^ 


1 




o^e.5^ 




1 --vi-. 


■ J3 




.^Q 1 , 


, 




d £ O 


ot3 




3 w - 





L^ 




J M 


C.2 c 

III 




m 0- 


g 




ETI-IOD OF 
PERATION. 


^ OX! 
O m 
T. cd -" . 




E w 


5 

S 3 


.a 


" C « >. 
c o " 


c5 S-^ 

c S >• 
"j: 








•as 


SC 


■= S c S 
oSgH 




^3 S =* 




0x1 
"V >. 

cl-o. 




CQ 


Pi 




a, v)0 


a 


W 










_ -a M 






z , 

S a 















f-Si 








a-a 




' 


H a 








E V 




QJ 


^zc 


c 


E 




1 fl^ 

EE li"^ 
03 '^ ;« „- 


u 
_c 

a; ^ 


Z i. 








d 


^^ II g 


^ ^ 




f^ 


-* 






" 


1-5 


ro 


f^ 


ro , r^ 


" 




o'o 


SJ S 3 S C 


-= 




= i . 


O 

z 

o 
< 

Q 


J2 

So 
c 

C 

a) 

a E 


•S-Sool 

^ C tu X ■ 

"c^- 2-- 

C aj «£ u 


e 
3 


C-- '^ C rf ^W • r- 

M a-TS 3 c c ^ 3 -; -i 
2=-a§Sc5 al^'^' 

?;j=0.2c!e5in:;:( t M.3 


£ .3 
^ tfl 3 

111 

J2 a 




S"- 


15 ujo ciii 



s-c 


u^ 


H P >; 


6 






4 

00 


1^ 





Q 

m z 




— - "^ 

tt — 
3 xo. 


62 


<5_2- i*^'-'^ 


C ." !> 

.. u . 

2Sg:= 


o fci 


..■D .- 


go " 


'■- > r x! 




H 0! 


•-■ rf -3 


« i" - 




3cx i=:^~ 


5^ 


oil 


CO : 
.: i~ 


o!H 


.52 4- : X-C3 t^' 

— O'. u 

iS 


> 3T 




^! 


t, 


Z 


< 


d 


« 


N 


m 


■* 1 "5 


<: 


2 


"* 


t 


■* 


■f 1 


^ 1 


■* 



466 






1 f/3 "^ rrt 



;i|||||oS|^>.£| 



u 




a! cu OJ o -w 

-u. " 2 ^ ° 
§.2 Qii-S 

r-',C^*--^'C H ™ <1> 



O 3 3 
0-— ■_□ 



aiM^ nl rtmW^ art >t! 



oCrt'Sp'SSc'^'S 
t; 0! g a) 5 QSj 5^3 -rf 

3 '•" XI .2 -c S M o .S £ 
O O (u2 3 J* E 



2 J; 3 a 

Tl c c h' 

^ (U ,^ ii 



3 iK 



^■3Em-£5sS^ 
ixi u, i)^ M1.5 art wH^a 



rt 2 3ii 
OJ OJ J- 3 

=^•33° 



o rt C 






.- ^ ^ -a >. rt 

■0-2 °-5 g£ 

» rt <y I- "- 

C ^ 2 a; >. i; 

•2 o. 5 rt d S 

n O ;-^ " O -h! 



5 2!,^^^rt 
,.■5 ° f= • E 

3 C ^ O t- tfl 

-Spo^.2^ 



«S 



C 3 v. i- 

3 " 0. o 
C t'-' rt 



ft ^ 
j^ • ^ 

P 3 3 r3 



is 

.5-^3 
rt ^.-^ 
■"do; 
P 3 *" 






rt t: o 
W.S P 




■W.-- 



ss 



467 



u 

a. 
o _^. 

Z H 

2g 

5« 
z 

o 
u 

ti 
w 

H 



J3 >^-:3 S . 



Q 3 o 



."3 ra 
g o I 



-"So "c«^.Sl3 



Q 






.3 cs i; 
•a e^ 

32->. 



(U (J t. 

t- o ta 
O d^ 

.-^^ 
^ 3 i . 
•> X^ 3 w 

•5 1' 3 



O «) o S 

2 > ^ 
O O 3 



'It 



"d 






o 

o 
u 
m 

w 



< 
z 

w 
z 

> 

in 
Z 

w 

X 



M 


.2 --a 


f fn 


m^ 3 




ro a 


ori 














C s o 

>■ 3 






z 


>.-a o 




m 



^- *j ^ ' u ^ XI i2 

. 3i "^ ■" 3 u t. 
u .3 .3 • 3 fe >• 3 



3mxI1'-""t;m"1' 
ctf>.3?ig°S3 

1^ ^% 1% U g 
■2|£-2|-° 



I'S CS 



■•s^ 

?S^ 



3"5. ^.S " 



'^ -S m "*' m -5 ■" 






i <u ^ (S^-M 

3 C K, SSJS 

o o b >-< by? 

„ a! o---<4-i 

3 >.'^ " ° 

S « — .2 o " S 

*j j3 a! ca z; 

o o ji ^ a'S £■ 

fe 3 S £• I' 3 o 
? 3 O O o 4J m 
H 



So 





3 <u S- 




rn'ort ■" ji 






Kl 


t? § != "^ 8^ 


3 



jr, & 3 





3^-d3T) 








- „-rt-i2-0 




tera 

urn 
esec 
xclu 


§S 




rt c c 1- aj 


&, 


J 



3„c. 



fa H H 

O'-i 
5° 






1.; 



|Cfl 



.2 ts 



■•3 3.2 

« 5 m 
3"*--= 



bo-3 



11^ 



o » 

w « 
O 



: go 1^ 
3O =■?' 



2 »< c 



Q05 

2n& 



;.^o 

— > CI 

o y.-v ■ 



ioo 



•a J3 j2 . 

•".- M.3 



OS" gf £o 

= ^:3" 



./<! 



o 



o 



g gQ-S2o 

Oil aj '^ . . o^ 'I" 



ENTERECTOMY. 469 

This series of cases shews clearly enough that the extent of 
the resection may be very considerable without involving any 
such serious risk as one might expect. It emphasises the point, 
upon which stress has already been laid, that a free removal 
of the bowel should be performed in any case where doubt 
exists as to its integrity. 

In certain cases the band which has caused the constriction 
has been very narrow and has compressed the gut very tightly. 
A fine linear band of gangrene is thereby produced. If this 
band encircles the intestine, a resection operation is not always 
necessary. The damaged strip may be simply infolded and 
closed over by a continuous suture which picks up the serous 
and muscular coats. When the gangrenous part gives way, 
it will be shed into the lumen of the bowel and the firm line of 
union ensured by the suture will prevent any leakage into the 
peritoneal cavity. In some instances a very small patch of 
gangrene or a perforation may be met with. It is in cases 
such as these that a partial resection has been successfully 
performed. The edges of the perforation are trimmed and 
sutures applied, or the damaged area is inverted. Caird has 
recorded ("Edin. Med. Jour.," 1895, p. 312) five cases of gangrene 
or perforation, occurring in strangulated hernia, which were 
treated by inversion. In some cases of Richter's hernia, with 
gangrene limited to a A^ery small area opposite the mesenteric 
attachment, this method may be adopted. But it is to be 
remembered that the walls of the bowel around the damaged 
area are infected and but little likely to lend themselves to 
safe suture or to sound healing. The operation of inver- 
sion, though occasionally advisable, is probably not so safe a 
procedure as resection. 

In all operations where the bowel has been strangulated 
and has become gangrenous the most minute precautions must 
be taken to avoid contamination of the operation area in the 
handling of tissues which are infected with swarms of the most 
virulent organisms. 



470 



ABDOMINAL OPERATIONS. 



In some instances the use of an omental flap or graft is of 
great ser\4ce in strengthening the hne of union. 

In both the operations above described the removal of 
a triangular piece of the mesentery is desirable, for in cases of 
gro-^-th the glands are included in it, and in cases of gangrene, 
the vessels in the mesentery are seriously damaged, and the 
veins perhaps filled with septic clots. 

In cases of multiple wounds of the intestine or in other 
rarer conditions the removal of this triangular piece of the 
mesentery is not necessar\'. The mesentery quite close to the 

bowel may be cut through 
along a line parallel to the 
intestine, and the bleeding 
points clipped and ligated. 
When the ends of the intes- 
tine are stitched, the mesen- 
tery' can then be folded upon 
itself in a pleat. It is said 
that in such a condition the 
suture -Hne at the mesenteric gap is hkely to be more securely 
closed than when the mesentery is removed. Sir William ]\Iac- 
Cormac also claimed for this method that, since it interfered less 
with the vessels of the mesentery (the terminal branches onlv 
being cHppedj, gangrene of the bowel was far less likely to 
occur than when the deeper vessels of the mesentery were ligated. 
(See Figs. 214 and 215.) It is perhaps desirable to call attention 
to a very satisfactory stitch, introduced by ]\Iitchell and Hunter, 
for the purpose of effectively closing the gap at the mesen- 
teric edge. The diagram (Fig. 216) explains itself. 




Fig. 216. — Mitchell and Hunter's 
suture for application at the mesenteric 
attachment. 



INDEX OF NAMES— VOLUME 



Abbe, io6 
Adossides, 131 
Albrecht, 94 
Albu, 458, 461 
Allis, 184, 186 
Andrews, 52 
Angelberger, 206 
Anschiitz, 237, 238 
Archibald, 135 
Assmy, 106 
Auvray, 372 
Axhausen, 458, 462, 468 

Ballance, 391 

Bancock, 407 

Barclay, 261 

Barker, 214, 215 

Barnard, 145, 146 

Bartlett, 210, 211 

Bastianelli, 160 

Battle, 221, 236 

Baudens, 371 

Beckman, 100 

Bell, 63, 72 

Beneke, 455 

Bernard, 20, 206 

Bertram, 373 

Beyea, 155, 156, 157 

Beyer, 162 

Biburgeil, 77 

Bier, 157 

Billroth, 17, 160, 206, 315 

Bingham, 230 

Blake, 123, 124, 127 

Blayney, 457, 463 

Borchgrevink, 131 

Borrmann, 290, 299, 300 

Bosquier, 85 

Box, 92, 95 

Braithwaite, 230, 231, 232 

Braun, 209, 217, 363 

Brenner, 208, 270, 45S, 459, 462, 

Briddon, 374 



468 



Brinton, 300, 336 

Brougham, 466 

Brugsch, 458, 468 

Bryant, 428 

Bucknall, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84 

Bucquoy, 174 

Buxton, 126 

Cackovie, 363 

Caird, 451, 469 

Cannizaro, 371 

Cantani, 157 

Carle, 238, 298, 300, 328 

Carrion, 95 

Chaput, 209, 270 

Childe, 463 

Chlumskij, 205, 206, 207, 208 

Clark, 36, 55, 65, 161, 162 

Claudius, 34, 35 

Coflfey, 153, 154, 204, 205, 266, 270, 



272, 273, 274, 283, 
Coley, 117 
Collin, 1 74 
Connell, 391, 39; 

398, 404 
Conner, 95 
Cordier, 98, 99 
Courvoisier, 208 
Crile, 42, 43, 62, 235 
Cripps, 421 
Cuneo, 290, 292, 294 

300, 330 
Cushing, 18, 19, 20, 2 
Czerny, 106, 131, 207 

Dastre, 206 
Davies-Colley, 174 
Davis, 152 
Dekonski, 462 
Denk, 458, 459, 462 
Depage, 154 
Diaz, 85 
Diliberti-Herbin, 457 



184 



393. 395. 396, 397. 



295, 298, 299, 
2, 38, 263. 3S7 



471 



472 



INDEX OF NAMES VOLUME I 



Dobson, 290, 293, 294, 295, 298, 299, 

301 
Domenici, 18, 19 
Douglas, 115, 116 
Doyen, 207, 209 
Dreesmann, 461 
Dudensing, 174 
Dupuytren, 385, 386, 3S7 
Duret, 150, 151 
Dwight, 379 
Dyball, 80 

Edgecombe, 228 
Edmunds, 391 
Edwards, 106 
Eiselsberg, 87, 88 
Enderlen, 461 
Enochin, 462 
Escherich, 17 
Ewart, 94 

Fagge, 93 

Fantino, 238, 298, 300, 328, 458, 464 

Faure, 158, 209 

Fenner, 117, 118 

Fenwick, 344 

Finney, 170, 242, 245, 246, 247, 248, 

249, 251, 252, 280, 311 
Fischel, 85 
Flint, 458, 460, 465 
Foote, 278 

Forgue, 369, 371 372, 373, 374 
Francke, 161 
Frank, 360, 361 
Friedrich, 467 

Gabzewicz, 374 
Gatti, 135 

Gerard-Marchant, 160 
Gerota, 290, 291 
Ghedini, 464, 468 
Gibson, 405 
Gilbert, 18, 19, 20 
Gillespie, 18 
Girode, 84, 85 
Glenard, 150 
Goebell, 464 
Gordon, 216 
Grant, 100 
Gray, 212 
Gross, 174, 387 



Griineisen, 142 
Guinard, 370 

Hadra, 210, 363 

Hahn, 67 

Hall, 218 

Hallon, 95 

Halm, 363 

Halsted, 385, 386, 387 

Hanau, 82 

Harrington, 39 

Harris, 462, 463 

Hartmann, 106^ 257, 290, 368, 444 

Hayes, 462 

Herczel, 205 

Hertz, 238 

Herzf elder, 174 

Hildebrandt, 136 

Hochenegg, 197 

Hofbauer, 67 

Hoffman, 174 

Hoffmann, 22 

Howse, 106 

Hunt, 139 

Hunter, 470 

Hutchinson, 89 

Jaboulay, 208, 209, 240 

Jakob, 67 

Jamieson, 290, 293, 294, 295, 298, 299, 

301 
Jano, 458 465 
Janowski, 85 

Jeanbrau, 369, 371, 372, 373 
Jessop, 94 

Kader, 125, 208, 209, 357, 358, 359 
Kammerer, 252, 279, 280 
Kappeler, 208 
Karlinski, 374 
Karlow, 462, 466 
Kausch, 363 
Keen, 98 
Keetley, 254 
Kelling, 237 
Kelly, 465 
Kerr, 201, 306 
Key, 218 
Keyl, 174 
Kisbert, 160 

Kocher, 27, 29, 106, iii, 126, 210, 242, 
251, 261, 311, 315, 316, 360, 456, 461 



INDEX OF NAMES — VOLUME I 



473 



Koeberle, 461 

Konig, 133 

Kopfstein, 463 

Korte, 74, 78, 138, 139, 142, 145- 3^3 

Kousnetzoff, 115, 160 

Kou\A'er, 462 

Krauss, 174 

Krehl, 331 

Krokiewicz, 318 

Kronlein, 87, 319, 320, 321, 323, 325, 

327. 328 
Kukula, 462, 463 
Kiimmell, 208, 240, 241 
Kundrat, 94 

Landau, 158 

Langenbeck, 330 

Langenbuch, 160 

Lauenstein, 209, 210 

Lauwers, 463 

Legueu, 160 

Lehmann, 85 

Lembert, 384, 385. 386, 387 

Lemeau, 174 

Lengeinann, 290, 293, 295, 299, 301 

Lennander, 104, 125, 173, 176, 218, 414 

Lilienthal, 430, 431, 432 

Lockwood, 160 

Loewy, 67 

Lorenz, 463 

Loze, S3 

Liicke, 209 

Lund, 217 

LetuUe, 292 

Levin, 18 

Levy, 330 

Lexer, 458, 460 

MacCarty, 287 
MacCormac, 470 
Macdonald, 332 
Macfadyen, 19 
Malbranc, 206 
Mall, 375 
Marfan, 20 
Margaracci, 131 
Marwedel, 359 
Maunsell, 388, 389, 390, 391 
Maydl, 139, 145, 209, 364, 463 
Mayo, 77, 100, loi, 136, 190, 196, 197, 
211, 223, 270, 285, 287, 305, 325, 

328, 330 



McBurney, 106, 420 
McCosh, 125 
McGuire, 466 
Meunier, 173 
Michel, no 

Mikulicz, 67, 68, 69, 71, 77, 143, 205, 
208, 290, 300, 319, 324, 325, 327, 328, 

330. 359- 362, 3(>3' 461 
Miller, 18 

Mitchell, 172, 466, 470 
Mixter, 412 
Miyaki, 68, 458, 465 
Monari, 457 
Monks, 375, 376, 377 378, 379, 3S0, 

381, 382, 383, 411 
Monprofit, 464 
Moore, 344 
Mbrison, 52, 218 
Morley, 85 
Morris, 90, 91, 93 
Morton, 465 
Moschowitz, 35 
Most, 290, 293, 295, 300 
Moynihan, 174, 180, 251 
MuUer, 95 
Murphy, 40, 60, 61, 114, 132, 133, 134, 

136, 172, 404, 435, 463, 467 

Navratil, 290, 293, 294, 295, 298, 301 

Nelaton, 410, 416 

Neumann, 363 

Nicola, 466 

Nigrisoli, 458, 468 

Noble, III, 465 

Nuttall, 18 

Obalinski, 466 
Oldfield, 166 
Oddi, 206 
Onodera, 458, 465 
Ordway, 94 

Pagenstecher, 35 
Paget, 79, 81 
Park, 463 
Parker, 306 
Pasteur, 74 
Paterson, 218, 261 
Pauchet, 458, 467 
Paul, 412, 417, 41S, 425 
Payr, 463 
Pean, 160 



474 



INDEX OF NAMES — -VOLUME I 



Peck, 463 

Pepper, 93 

Perrin, 206 

Perutz, 139, 142, 144, 145 

Petersen, 20S 

Peterson, 460 

Phillips, 275 

Pilch er, 223, 270 

Pilliet, 82, 31S 

Planchard, 174 

Plant, 45S, 461 

Pokotilo, 463 

Poh'a, 290, 293, 294, 295, 298, 301 

Poncet, 374 

Popofif, 17 

Porritt, 218, 219 

Prantois, 85 

Purves, 87, 88, 89 

Reichard, 90 

Reichel, 317 

Richardson, 98 

Richter, 67, 469 

Riedel, 15S, 159 

Riegel, 206 

Riva-Rocci, 458, 464 

Robinson, 160 

Robson, 89, 176, 365, 367 

Rockwitz, 209 

Rodman, 88, 89, 259, 260, 287 

Rokitansky, 174, 300 

Rorsch, 131 

Rothe, 461 

Roux, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 209, 223, 

224, 230, 252, 364 
Rovsing, 152, 154 
Ruggi, 457, 458, 465 
Rutkowsky, 209 

Sabixa, 458 

Sagini, 465 

St. Martin, 371 

Sappey, 158 

Schlatter, 321, 366, 458, 461, 466 

Schmidt, 459 

Senn, 352, 353, 354, 355, 356, 357, 358, 

360, 457 
Shepherd, 462 
Smith, 371 
Socin, 371 
Sonnenburg, 209 
Spassokukozka j a , 458,464 



Spencer. 241 
Staehlin. 464 
Steinthal. 363 
Stengel, 93 

Steudel, 206, 207. 208 
Stewart, 348 
Stolz, 467 
Storp, 466, 468 
Subkovski, 85 
Siimmers, 269 
Swain, 85 

Tait, 54 

Tatlow, 252 

Tavel, 209 

Terrier, 159, 206, 319 

Testa, 85 

Testut, 370 

Thierf elder, 18 

Thomas, 275 

Thomson, 90, 91, 93 

Thompson, 348 

Thon, 462 

Tiffany, 117 

Toupet, 85 

Treves, 369, 455 

Trzebicky, 457, 458, 461 

Tscheming, 160 

Underhill, 458 

Van Roojex. 218, 219, 221 

Villard, 208, 240, 242, 244 

VitaH, 458, 468 

von Eiselsberg, 87, 88 

von Hacker, 208, 209 

von Mikulicz, 67. 68, 69, 71, 77. 14J 

205, 208, 290, 300, 319, 324, 325, 32; 

328, 330. 359. 362, 363, 461 
von Navratil, 290. 293, 294, 295, 29$ 

301 

Wallace, 92. 95 

Ward, 421, 422. 423, 424, 429. 432 

Watson, 2S2 

Webster, 154, 161, 162 

Weil, 205 

Weir, 278, 279, 415 

Wells, 133 

Werelius, 466 

Whitall, 465 



INDEX OF NAMES — VOLUME I 



475 



White, 204, 24S 
Wickhoff, 206 
Wiesinger, 94 
Wiggin, 391, 394 
Wilkie, 89, 218, 221 
Wilms, 317 
Wilson, loi, 102, 2S7 
Witzel, 125, 209, 252, 254, 358, 359, 
365 



Wolfler, 207, 208, 209, 210, 281, 390 
Wunderlich, 131 

Wyeth, 428 

Yates, 55, 56, 65 

Zeidler, 458, 464 
Zusch, 458, 464 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS— VOLUME 



Abdomen, gunshot wounds of, 369 
wounds of, penetrating, 114. See also 
Penetrating wounds of abdomen 
Abdominal belt for gastroptosis, 150 
for hepatoptosis, 159 
incisions, 105 

operations, after-treatment, 24, 57 
conduct of, 24 
drainage, 54 

examination after laparotom)'-, 49 
isolation of area, 49 
preparations for, 24 
time patient should be kept in 
bed, 63 
suture, 108, 109 
Abscess of lungs after operation, 73, 78 
perigastric, 140 

subphrenic, 137. See also Subphrenic 
abscess 
Adhesions, treatment of, 51 
After-treatment, 24, 57 
Albumose injections to prevent post- 
operative peritonitis, 67 
Alimentary canal, bacteria in, relative 
number, 18, 19 
bacteriology of, 1 7 
sterility of, food and, 19, 20 
Ancesthesia, 44 
Anaesthetic, 43 
Anastomosis button, 404 
end-to-end, 405 

in enterectomy, 445, 446 
lateral, 433. See also Entero-anasto- 
mosis 
Anoci-association, 43, 62 
Antistreptococcic serum to prevent 

peritonitis, 71 
Anus, artificial, in enterostomj', 410 
Aponeurosis, overlapping of, in abdom- 
inal suture. III 
Appendectomy with gastro-enteros- 

tomy, 221 
Appendicitis, duodenal ulcer and, 174 



Appendicostomy, 415 
Appendix, adhesions around, treat- 
ment, 52 
Artificial anus in enterostomy, 410 
Ascitic tuberculous peritonitis, 128 
Aspirin for pain, 62 
Assistants, preparations of, 31 

Bacillus coli in intestines, 17 
prodigiosus in intestine, 19 

Bacteriology of intestines, 1 7 
of stomach, 17 

Bantock's tube in enterotomy, 407 

Beyea's gastropexy, 155, 156 

Bier's gastropexy, 157 

Bismuth for rendering intestinal con- 
tents sterile, 23 

Black vomit, 86. See also Hcematemesis, 
post-operative 

Brenner's gastro-enterostomy, 208 

Bronchitis after operation, 73, 78 

Bronchopneumonia, post-operative, 73, 

75. 78 _ _ _ 
Bryant's incision, 428 
Buried sutures, material for, iii 

Cancer, gastric, 285. See also Gastric 
cancer 
jejunal ulcer after operation for, 218 
of pylorus, mode of spreading, 297, 
298 
operation in, choice, 318 
of small intestine, resection for, 441 
pylorectomy for, 318 
Carcinoma. See Cancer 
Cardiac cancer, choice of operation, 

330 
Catgut for buried sutures, 1 1 1 

preparation of, 34 
Catheterisation after operation, 60 
Caustic fluids, drinking of, ulceration 

from, 254 



4; 



478 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS — VOLUME I 



Celluloid thread, Pagenstecher's, 35 
Chlumskij's gastro-enterostomy, 208 
Choledochotomy, adhesions in, treat- 
ment, 5 1 
Cholelithiasis, "natural cure," 52 
Claudius' sterilisation of catgut, 34 

Moschowitz's modification, 35 
Cloisonnement peritoneal horizontal' 

for hepatoptosis, 160 
Coeliac axis, gastric lymphatics asso- 
ciated with, 297 
Coffey's gastropexy, 153, 154 
Collapse of lung after operation, 73, 74 
CoUargol injections to prevent phlebitis, 

104 
Colohepatopexy, 52 
Colon substitution, 52 
Colotomy, 417 

Bryant's incision in, 428 

high sigmoid, 419 
time for, 425 

ingmnal, 417, 418 

and lumbar, choice between, 417 
short mesentery, 430 

Lilienthal's, 430 

low sigmoid, 425 

lumbar, 417, 418, 428 
drainage in, 429 
short colon in, 429 

Paquelin cautery in, 425 

Paul's tube in, 417 

sigmoid, high, 419 
low, 425 

Ward's suture in, 421, 422, 429 
Complications of abdominal operations 

66 
Connell's suture, 391 
Continuous proctoclysis, 60 

subcutaneous saline infusion, 126 
Coronary artery, gastric lymphatics 

associated with, 292 
Courvoisier's gastro-enterostomy, 208 
Crile's anoci-association, 43, 62 
Cushing's suture, 387 



Davis' gastropexy, 152 
Diarrhoea after enterectomy, 458 
after gastro-enterostomy, 2 36 

clinical forms, 237 

theories of, 237 
Diet after operations, 59 



Digital divulsion for hour-glass stom- 
ach, 283 
Dilatation, digital, for hour-glass stom- 
ach, 283 
gastric, post-operative, 90 
pathology, 92 
symptoms, 90 
theories, 93 
treatment, 96 
Divulsion, digital, for hour-glass stom- 
ach, 283 
Doyen's gastro-enterostom}-, 209 
Drainage, 36, 54 
care of tubes, 64 
material, 36 
Dressing, 6 1 

Drinking caustic fluids, gastric ulcer- 
ations from, operation for, 254 
Drugs for rendering intestinal contents 

sterile, 22 
Duct-infection theorj" of secondary 

parotitis, 82 
Duodenal fistula, external, 174 
internal, 174 
ulcer, 163 

chronic, infolding of, 192 

jejunal ulcer after operation, 

cases, 224, 228 
perforating, 173 

appendicitis and, 174 
consequences, 173 
diagnosis, 175 
fistula from, 174 
gastro-enterostomy in, 171, 175 
manner of, 173 
operation in, 175 

closure of ulcer, 175 
symptoms, 174 
Duodenostomy, 368 

in cancer, 329 
Duodenum, invasion of, in gastric 

cancer, 300 
Dupuytren's suture, 385, 3S6 
Duret's gastropexy, 150 



Embolic theory of secondary paro- 
titis, 80 
Embolism, pulmonary, after operation, 

73. 75. 78 
End-to-end anastomosis, 405 
in enterectomy, 445. 446 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS — VOLUME I 



479 



Enema after operation, 60 
Enterectomy, 440 

after-treatment, 460 

diarrhoea after, 45 S 

effects on digestion, 457 

end-to-end anastomosis in, 445, 446 

extension, 460, 461 

for gangrene, 453 

for growths, 441 

for obstruction in small intestine, 

453 
for strangulated hernia, 453 
for stricture, 441 
for tuberculous disease, 450 
indications, 440 
length of piece resected, 455 
metabolic changes, 458 
on small intestine, 441 
results, 458 
Entero-anastomosis, 209, 433 
advantages, 434 
indications, 434 
Murphy button in, 435 
results, 438 

short mesosigmoid in, 439 
techniqtie, 435 
Enteroptosis, 150 
Enterostomy, 410 
adhesions after, 414 
artificial anus in, 410 
isecsd fistula in, 410 
for bowel evacuation in peritonitis, 

125 
indications, 410, 415, 416 
Mixter's tube in, 412 
pain at discharge after, 413 
Paul's tube in, 412 
site of opening, 413, 414 
Enterotomy, 406 

Bantock's tube in, 407 

for bowel evacuation in peritonitis, 

125 
Moynihan's tube in, 407 
Eserine sulphate for flatulence, 63 
Excision for gastric cancer, 287 
of gastric ulcer, 259 

adherent to pancreas, 275 
along lesser curvature, 263 
by rotation of stomach, 269 
gastro-enterostomy and, choice 

between, 259 
indications, 260 



Excision of gastric ulcer involving 
large extent, 266 
on anterior wall, 262 
on posterior surface, 269, 270 
technical considerations, 262 
through transverse mesocolon, 

270 
transgastric, 269, 270 
Exploratory incision in gastric cancer, 
mortality, 324 



F.^CAL fistula in enterostomy, 410 
Fallopian tubes, involvement in tu- 
berculous peritonitis, 134 
Faure's gastro-enterostomy, 209 
Fibrous tuberculous peritonitis, 129, 

130. 131 
Finney's gastroduodenostomy, 245 
Moynihan's modification, 249 
Fistula, duodenal, external, 174 
internal, 174 

f cecal, in enterostomy, 410 
Flatulence, 63 
Floating lobe, 158, 159 
Formaline-gelatine for dressing, 61 

to prevent adhesions, 135 
Francke's hepatopexy, 161 
Frank's gastrostomy, 360 



Gall-bladder, adhesions around, 

treatment, 5 1 
Gangrene of intestine, enterectomy for, 

453 

inversion, 469 
of lung after operation, 73 
Garments for operator, 24 
Gastrectomy, complete, 332 

after-care, 343 

late history of patient, 347, 348 

microscopical examination, 346 

pathologic report, 344 

postmortem, 34S 

technique, 337 

use of stomach tube in oesophagus, 

344 
partial, 302 

advantages over gastro-enter- 
ostomy, 328, 329 

closure of distal end of duodenum, 
306 



48o 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS — VOLUME I 



Gastrectomy, partial, feeding after, 316 
for cancer, 28 7, 32 S 

mortality, 325 
for hotir-glass stomach, 279, 283 
mortality, 319. 321 
Gastric cancer, 285 
adhesions in, 52 
cardiac end, choice of operation, 

330 
diagnosis, 2S6, 2S8 
duodenostomy in, 329 
exploratory incision in, 2 88 

mortality. 324 
gastrectomy in, complete, 332 
partial, 302, 328 
mortality, 321, 325 
gastro-enterostomy in, 327 

mortality, 321, 324 
history, 285 

invasion of bowel in, 300 
of duodenum, 300 
of greater curvature, 299 
of lesser curvature, 299 
jejunostomy in, 329 
local enlargement, 299 
h^mphatic invasion, 298 
microscopical examination, 346 
mode of spreading, 297, 298 
mural, choice of operation, 329 
operation in, 285 

choice, 318, 327, 329 
indications, 288 
mortality, 319, 320 
palliative or radical, 319 
pathologic report, 344 1 

radical or palliative, 319 
pathology, 288 
resection for, 287 
symptoms, 286 
ulcer and, 286 
contents, bacteriologj-, 17 
dilatation, post-operative, 90 
pathology, 92 
symptoms, 90 
theories, 93 
treatment, 96 
diseases, chronic, operations in, 

indications, 288 
gunshot wounds, 369 

haemorrhage from, 370 
injuries to other organs, 373, 
374 



Gastric cancer, gunshot wounds, mor- 
tality, 372 

nature of lesion, 370 
operation in, drainage, 374 
indications, 369 
position of patient, 374 
technique, 372 
peritonitis from, 371 
spontaneous recovery, 371 
lymphatics, 290 
areas of, 292, 296 
associated -ndth cceliac axis, 297 
with coronary artery, 292 
"n-ith hepatic artery, 294 
with pyloric artery, 294 
with right gastroduodenal ar- 
tery, 294 
gastro-epiploic artery, 294 
with splenic artery, 296 
cancer invasion of, 298 
direction of drainage, 291, 292 
distribution, 291, 292 
isolated area, 296, 297 
primary, 297 
retropyloric, 294, 295 
right suprapancreatic, 294, 295 
secondary, 297 
subpyloric, 294 
suprapyloric, 294, 295 
watersheds, 291, 292 
operations, 163 
perforation, chronic, 140 
prolapse, 150. See also Gastroptosis 
stasis, operation in, indications, 289 
sterility, food and, 19. 20 

operations and, 22 
tumor, operation in, indications, 289 
ulcer, 163 

adhesions in, treatment, 51 
chronic, 177, 240 
cancer from, 286 
excision, 258. See also Excision 

of gastric ulcer 
general propositions, 261 
operations for, 240 
indications, 288 
recurrence, 260 
perforating, 163 
acute, 163 

medical treatment, 165 
chronic, 163, 164 
diagnosis, 165 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS — VOLUME I 



481 



Gastric ulcer, perforating chronic, 
gastro-enterostomy in, 171 
induration in, 169 
menstruation and, 167 
operation in, 167 
after-care, 172 
drainage, 170 
proctoclysis after, 172 
toilet of peritoneum, 170 
proctoclysis in, 172 
symptoms, 165 
gastro-enterostomy in, 171 
medical treatment, 165 
subacute, 163 

medical treatment, 165 
ulceration from drinking caustics, 
surgical treatment, 254 
Gastro-anastomosis for hour-glass 

stomach, 279, 281 
Gastroduodenal artery, right, gastric 

lymphatics associated with, 294 
Gastro-duodenostomie sous pylorique, 

208 
Gastro-duodenostomy, 208, 240 
Finney's, 245 

Moynihan's modification, 249 
Jaboulay's, 240 
Kocher's, 242 
Kiimmell's, 241 
lateral, 244 

Moynihan's clamp for, 251 
subpyloric, 241 
Villard's, 240, 241, 242 
Gastro-enterostomie retrocolique pos- 

terieure transmesocolique, 208 
Gastro-enterostomy, 177 
adhesions after, 217 
advantages of partial gastrectomy 

over, 328, 329 
and jejunostomy combined, 209 
anterior, 197 

complications after, 202 
in Y, 198, 200 
jejunal ulcer after, 219 
retrocolic, 208 
Roux's, 198, 200 
antiperistaltic, 197 
appendectomy with, 221 
Brenner's, 208 
by invagination, 209 
Chlumskij's, 208 
complications after, 202 

VOL. I — 31 



Gastro-enterostomy, Courvoisier's, 208 
diarrhoea after, 236 
division of transverse mesocolon, 

179, 180 
Doyen's, 209 
excision of gastric ulcer and, choice 

between, 259 
Faure's, 209 

for hour-glass stomach, 278 
gastrojejunal ulcer after, 217 
gastrostomy with, 256, 257 
haemorrhage after, 203 
Hadra's, 210 

hernia after, internal, 211 
in cancer, mortality, 321 
in duodenal ulcer, 175 
in gastric cancer, 327 

mortality, 324 
in perforating ulcer, 171 
in Y, 198, 200, 209 
indications, 259 
Jaboulay's, 208 
jejunal ulcer after, 217 
jejunostomy with, 252 
Kader's, 208 
Kappeler's, 208 
modifications, 208 
Petersen's, 208 
position after, 58, 203 
posterior, 177 

chief points, 194 

complications after, 202 

jejunal ulcer after, 219 

line of attachment of jejunum, 
196, 197 

Mayo's, 196, 197 

no-loop, 210 

size of opening, 195 

time required for, 193 
rapid gastric drainage after, 238 
regurgitant vomiting after, 205 
results, 258 
retrocolic, 208 
Rockwitz's, 209 
Roux's, 198, 200, 209 
separation of united viscera after, 

217 
Sonnenburg's, 209 
stroma situated above level of 

gastric contents, 239 
von Hacker's, 208 
with valve, 210 



482 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS — VOLUME I 



Gastro-enterostom5^ Wolfler's, 208, 

2 10 
Gastro-epiploic artery, right, gas- 
tric lymphatics associated with, 
294 
Gastrogastrostomy for hour-glass 
stomach, 279, 281 
Watson's, 282 
Gastrojejimal ulcer, 217. See also 
Jejunal idcer 
case, 233 

transgastric excision, 233 
Gastropexy, 150 
Beyea's, 155, 156 
Bier's, 157 
Coffey's, 153, 154 
Davis', 152 
Buret's, 150 
Rovsing's, 152 
Gastroplasty for hour-glass stomach, 
279, 280 
Kammerer's, for hour-glass stomach, 
279, 280 
Gastroptosis, 150 

abdominal belt for, 150 
multiparous, 154 
operation in, 150 
Beyea's, 155, 156 
Bier's, 157 
Coffey's 153, 154 
Davis', 152 
Duret's, 150 
Rovsing's, 152 
symptoms, 150 
virginal, 154 
Gastrostomy, 350 
Frank's, 360 

Kocher's modification, 360 
gastro-enterotomy with, 256, 257 
indications, 350 
Kader's, 357 
Senn's, 352 
Witzel's, 358 

Moynihan's modification, 365 
Gastrosuccorrhoea, 93 
Gauze drainage, 36 
care of, 65 
mask, 26 
Gerard-Marchant's hepatopexy, 160 
Glenard's disease, 150 
Gloves, 29 

pricjcing of, 30 



Greater curvature, invasion of, in 

gastric cancer, 299 
Gunshot wounds of abdomen, 116 
of stomach, 369 

hccmorrhage from, 370 
injuries to other organs, 373, 

374 
mortality, 372 
nature of lesion, 370 
operation in, drainage, 374 

indications, 369 

position of patient, 374 

technique, 372 
peritonitis from, 371 
spontaneous recovery, 371 



Hadra's gastro-enterotom^^ 210 
Hagmatemesis, post-operation, 85 

causes, 87 

onset, 86, 87 

symptoms, 86 

treatment, 89 
Haemorrhage after gastro-enterotomy, 
203 

causes, 204 

prevention, 204 
from gunshot wounds of stomach, 

370 
Halsted's suture, 385 
Hands, sterilisation of, 27 
Harrington's solution, 39 
Hepatic artery, gastric h'mphatics 

associated with, 294 
Hepatopexy, classification of cases, 161 

Francke s, 161 

Gerard-Marchant's, 160 

Leguens, 160 

Moynihan's, 161 

Pean, 160 

total, 160 
Hepatoptosis, 157 

abdominal belt for, 159 

classification of cases, 161 

complete, 158 

floating lobe, 158, 159 

linguiform lobe, 158, 159 

operation in, 160 

partial, 158 

Riedel's lobe, 158, 159 
High sigmoid colotomy, 419 
time for, 425 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS — VOLUME I 



483 



Hernia, internal, after gastro-enter- 
ostomy, 21 1 
prevention, 216 
Richter's inversion in, 469 
strangulated, enterectomy for, 453 
Hour-glass stomach, 276 
acquired, 276 
causes, 276 
congenital, 276 
digital divulsion for, 283 
double stenosis, 278 
gastrectomy for, partial, 279, 283 
gastro-anastomosis for, 279, 281 
gastro-enterostomy for, 278 
gastrogastrostomy for, 279, 281 
gastroplasty for, 279, 280 
Kammerer's operation for, 279, 

280 
operations for, 276 
site of stricture, 276 
types, 277 
Hyperleucocytosis, artificial, as pro- 
phylactic for peritonitis, 67 



Ileosigmoidostomy, Murphy button 

in, 435 
Immediate adenopathies, 298 
Incisions, abdominal, 105 

of peritoneum between clip and 

forceps, 107 
size, 107 
suture, 107 
Inguinal colotomy, 417, 418 

short mesentery, 430 
Inoculations to prevent post-operative 

peritonitis, 67 
Instruments, sterilisation, 34, 50 
Intestinal contents, sterility, 18 
localisation, 375 
obstruction, Moynihan's tube for, 

407 
suture, 384. See also Suture, intes- 
tinal 
Intestines, bacillus coli in, 17 
prodigiosus in, 19 
bacteriology, 1 7 
evacuation, in peritonitis, 125 
injury to, in abdominal wounds, 114, 

"5 
invasion in gastric cancer, 300 
length, 455 



Intestines, localisation, 375 
normal arrangement, 375 
operations on, 375 
small, acute obstruction of, resection 
for, 453 
drainage, 410 
gangrene of, enterectomy for, 453 

inversion, 469' 
growths of, resection for, 441 
isolation, 442 
length, 455 
operations on, 375 
resection, 441 

after-treatment, 460 
shape, 378 

tuberculovis disease, 450 
wounds of, operation for, 470 
sterility of, food and, 19, 20 
operations and, 22 
streptococci in, 18 
suture, 384. See also Suture, Intes- 
tinal 
Invagination, gastro-enterostomy by, 

209 
Isoform for rendering intestinal con- 
tents sterile, 23 
Isolated lymphatic area of stomach, 

296, 297 
Isolation of operative area, 49 



Jaboulay's gastroduodenostomy, 240 

gastro-enterostomy, 208 
Jejunal ulcer, 217 

after operation for carcinoma, 218 

cases, 223 

cause, 220 

clinical types, 221 

operation for, 229-233 

site, 218 

time of appearance, 219 

treatment, 223 

two perforations, 219, 220, 236 
Jejunostomy, 363 

and gastro-enterostomy combined, 

209 
feeding after, 368 
gastro-enterostomy with, 252 
in cancer, 329 
indications for, 363 
Maydl's, 364, 365 
Robson's, 367 



484 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS VOLUME I 



Kader's gastro-enterostomy, 208 
gastrostomy, 357 

Kammerer's gastroplasty for hour- 
glass stomach, 279, 280 

Kappeler's gastro-enterostomy, 208 

Kidney T\-ounds, 115 

Kocher's gastroduodenostomy, 242 
method of uniting duodentmi to 

stomach wall, 315, 316 
modification of Frank's gastrostomy, 
360 

Kummell's gastroduodenostomy, 241 



Laparotomy, examination after, 49 
exploratory, in gastric cancer, 324, 

327 
Lateral anastomosis. 433. See also 

Entero-ayvjstoinosis 
Lavage in penetrating wounds of 

abdomen, 116 

saline, to prevent peritonitis, 71 
Leguen's hepatopexy, 160 
Lembert's suture. 384 
Lesser cun.'ature. invasion in gastric 

cancer, 299 
Levy's operation for cardiac cancer, 

330 
Ligation of omentum, 442 
Ligattues, catgut, 34 

Pagenstecher's celluloid thread, 35 
silk, 35 

sterilisation, 34 
LiUenthaVs colotomy, 430 
Lingiaiform lobe, 158, 159 
Liver prolapse, 157. See also Hepa- 
topiosis 
suspensory apparatus, 158 
wounds, 115 
Loop-on-mucosa suture, 403 
Low sigmoid colotomy, 425 
Lumbar colotomy, 417, 418, 428 
drainage in, 429 
short colon in, 429 
Lunettes of mesentery, 378 
Lung complications after operation, 
causes, 73 

treatment, 77 
of abdominal operations, 73 
Lymphatics of stomach, 290 
areas, 292, 296 
associated with cceliac axis, 297 



Lymphatics of stomach associated 
with coronary artery, 292 
with hepatic artery, 294 
with pyloric artery, 294 
with right gastroduodenal ar- 
ter}", 294 
gastro-epiploic artery, 294 
with splenic artery, 296 
cancer invasion, 298 
distribution, 291, 292 
isolated area, 296, 297 
primary, 297 
retropyloric, 294, 295 
right suprapancreatic, 294, 295 
secondarj', 297 
subpyloric, 294 
suprapjdoric, 294, 295 
paracardial, 293 



Mackintoshes during operations, 32 
Massage after operation, 64 
Maunsell's suture, 388 
Maydl's jejunostomy, 364, 365 
Mayo's posterior gastro-enterostomy, 

196, 197 
Mesentery, characters, 378 

lunettes, 378 

normal arrangement, 375 

primary loops, 379 

secondary loops, 379 

tertiary loops, 379 

vasa recta, 378, 379 

vessels, 379 
Mesocolic band, 179 
Mesocolon, transverse, division of, 

179, 180 
Michel's clips, no 
Mitchell and Hunter's suture, 470 
Mixter's tube in enterostomy, 412 
Morphine after operation, 62 

and scopolamine anaesthesia, 44 
Moschowitz's modification of Claudius' 

catgut sterilisation, 35 
Mouth, care of, after operation, 64 

sterilisation, 37, 38 
Moynihan's clamps, 180 

for partial gastrectomy, 306 

continuous suture, 400, 401 

gastroduodenostomy clamp, 251 

gastro-enterostomy with jejunos- 
tomv, 2.!; 3 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS — VOLUME I 



485 



Moynihan's hepatopexy, 161 

modification of Finney's gastroduo- 
denostomy, 249 
of Witzel's gastrostomy, 365 
tube for intestinal obstruction, 407 
Mural cancer, operation in, choice, 329 
Murphy button, 404 

in ileosigmoidostomy, 435 
continuous proctoclysis after gastric 

ulcer operation, 172 
indications in operation for tubercu- 
lous peritonitis, 133 
proctoclysis, 60 
rubber dam, 40 
Muscular fibres, division of, in incising, 

105 



" Natural cure" of bladder stones, 52 
Nerve division in incising, 105 
Nitrous oxide anaesthesia, 44 
Novocaine anaesthesia, 43, 44, 46 
Nuclein as prophylactic for post- 
operative peritonitis, 67, 68 



Obstruction, acute, of small intestine, 

resection for, 453 
CEdema of lungs after operation, 73, 76 
Omentum ligation, 442 
Operating room, 41 
Operative area, sterilisation, 38 



Pagenstecher's celluloid thread, 35 
Pain after operation, 62 
Paquelin cautery in colotomy, 425 
Paracardial lymphatic glands, 293 
Paraffin to prevent adhesions, 135 
Parker-Kerr clamp, Moynihan's modi- 
fication, 306 
closure of distal end of duodenum in 

partial gastrectomy, 306 
Parotitis, post-operative, 79 

bacteriology-, 84 

causes, 80 

duct-infection theory, 82 

embolic theory, 80 

pyaemic theory, 80 

reflex theory, 81 

sympathetic theory, 81 

theories, 80 



Patient, preparation, 37 
Pauls tube in colotomy, 417 

in enterostomy, 412 
Pean's hepatopexy, 160 
Penetrating wounds of abdomen, 114 
drainage, 116, 117 
intestinal injury in, 114 
lavage in, 116 
operation for, 115 
viscera injured, 114 
Perforating ulcer, 163. See also Gastric 
ulcer and Duodenal ulcer 
wounds of abdomen, 114. See also 
Penetrating wounds of abdomen 
Perforation, gastric, chronic, 140 
Perigastric abcess, 140 
Peristalsis after operation for peri- 
tonitis, 125 
Peritoneum, incision, 107, 108 
Peritonitis, acute, bowel evacuation 
in, 125 
classification, 119 
diagnostic value of escaping fluid, 

120 
distension in, 124, 125 
operation in, 119 
after-care, 125, 126 
cleansing peritoneum, 122, 123 
collapse, 126 

diagnostic points during, 120 
drainage, 122, 123, 124, 127 
examination, 121 
indications, 119 
lavage, 122, 123 
peristalsis after, 125 
position after, 125, 126 
preparation of patient, 120 
purposes, 119 
saline infusion after, 126 
technique, 120 
treatment, surgical, 119 
Witzel fistula in, 125 
from gunshot wounds of stomach, 

371 
post-operative, 66 

bowels in, 72 

preventive inoculations, 67 
reopening abdomen for, 72 
symptoms, 71 
treatment, 72 
tuberculous, 128 
ascitic form, 128 



486 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS — VOLUME I 



Peritonitis, tuberculous, operation in, 

134 
evacuation of fluid, cure b5^ 135, 

136 
fibrous form, 129, 130, 131 
operation in, 133 
adhesions, 135 
advantages, 130 
indications, 130, 133 
results, 130, 131 
technique, 134 
removal of Fallopian tube, 134 
spontaneous recovery, 130, 131 
suppurative form, 129, 130, 132 
Petersen's gastro-enterostomy, 208 
Phlebitis, post-operative, 96 
Pituitary extract for flatulence, 63 
Pleura involvement in subphrenic 

abscess, 142 
Pleurisy after operation, 73, 75, 78 
Pneumonia after operation, 73, 75, 78 
Position after operation, 58 
Preparations for abdominal operations, 

24 
Proctoclysis, 60 

Murphy's, after gastric ulcer opera- 
tion, 172 
Prolapse, visceral, surgical treatment, 

150 
Pulmonary embolism after operation, 

73. 75. 78 
gangrene after operation, 73 
Pyaemic theory of secondary parotitis, 

80 
Pylorectomy for cancer, 318 
Pyloric artery, gastric lymphatics 
associated with, 294 
cancer of, mode of spreading, 297, 
298 
operation in, choice, 318 
stenosis, 177 
ulcer, infolding, 192 
Pyloroplasty, Finney's, 245 

Quinine and urea hydrochloride anai's- 
thesia, 44, 46 

Rectal injections after operation, 60 
Reflex theory of secondary parotitis, 81 
Regurgitant vomiting after gastro- 
enterostomy, 205. See also Vomiting, 
regurgitant, after gastro-enterostomy 



Retropyloric lymphatics, 294, 295 
Richter's hernia, inversion in, 469 
Riedel's lobe, 158, 159 

abdominal belt for, 159 

treatment, 159, 160 
Robsons jejunostom)^ 367 
Rockwitz's gastro-enterostomy, 209 
Roux's gastro-enterostomy, 209 

anterior, 198, 200 
Rovsing's gastropexy, 152 
Rubber dam, 40 
tube drainage, 37 



Saline infusion, continuous subcuta- 
neous, 126 
injections after operation, 60 
lavage to prevent peritonitis, 71 

Sequels of abdominal operations, 66 

Senn's gastrostomy, 352 

Shockless operation, 43, 62 

Short-circuiting, 433. See also Entero- 
anastomosis 

Sigmoid colotomy, high, 419 
time for, 425 
low, 425 

Silk ligatures, 35 

Silkworm-gut sutures, 108 

Skin, sterilisation of, 38, 48, 49 

Small intestine. See Intestine, small 

Sonnenberg's gastro-enterostomy, 209 

Spectacle mask, 25 

Spermin injections to prevent post- 
operative peritonitis, 67 

Spleen wounds, 115 

Splenic artery, gastric Ij^mphatics 
associated with, 296 

Splitting muscular fibers, 105 

Stenosis, pyloric, 177 

Sterilisation of catgut, 34 
of gloves, 29 
of hands, 27 
of instruments, 34, 50 
of ligatures, 34 
of mouth, 37, 38 
of operative area, 38, 48, 49 
of Pagenstecher's celluloid thread, 

35 
of swabs, 31, 50 
Sterility of alimentary canal, food. and, 

19,20 
of intestinal contents, 18 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS — VOLUME I 



487 



Sterility of intestines, operations and, 
22 

of stomach, operations and, 22 
Stomach. See Gastric 
Stomach-tube in oesophagus in total 

gastrectomy operation, 344 
Strangulated hernia, enterectomy for, 

453 
Streptococci in intestinal canal, 18 
Stricture of small intestinal, resection 

for, 441 
Subcutaneous saline infusion, contin- 
uous, 126 
Subphrenic abscess, 137, 164 

age and, 147 

aspiration in, 142, 149 

bacteriology of pus, 148 

diagnosis, 141 

extra-peritoneal, 137 

fossae, 14s 

gas in, 141 

incision along lower costal margin, 

143 
through anterior abdominal 

wall, 143 
through chest-wall and dia- 
phragm, 143 
through thorax and abdomen, 

144 
transpleural, 143 
intraperitoneal, 137 
mortality, 145, 149 
onset, 148 
operation in, 143 
incisions for, 143 
results, 145 
origin, 138 
physical signs, 141 
pleuritic effusion in, 142 
retroperitoneal, 141 
rigors in, 148 
sex and, 147 
source, 146 

spontaneous rupture, 147 
Subpyloric lymphatics, 294 
Suppurative tuberculous peritonitis, 

129, 130, 132 
Suprapancreatic gastric lymphatics, 

294, 295 
Suprapyloric lymphatics, 294, 295 
Surgeon, preparations, 24 
Sutures, abdominal, 108 



Sutures, buried, catgut for, i j i 

materials for, 1 1 1 
Connell's, 391 

continuous, objections to, 399 
Cushing"s, 387 
Dupuytren's, 385, 386 
Halsteds, 385 

interrupted, objections to, 398 
intestinal, 384 

best method, 400 

Connell's, 391 

continuous, 398 

Cushing's, 387 

Dupuytren's, 385, 386 

Halsted's, 385 

interrupted, 398 

Lembert's, 384 

Maunsell's, 388 

Moynihan's, 400, 401 

through-and-through, 388 

two continuous, 400, 401 
Lembert's, 384 
loop-on-mucosa, 403 
Maunsell's, 388 
Mitchell and Hunter's, 470 
Moynihan's, 400, 401 
of abdominal wall, 109 
of incisions, 107 
silkworm-gut, 108 
through-and-through, 388 
Ward's, in colotomy, 421, 422, 429 
Swabs, 31, 50 

left in abdomen, 32, 33 
Sympathetic theory of secondary paro- 
titis, 81 

Teeth, toilet of, after operation, 64 
Tetra cloths, 39, 40, 49 
Thirst, 58 

Thrombophlebitis, frequency, 97, 98 
post-operative, 96 

bacterasmia, 103 

causes, 96 

clinical course, 99 

disintegration of corpuscles, 102 

infected cases and, 100 

injury to vascular walls, 102 

slowing of blood stream, 102 

symptoms, 99 

treatment, 103 

veins most frequently affected, 98 
Thrombosis, post-operative, 96 



488 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS — VOLUME I 



Through-and-through suture, 388 
Towels, 34 

Transgastric excision of gastrojejunal 
ulcer, 233 
of ulcer, 269, 270 
Transverse mesocolon, division of, 

179, 180 
Treatment of adhesions, 51 
Tuberculosis of small intestine, 450 
Tuberculous peritonitis, 128. See also 

Peritonitis, tuberculous 
TyphlotomA^ 411, 412 

Ulcer, duodenal, 163. See also -Dxio- 
denal ulcer 

gastric, 163. See also Gastric ulcer 

gastrojejunal, 217. See also Gastro- 
jejunal ulcer 

jejxonal, 217. See also Jejunal ulcer 
Ulceration gastric, from drinking 

caustics, siirgical treatment, 254 
Ulcerative, tuberculous peritonitis 

129, 130, 132 
Urination after operation, 60 

Vasa recta of mesentery, 378, 379 
Vena cava as support of liver, 158 



Villard's gastroduodenostomy, 240, 

241, 242 
Viscera injured in penetrating wounds, 

114 
Visceral prolapse, surgical treatment, 

150 
Vomiting, regurgitant, after gastro- 
enterostomy, 205 

causes, 207, 210 

frequency, 207 

modifications to prevent, 208 

narrowing afferent loop for, 209 

theories, 205 

treatment, 211 

varieties, 207 
von Hacker's gastro-enterostomy, 208 

Ward's suture in colotomy, 421, 422, 

429 
Watson's gastrogastrostomy, 282 
Witzel fistula in peritonitis, 125 
gastrostomy, 358 

Moynihan's modification, 365 
Wolfier's gastro-enterostomy, 208, 210 
Woiuids of abdomen, penetrating, 114. 
See also Penetrating wounds of ab- 
domen 





Date Due 




'^->-33 








/-n-yi 








l-27r3^ 








^ f 








FFR 2n 










:_vf 








«AAflt 






iBWi 








- i> ?948 












































































^ 









RD640 
Moynihan 



M87 

1914 

v.l. 



COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES (hsi.stx) 

RD 540 MS? 1914 C.2 V. 1 



2002246996 



